Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education (1924–1948) Toggle Early life and education (1924–1948) subsection 1.1 World War II 1.2 Marriage 1.3 College years 2 Business career (1948–1963) 3 Early political career (1963–1971) Toggle Early political career (1963–1971) subsection 3.1 Entry into politics 3.2 U.S. House of Representatives 4 Nixon and Ford administrations (1971–1977) Toggle Nixon and Ford administrations (1971–1977) subsection 4.1 Ambassador to the United Nations 4.2 Chairman of the Republican National Committee 4.3 Head of U.S. Liaison Office in China 4.4 Director of Central Intelligence 5 1980 presidential election Toggle 1980 presidential election subsection 5.1 Presidential campaign 5.2 Vice presidential campaign 6 Vice presidency (1981–1989) Toggle Vice presidency (1981–1989) subsection 6.1 First term 6.2 Second term 6.2.1 1988 presidential election 7 Presidency (1989–1993) Toggle Presidency (1989–1993) subsection 7.1 Foreign affairs 7.1.1 End of the Cold War 7.1.2 Invasion of Panama 7.1.3 Gulf War 7.1.4 NAFTA 7.2 Domestic affairs 7.2.1 Economy and fiscal issues 7.2.2 Discrimination 7.2.3 Environment 7.2.4 Points of Light 7.2.5 Judicial appointments 7.2.6 Other issues 7.3 Public image 7.4 1992 presidential campaign 8 Post-presidency (1993–2018) Toggle Post-presidency (1993–2018) subsection 8.1 Appearances 8.2 Final years 9 Death and funeral 10 Personal life 11 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 11.1 Historical reputation 11.2 Memorials, awards, and honors 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Works cited 15 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 15.1 Secondary sources 15.2 Primary sources 16 External links Toggle the table of contents George H. W. Bush 156 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chi-Chewa Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 Gungbe 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban.

Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangasinan پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Tok Pisin Polski Português Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1989 to 1993 This article is about the 41st president of the United States. For his son, the 43rd president, see George W. Bush .

George H. W. Bush Official portrait, 1989 41st President of the United States In office January 20, 1989 – January 20, 1993 Vice President Dan Quayle Preceded by Ronald Reagan Succeeded by Bill Clinton 43rd Vice President of the United States In office January 20, 1981 – January 20, 1989 President Ronald Reagan Preceded by Walter Mondale Succeeded by Dan Quayle 11th Director of Central Intelligence In office January 30, 1976 – January 20, 1977 President Gerald Ford Deputy Vernon A. Walters E. Henry Knoche Preceded by William Colby Succeeded by Stansfield Turner 2nd Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office to the People's Republic of China In office September 26, 1974 – December 7, 1975 President Gerald Ford Preceded by David K. E. Bruce Succeeded by Thomas S. Gates Jr.

48th Chair of the Republican National Committee In office January 19, 1973 – September 16, 1974 Preceded by Bob Dole Succeeded by Mary Smith 10th United States Ambassador to the United Nations In office March 1, 1971 – January 18, 1973 President Richard Nixon Preceded by Charles Yost Succeeded by John A. Scali Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas 's 7th district In office January 3, 1967 – January 3, 1971 Preceded by John Dowdy Succeeded by Bill Archer Personal details Born George Herbert Walker Bush ( 1924-06-12 ) June 12, 1924 Milton, Massachusetts , U.S.

Died November 30, 2018 (2018-11-30) (aged 94) Houston, Texas , U.S.

Resting place George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum Political party Republican Spouse Barbara Pierce ​ ​ ( m.

1945; died 2018 ) ​ Children George Robin Jeb Neil Marvin Dorothy Parent Prescott Bush (father) Relatives Bush family Alma mater Yale University ( BA ) Occupation Politician diplomat businessman Civilian awards Full list Signature Website Presidential Library Nickname "Skin" Military service Branch/service United States Navy Years of service 1942–1955 (reserve, active service 1942‍–‍1945) Rank Lieutenant Unit Fast Carrier Task Force Battles/wars World War II Pacific War Military awards Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) Air Medal (3) [ 1 ] Presidential Unit Citation George H. W. Bush's voice Bush announces the Gulf War .

Recorded January 16, 1991 George Herbert Walker Bush [ a ] (June 12, 1924 – November 30, 2018) was the 41st president of the United States , serving from 1989 to 1993. A member of the Republican Party , he also served as the 43rd vice president under President Ronald Reagan from 1981 to 1989 and previously in various other federal positions .

[ 2 ] Born into a wealthy, established family in Milton, Massachusetts , Bush was raised in Greenwich, Connecticut . He attended Phillips Academy and served as a pilot in the United States Navy Reserve during World War II before graduating from Yale and moving to West Texas , where he established oil company Zapata Corporation . Following an unsuccessful run for the United States Senate in 1964 , he was elected to represent Texas's 7th congressional district in 1966. President Richard Nixon appointed Bush as the ambassador to the United Nations in 1971 and as chairman of the Republican National Committee in 1973. President Gerald Ford appointed him as the chief of the Liaison Office to the People's Republic of China in 1974 and as the director of Central Intelligence in 1976. Bush ran for president in 1980 but was defeated in the Republican presidential primaries by Reagan, who then selected Bush as his vice presidential running mate. In the 1988 presidential election , Bush defeated Democrat Michael Dukakis .

Foreign policy drove Bush's presidency as he navigated the final years of the Cold War and played a key role in the reunification of Germany . He presided over the invasion of Panama and the Gulf War , ending the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait in the latter conflict. Though the agreement was not ratified until after he left office, Bush negotiated and signed the North American Free Trade Agreement , which created a trade bloc consisting of the United States, Canada and Mexico. Domestically, Bush reneged on a 1988 campaign promise by enacting legislation to raise taxes that he justified as necessary to reducing the budget deficit. He championed and signed three pieces of bipartisan legislation in 1990, the Americans with Disabilities Act , the Immigration Act and the Clean Air Act Amendments . He also appointed David Souter and Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court. Bush lost the 1992 presidential election to Democrat Bill Clinton following an economic recession , his turnaround on his tax promise , and the decreased emphasis of foreign policy in a post–Cold War political climate.

[ 3 ] After leaving office in 1993, Bush was active in humanitarian activities, often working alongside Clinton. With the victory of his eldest son, George W. Bush , in the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections , the two became the second father–son pair to serve as the nation's president, following John Adams and John Quincy Adams . His second son, Jeb Bush , unsuccessfully sought the Republican presidential nomination in the 2016 primaries .

Historians generally rank Bush as an above-average president.

Early life and education (1924–1948) See also: Bush family Bush at his grandfather's house in Kennebunkport, Maine , c.

1925 Bush's Phillips Academy yearbook photo, 1942 George Herbert Walker Bush was born on June 12, 1924, in Milton, Massachusetts .

[ 4 ] He was the second son of Prescott Bush and Dorothy (née Walker) Bush , [ 5 ] and a younger brother of Prescott Bush Jr.

His paternal grandfather, Samuel P. Bush , worked as an executive for a railroad parts company in Columbus, Ohio , [ 6 ] while his maternal grandfather and namesake, George Herbert Walker , led Wall Street investment bank W. A. Harriman & Co.

[ 7 ] Walker was known as "Pop", and young Bush was called "Poppy" as a tribute to him.

[ 8 ] The Bush family moved to Greenwich, Connecticut , in 1925, and Prescott took a position with W. A. Harriman & Co., which later merged into Brown Brothers Harriman & Co.

the following year.

[ 9 ] Bush spent most of his childhood in Greenwich, at the family vacation home in Kennebunkport, Maine , [ b ] or at his maternal grandparents' plantation in South Carolina.

[ 11 ] Because of the family's wealth, Bush was largely unaffected by the Great Depression .

[ 12 ] He attended Greenwich Country Day School from 1929 to 1937 and Phillips Academy , an elite private academy in Massachusetts, from 1937 to 1942.

[ 13 ] While at Phillips Academy, he served as president of the senior class, secretary of the student council, president of the community fund-raising group, a member of the editorial board of the school newspaper, and captain of the varsity baseball and soccer teams.

[ 14 ] World War II Bush in his Grumman TBM Avenger aboard the USS San Jacinto in 1944, during World War II On his 18th birthday, immediately after graduating from Phillips Academy, he enlisted in the United States Navy as a naval aviator .

[ 15 ] After a period of training, he was commissioned as an ensign in the Naval Reserve at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi on June 9, 1943, becoming one of the youngest pilots in the Navy.

[ 16 ] [ c ] Beginning in 1944, Bush served in the Pacific theater, where he flew a Grumman TBM Avenger , a torpedo bomber capable of taking off from aircraft carriers.

[ 21 ] His squadron was assigned to the USS San Jacinto as a member of Air Group 51, where his lanky physique earned him the nickname "Skin".

[ 22 ] Bush flew his first combat mission in May 1944, bombing Japanese-held Wake Island , [ 23 ] and was promoted to lieutenant (junior grade) on August 1, 1944. During an attack on a Japanese installation in Chichijima , Bush's aircraft successfully attacked several targets but was downed by enemy fire.

[ 20 ] Though both of Bush's fellow crew members died, Bush successfully bailed out from the aircraft and was rescued by the submarine USS Finback .

[ 24 ] [ d ] Several of the aviators shot down during the attack were captured and executed, and their livers were cannibalized by their captors .

[ 25 ] Bush's survival after such a close brush with death shaped him profoundly, leading him to ask, "Why had I been spared and what did God have for me?" [ 26 ] He was later awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his role in the mission.

[ 27 ] Bush returned to San Jacinto in November 1944, participating in operations in the Philippines. In early 1945, he was assigned to a new combat squadron, VT-153, where he trained to participate in an invasion of mainland Japan . Between March and May 1945, he trained in Auburn, Maine , where he and Barbara lived in a small apartment.

[ 28 ] On September 2, 1945, before any invasion took place, Japan formally surrendered following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki .

[ 29 ] Bush was released from active duty that same month but was not formally discharged from the Navy until October 1955, when he had reached the rank of lieutenant.

[ 20 ] By the end of his period of active service, Bush had flown 58 missions, completed 128 carrier landings, and recorded 1228 hours of flight time.

[ 30 ] Marriage Bush met Barbara Pierce at a Christmas dance in Greenwich in December 1941, [ 31 ] and, after a period of courtship, they became engaged in December 1943.

[ 32 ] While Bush was on leave from the Navy, they married in Rye, New York , on January 6, 1945.

[ 33 ] The Bushes enjoyed a strong marriage, and Barbara would later be a popular First Lady, seen by many as "a kind of national grandmother".

[ 34 ] [ e ] They had six children: George W.

(b. 1946), Robin (1949–1953), Jeb (b. 1953), Neil (b. 1955), Marvin (b. 1956), and Doro (b. 1959).

[ 15 ] Their oldest daughter, Robin, died of leukemia in 1953.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] College years Bush enrolled at Yale College , where he took part in an accelerated program that enabled him to graduate in two and a half years rather than the usual four.

[ 15 ] He was a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity and was elected its president.

[ 39 ] He also captained the Yale baseball team and played in the first two College World Series as a left-handed first baseman.

[ 40 ] Like his father, he was a member of the Yale cheerleading squad [ 41 ] and was initiated into the Skull and Bones secret society. He graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1948 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics.

[ 42 ] Business career (1948–1963) Bush, top right, standing with his wife and children, mid-1960s After graduating from Yale, Bush moved his young family to West Texas . Biographer Jon Meacham writes that Bush's relocation to Texas allowed him to move out of the "daily shadow of his Wall Street father and Grandfather Walker, two dominant figures in the financial world," but would still allow Bush to "call on their connections if he needed to raise capital." [ 43 ] His first position in Texas was an oil field equipment salesman [ 44 ] for Dresser Industries , which was led by family friend Neil Mallon.

[ 45 ] While working for Dresser, Bush lived in various places with his family: Odessa, Texas ; Ventura , Bakersfield and Compton, California ; and Midland, Texas .

[ 46 ] In 1952, he volunteered for the successful presidential campaign of Republican candidate Dwight D. Eisenhower . That same year, his father won election to represent Connecticut in the United States Senate as a member of the Republican Party.

[ 47 ] With support from Mallon and Bush's uncle, George Herbert Walker Jr.

, Bush and John Overbey launched the Bush-Overbey Oil Development Company in 1951.

[ 48 ] In 1953, he co-founded the Zapata Petroleum Corporation , an oil company that drilled in the Permian Basin in Texas.

[ 49 ] In 1954, he was named president of the Zapata Offshore Company, a subsidiary which specialized in offshore drilling .

[ 50 ] Shortly after the subsidiary became independent in 1959, Bush moved the company and his family from Midland to Houston .

[ 51 ] There, he befriended James Baker , a prominent attorney who later became an important political ally.

[ 52 ] Bush remained involved with Zapata until the mid-1960s, when he sold his stock in the company for approximately $1 million.

[ 53 ] In 1988, The Nation published an article alleging that Bush worked as an operative of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) during the 1960s; Bush denied this claim.

[ 54 ] Early political career (1963–1971) Entry into politics Former president Dwight D. Eisenhower with Bush By the early 1960s, Bush was widely regarded as an appealing political candidate, and some leading Democrats attempted to convince Bush to become a Democrat. He declined to leave the Republican Party, later citing his belief that the national Democratic Party favored "big, centralized government". The Democratic Party had historically dominated Texas, but Republicans scored their first major victory in the state with John G. Tower 's victory in a 1961 special election to the United States Senate. Motivated by Tower's victory and hoping to prevent the far-right John Birch Society from coming to power, Bush ran for the chairmanship of the Harris County Republican Party, winning election in February 1963.

[ 55 ] Like most other Texas Republicans, Bush supported conservative Senator Barry Goldwater over the more centrist Nelson Rockefeller in the 1964 Republican Party presidential primaries .

[ 56 ] In 1964, Bush sought to unseat liberal Democrat Ralph W. Yarborough in Texas's U.S. Senate election .

[ 57 ] Bolstered by superior fundraising, Bush won the Republican primary by defeating former gubernatorial nominee Jack Cox in a run-off election . In the general election, Bush attacked Yarborough's vote for the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which banned racial and gender discrimination in public institutions and many privately owned businesses. Bush argued that the act unconstitutionally expanded the federal government's powers, but he was privately uncomfortable with the racial politics of opposing the act.

[ 58 ] He lost the election 56 percent to 44 percent, though he did run well ahead of Barry Goldwater, the Republican presidential nominee.

[ 57 ] Despite the loss, The New York Times reported that Bush was "rated by political friend and foe alike as the Republicans' best prospect in Texas because of his attractive personal qualities and the strong campaign he put up for the Senate".

[ 59 ] U.S. House of Representatives Bush in 1969 In 1966 , Bush ran for the United States House of Representatives in Texas's 7th congressional district , a newly redistricted seat in the Greater Houston area. Initial polling showed him trailing his Democratic opponent, Harris County District Attorney Frank Briscoe, but he ultimately won the race with 57 percent of the vote.

[ 60 ] To woo potential candidates in the South and Southwest, House Republicans secured Bush an appointment to the powerful United States House Committee on Ways and Means , making Bush the first freshman to serve on the committee since 1904.

[ 61 ] His voting record in the House was generally conservative . He supported the Nixon administration 's Vietnam policies but broke with Republicans on the issue of birth control , which he supported. He also voted for the Civil Rights Act of 1968 , although it was generally unpopular in his district.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] In 1968, Bush joined several other Republicans in issuing the party's Response to the State of the Union address ; Bush's part of the address focused on a call for fiscal responsibility.

[ 66 ] Though most other Texas Republicans supported Ronald Reagan in the 1968 Republican Party presidential primaries , Bush endorsed Richard Nixon , who went on to win the party's nomination. Nixon considered selecting Bush as his running mate in the 1968 presidential election , but he ultimately chose Spiro Agnew instead. Bush won re-election to the House unopposed, while Nixon defeated Hubert Humphrey in the presidential election.

[ 67 ] In 1970, with President Nixon's support, Bush gave up his seat in the House to run for the Senate against Yarborough. Bush easily won the Republican primary, but Yarborough was defeated by the more centrist Lloyd Bentsen in the Democratic primary.

[ 68 ] Ultimately, Bentsen defeated Bush, taking 53.5 percent of the vote.

[ 69 ] Nixon and Ford administrations (1971–1977) See also: Presidency of Richard Nixon and Presidency of Gerald Ford Ambassador to the United Nations Bush as ambassador to the United Nations, 1971 After the 1970 Senate election, Bush accepted a position as a senior adviser to the president, but he convinced Nixon to instead appoint him as the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations .

[ 70 ] The position represented Bush's first foray into foreign policy, as well as his first major experiences with the Soviet Union and China, the two major U.S. rivals in the Cold War .

[ 71 ] During Bush's tenure, the Nixon administration pursued a policy of détente, seeking to ease tensions with both the Soviet Union and China.

[ 72 ] Bush's ambassadorship was marked by a defeat on the China question, as the United Nations General Assembly voted, in Resolution 2758 , to expel the Republic of China and replace it with the People's Republic of China in October 1971.

[ 73 ] In the 1971 crisis in Pakistan , Bush supported an Indian motion at the UN General Assembly to condemn the Pakistani government of Yahya Khan for waging genocide in East Pakistan (modern Bangladesh), referring to the "tradition which we have supported that the human rights question transcended domestic jurisdiction and should be freely debated".

[ 74 ] Bush's support for India at the UN put him into conflict with Nixon who was supporting Pakistan, partly because Yahya Khan was a useful intermediary in his attempts to reach out to China and partly because the president was fond of Yahya Khan.

[ 75 ] In 1972, during a controversy over whether the United States was intentionally bombing civilian hydrological infrastructure in Vietnam , Bush was sent by Nixon to convince Kurt Waldheim of the United States' position. Bush, who was himself a fighter pilot in the Second World War, was "unwilling to press his assigned case that the dikes had been spared," and told reporters "I think that the best thing I can do on the subject is shut up." [ 76 ] Chairman of the Republican National Committee After Nixon won a landslide victory in the 1972 presidential election , he appointed Bush as chair of the Republican National Committee (RNC).

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] In that position, he was charged with fundraising, candidate recruitment, and making appearances on behalf of the party in the media.

When Agnew was being investigated for corruption, Bush assisted, at the request of Nixon and Agnew, in pressuring John Glenn Beall Jr.

, the U.S. Senator from Maryland , to force his brother, George Beall the U.S. Attorney in Maryland, to shut down the investigation into Agnew. Attorney Beall ignored the pressure.

[ 79 ] During Bush's tenure at the RNC, the Watergate scandal emerged into public view; the scandal originated from the June 1972 break-in of the Democratic National Committee but also involved later efforts to cover up the break-in by Nixon and other members of the White House.

[ 80 ] Bush initially defended Nixon steadfastly, but as Nixon's complicity became clear he focused more on defending the Republican Party.

[ 62 ] Following the resignation of Vice President Agnew in 1973 for a scandal unrelated to Watergate, Bush was considered for the position of vice president, but the appointment instead went to Gerald Ford .

[ 81 ] After the public release of an audio recording that confirmed that Nixon had plotted to use the CIA to cover up the Watergate break-in, Bush joined other party leaders in urging Nixon to resign.

[ 82 ] When Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974, Bush noted in his diary that "There was an aura of sadness, like somebody died... The [resignation] speech was vintage Nixon—a kick or two at the press—enormous strains. One couldn't help but look at the family and the whole thing and think of his accomplishments and then think of the shame... [President Gerald Ford's swearing-in offered] indeed a new spirit, a new lift." [ 83 ] Head of U.S. Liaison Office in China Bush on Tiananmen Square in Beijing as U.S. Liaison to China, c.

1975 Upon his ascension to the presidency, Ford strongly considered Bush, Donald Rumsfeld , and Nelson Rockefeller for the vacant position of vice president. Ford ultimately chose Nelson Rockefeller, partly because of the publication of a news report claiming that Bush's 1970 campaign had benefited from a secret fund set up by Nixon; Bush was later cleared of any suspicion by a special prosecutor.

[ 84 ] Bush accepted appointment as Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office in the People's Republic of China, making him the de facto ambassador to China.

[ 85 ] According to biographer Jon Meacham, Bush's time in China convinced him that American engagement abroad was needed to ensure global stability and that the United States "needed to be visible but not pushy, muscular but not domineering".

[ 86 ] Director of Central Intelligence Director of Central Intelligence Bush at a meeting following the assassinations of Francis E. Meloy Jr.

and Robert O. Waring in Beirut in 1976 In January 1976, Ford brought Bush back to Washington to become the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI), placing him in charge of the CIA.

[ 87 ] In the aftermath of the Watergate scandal and the Vietnam War , the CIA's reputation had been damaged for its role in various covert operations. Bush was tasked with restoring the agency's morale and public reputation.

[ 88 ] [ f ] During Bush's year in charge of the CIA, the U.S. national security apparatus actively supported Operation Condor operations and right-wing military dictatorships in Latin America .

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Meanwhile, Ford decided to drop Rockefeller from the ticket for the 1976 presidential election ; he considered Bush as his running mate, but ultimately chose Bob Dole .

[ 91 ] In his capacity as DCI, Bush gave national security briefings to Jimmy Carter both as a presidential candidate and as president-elect. Bush then stepped down as DCI on the day of Carter's inauguration, January 20, 1977.

[ 92 ] 1980 presidential election Presidential campaign Main articles: George H. W. Bush 1980 presidential campaign and 1980 Republican Party presidential primaries Ronald Reagan , moderator Jon Breen, and Bush at the presidential debate in Nashua, New Hampshire , during the Republican party presidential primary in 1980 Bush's tenure at the CIA ended after Carter narrowly defeated Ford in the 1976 presidential election. Out of public office for the first time since the 1960s, Bush became chairman on the executive committee of the First International Bank in Houston.

[ 93 ] He also spent a year as a part-time professor of Administrative Science at Rice University's Jones School of Business , [ 94 ] continued his membership in the Council on Foreign Relations , and joined the Trilateral Commission . Meanwhile, he began to lay the groundwork for his candidacy in the 1980 Republican Party presidential primaries .

[ 95 ] In the 1980 Republican primary campaign, Bush faced Ronald Reagan, who was widely regarded as the front-runner, as well as other contenders like Senator Bob Dole, Senator Howard Baker , Texas Governor John Connally , Congressman Phil Crane , and Congressman John B. Anderson .

[ 96 ] Bush's campaign cast him as a youthful, "thinking man's candidate" who would emulate the pragmatic conservatism of President Eisenhower.

[ 97 ] Amid the Soviet–Afghan War , which brought an end to a period of détente, and the Iran hostage crisis , in which 52 Americans were taken hostage, the campaign highlighted Bush's foreign policy experience.

[ 98 ] At the outset of the race, Bush focused heavily on winning the January 21 Iowa caucuses , making 31 visits to the state.

[ 99 ] He won a close victory in Iowa with 31.5% to Reagan's 29.4%. After the win, Bush stated that his campaign was full of momentum, or " the Big Mo ", [ 100 ] and Reagan reorganized his campaign.

[ 101 ] Partly in response to the Bush campaign's frequent questioning of Reagan's age (Reagan turned 69 in 1980), the Reagan campaign stepped up attacks on Bush, painting him as an elitist who was not truly committed to conservatism.

[ 102 ] Prior to the New Hampshire primary , Bush and Reagan agreed to a two-person debate, organized by The Nashua Telegraph but paid for by the Reagan campaign.

[ 101 ] Days before the debate, Reagan announced that he would invite four other candidates to the debate; Bush, who had hoped that the one-on-one debate would allow him to emerge as the main alternative to Reagan in the primaries, refused to debate the other candidates. All six candidates took the stage, but Bush refused to speak in the presence of the other candidates. Ultimately, the other four candidates left the stage, and the debate continued, but Bush's refusal to debate anyone other than Reagan badly damaged his campaign in New Hampshire.

[ 103 ] He decisively lost New Hampshire's primary to Reagan, winning just 23 percent of the vote.

[ 101 ] Bush revitalized his campaign with a victory in Massachusetts but lost the next several primaries. As Reagan built up a commanding delegate lead, Bush refused to end his campaign, but the other candidates dropped out of the race.

[ 104 ] Criticizing his more conservative rival's policy proposals, Bush famously labeled Reagan's supply side –influenced plans for massive tax cuts as " voodoo economics ".

[ 105 ] Though he favored lower taxes, Bush feared that dramatic reductions in taxation would lead to deficits and, in turn, cause inflation.

[ 106 ] Vice presidential campaign Main articles: Ronald Reagan 1980 presidential campaign and 1980 Republican Party vice presidential candidate selection The Reagan–Bush ticket won the 1980 presidential election with 50.7% of the popular vote and a large majority of the electoral vote.

After Reagan clinched a majority of delegates in late May, Bush reluctantly dropped out of the race.

[ 107 ] At the 1980 Republican National Convention , Reagan made the last-minute decision to select Bush as his vice presidential nominee after negotiations with Ford regarding a Reagan–Ford ticket collapsed.

[ 108 ] Though Reagan had resented many of the Bush campaign's attacks during the primary campaign, and several conservative leaders had actively opposed Bush's nomination, Reagan ultimately decided that Bush's popularity with moderate Republicans made him the best and safest pick. Bush, who had believed his political career might be over following the primaries, eagerly accepted the position and threw himself into campaigning for the Reagan–Bush ticket.

[ 109 ] The 1980 general election campaign between Reagan and Carter was conducted amid a multitude of domestic concerns and the ongoing Iran hostage crisis, and Reagan sought to focus the race on Carter's handling of the economy.

[ 110 ] Though the race was widely regarded as a close contest for most of the campaign, Reagan ultimately won over the large majority of undecided voters.

[ 111 ] Reagan took 50.7 percent of the popular vote and 489 of the 538 electoral votes, while Carter won 41% of the popular vote and John Anderson, running as an independent candidate, won 6.6% of the popular vote.

[ 112 ] Vice presidency (1981–1989) See also: Presidency of Ronald Reagan and Reagan era Bush with President Ronald Reagan in 1981 As vice president, Bush generally maintained a low profile, recognizing the constitutional limits of the office; he avoided decision-making or criticizing Reagan in any way. This approach helped him earn Reagan's trust, easing tensions left over from their earlier rivalry.

[ 101 ] Bush also generally enjoyed a good relationship with Reagan staffers, including Bush's close friend James Baker, who served as Reagan's initial chief of staff.

[ 113 ] His understanding of the vice presidency was heavily influenced by Vice President Walter Mondale , who enjoyed a strong relationship with Carter in part because of his ability to avoid confrontations with senior staff and Cabinet members, and by Vice President Nelson Rockefeller 's difficult relationship with some members of the White House staff during the Ford administration .

[ 114 ] The Bushes attended a large number of public and ceremonial events in their positions, including many state funerals , which became a common joke for comedians. As the president of the Senate , Bush also stayed in contact with members of Congress and kept the president informed on occurrences on Capitol Hill.

[ 101 ] First term Reagan and Bush in a meeting to discuss the United States' invasion of Grenada with a group of bipartisan members of Congress in October 1983 On March 30, 1981, while Bush was in Texas, Reagan was shot and seriously wounded by John Hinckley Jr.

Bush immediately flew back to Washington D.C.; when his plane landed, his aides advised him to proceed directly to the White House by helicopter to show that the government was still functioning.

[ 101 ] Bush rejected the idea, fearing that such a dramatic scene risked giving the impression that he sought to usurp Reagan's powers and prerogatives.

[ 115 ] During Reagan's short period of incapacity, Bush presided over Cabinet meetings, met with congressional and foreign leaders, and briefed reporters. Still, he consistently rejected invoking the Twenty-fifth Amendment .

[ 116 ] Bush's handling of the attempted assassination and its aftermath made a positive impression on Reagan, who recovered and returned to work within two weeks of the shooting. From then on, the two men would have regular Thursday lunches in the Oval Office .

[ 117 ] Reagan assigned Bush to chair two special task forces, one on deregulation and one on international drug smuggling. Both were popular issues with conservatives, and Bush, largely a moderate, began courting them through his work. The deregulation task force reviewed hundreds of rules, making specific recommendations on which ones to amend or revise to curb the size of the federal government.

[ 101 ] The Reagan administration's deregulation push strongly impacted broadcasting, finance, resource extraction, and other economic activities, and the administration eliminated numerous government positions.

[ 118 ] Bush also oversaw the administration's national security crisis management organization, which had traditionally been the responsibility of the National Security Advisor .

[ 119 ] In 1983, Bush toured Western Europe as part of the Reagan administration's ultimately successful efforts to convince skeptical NATO allies to support the deployment of Pershing II missiles.

[ 120 ] Reagan's approval ratings fell after his first year in office, but they bounced back when the United States began to emerge from recession in 1983.

[ 121 ] Former vice president Walter Mondale was nominated by the Democratic Party in the 1984 presidential election . Down in the polls, Mondale selected Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate in hopes of galvanizing support for his campaign, thus making Ferraro the first female major party vice presidential nominee in U.S. history.

[ 122 ] She and Bush squared off in a single televised vice presidential debate .

[ 101 ] Public opinion polling consistently showed a Reagan lead in the 1984 campaign, and Mondale was unable to shake up the race.

[ 123 ] In the end, Reagan won re-election, winning 49 of 50 states and receiving 59% of the popular vote to Mondale's 41%.

[ 124 ] Second term Vice President Bush standing with President Ronald Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev on the New York City waterfront in 1988 Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the Soviet Union in 1985. Rejecting the ideological rigidity of his three elderly sick predecessors, Gorbachev insisted on urgently needed economic and political reforms called " glasnost " (openness) and " perestroika " (restructuring).

[ 125 ] At the 1987 Washington Summit , Gorbachev and Reagan signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty , which committed both signatories to the total abolition of their respective short-range and medium-range missile stockpiles.

[ 126 ] The treaty began a new era of trade, openness, and cooperation between the two powers.

[ 127 ] President Reagan and Secretary of State George Shultz took the lead in these negotiations, but Bush sat in on many meetings. Bush did not agree with many of the Reagan policies, but he did tell Gorbachev that he would seek to continue improving relations if he succeeded Reagan.

[ 128 ] On July 13, 1985, Bush became the first vice president to serve as acting president when Reagan underwent surgery to remove polyps from his colon ; Bush served as the acting president for approximately eight hours.

[ 129 ] In 1986, the Reagan administration was shaken by a scandal when it was revealed that administration officials had secretly arranged weapon sales to Iran during the Iran–Iraq War . The officials had used the proceeds to fund the Contra rebels in their fight against the leftist Sandinista government in Nicaragua . Democrats had passed a law that appropriated funds could not be used to help the Contras. Instead, the administration used non-appropriated funds from the sales.

[ 101 ] When news of the affair broke to the media, Bush stated that he had been "out of the loop" and unaware of the diversion of funds.

[ 130 ] Biographer Jon Meacham writes that "no evidence was ever produced proving Bush was aware of the diversion to the contras," but he criticizes Bush's "out of the loop" characterization, writing that the "record is clear that Bush was aware that the United States, in contravention of its own stated policy, was trading arms for hostages".

[ 131 ] The Iran–Contra scandal , as it became known, did serious damage to the Reagan presidency, raising questions about Reagan's competency.

[ 132 ] Congress established the Tower Commission to investigate the scandal, and, at Reagan's request, a panel of federal judges appointed Lawrence Walsh as a special prosecutor charged with investigating the Iran–Contra scandal.

[ 133 ] The investigations continued after Reagan left office, and, though Bush was never charged with a crime, the Iran–Contra scandal would remain a political liability for him.

[ 134 ] On July 3, 1988, the guided missile cruiser USS Vincennes accidentally shot down Iran Air Flight 655 , killing 290 passengers.

[ 135 ] Bush, then-vice president, defended his country at the United Nations by arguing that the U.S. attack had been a wartime incident and the crew of Vincennes had acted appropriately to the situation.

[ 136 ] 1988 presidential election Main article: George H. W. Bush 1988 presidential campaign Further information: 1988 Republican Party presidential primaries and 1988 United States presidential election Bush began planning for a presidential run after the 1984 election, and he officially entered the 1988 Republican Party presidential primaries in October 1987.

[ 101 ] He put together a campaign led by Reagan staffer Lee Atwater , which also included his son, George W. Bush, and media consultant Roger Ailes .

[ 137 ] Though he had moved to the right during his time as vice president, endorsing a Human Life Amendment and repudiating his earlier comments on "voodoo economics", Bush still faced opposition from many conservatives in the Republican Party.

[ 138 ] His major rivals for the Republican nomination were Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, Representative Jack Kemp of New York, and Christian televangelist Pat Robertson .

[ 139 ] Reagan did not publicly endorse any candidate but privately expressed support for Bush.

[ 140 ] Though considered the early front-runner for the nomination, Bush came in third in the Iowa caucus , behind Dole and Robertson.

[ 141 ] Much as Reagan had done in 1980, Bush reorganized his staff and concentrated on the New Hampshire primary.

[ 101 ] With help from Governor John H. Sununu and an effective campaign attacking Dole for raising taxes, Bush overcame an initial polling deficit and won New Hampshire with 39 percent of the vote.

[ 142 ] After Bush won South Carolina and 16 of the 17 states holding a primary on Super Tuesday , his competitors dropped out of the race.

[ 143 ] Bush, occasionally criticized for his lack of eloquence compared to Reagan, delivered a well-received speech at the Republican convention. Known as the " thousand points of light " speech, it described Bush's vision of America: he endorsed the Pledge of Allegiance , prayer in schools , capital punishment , and gun rights .

[ 144 ] Bush also pledged that he would not raise taxes , stating: "Congress will push me to raise taxes, and I'll say no, and they'll push, and I'll say no, and they'll push again. And all I can say to them is: read my lips. No new taxes." [ 145 ] Bush selected little-known Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana as his running mate. Though Quayle had compiled an unremarkable record in Congress, he was popular among many conservatives, and the campaign hoped that Quayle's youth would appeal to younger voters.

[ 146 ] 1988 electoral vote results. Bush won 426–111.

Meanwhile, the Democratic Party nominated Governor Michael Dukakis , known for presiding over an economic turnaround in Massachusetts.

[ 147 ] Leading in the general election polls against Bush, Dukakis ran an ineffective, low-risk campaign.

[ 148 ] The Bush campaign attacked Dukakis as an unpatriotic liberal extremist and seized on the Willie Horton case, in which a convicted felon from Massachusetts raped a woman while on a prison furlough , a program Dukakis supported as governor. The Bush campaign charged that Dukakis presided over a " revolving door " that allowed dangerous convicted felons to leave prison.

[ 149 ] Dukakis damaged his own campaign with a widely mocked ride in an M1 Abrams tank and poor performance at the second presidential debate.

[ 150 ] Bush also attacked Dukakis for opposing a law that would require all students to recite the Pledge of Allegiance.

[ 144 ] The election is widely considered to have had a high level of negative campaigning, though political scientist John Geer has argued that the share of negative ads was in line with previous presidential elections.

[ 151 ] Bush defeated Dukakis by a margin of 426 to 111 in the Electoral College , and he took 53.4 percent of the national popular vote.

[ 152 ] Bush ran well in all the major regions of the country, but especially in the South .

[ 153 ] He became the fourth sitting vice president to be elected president and the first to do so since Martin Van Buren in 1836 and the first person to succeed a president from his own party via election since Herbert Hoover in 1929 .

[ 101 ] [ g ] In the concurrent congressional elections , Democrats retained control of both houses of Congress.

[ 155 ] Presidency (1989–1993) Main article: Presidency of George H. W. Bush For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the George H. W. Bush presidency .

Bush takes the oath of office administered by Chief Justice William Rehnquist at the Capitol , January 20, 1989.

Bush was inaugurated on January 20, 1989, succeeding Reagan. In his inaugural address, Bush said: I come before you and assume the Presidency at a moment rich with promise. We live in a peaceful, prosperous time, but we can make it better. For a new breeze is blowing, and a world refreshed by freedom seems reborn; for in man's heart, if not in fact, the day of the dictator is over. The totalitarian era is passing, its old ideas blown away like leaves from an ancient, lifeless tree. A new breeze is blowing, and a nation refreshed by freedom stands ready to push on. There is new ground to be broken, and new action to be taken.

[ 156 ] Bush's first major appointment was that of James Baker as Secretary of State.

[ 157 ] Leadership of the Department of Defense went to Dick Cheney , who had previously served as Gerald Ford's chief of staff and would later serve as vice president under his son George W. Bush.

[ 158 ] Jack Kemp joined the administration as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, while Elizabeth Dole , the wife of Bob Dole and a former Secretary of Transportation, became the Secretary of Labor under Bush.

[ 159 ] Bush retained several Reagan officials, including Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas F. Brady , Attorney General Dick Thornburgh , and Secretary of Education Lauro Cavazos .

[ 160 ] New Hampshire Governor John Sununu, a strong supporter of Bush during the 1988 campaign, became chief of staff.

[ 157 ] Brent Scowcroft was appointed as the National Security Advisor, a role he had also held under Ford.

[ 161 ] Foreign affairs Main article: Foreign policy of the George H. W. Bush administration End of the Cold War Further information: Revolutions of 1989 and Dissolution of the Soviet Union During the first year of his tenure, Bush paused Reagan's détente policy toward the Soviet Union.

[ 162 ] Bush and his advisers were initially divided on Gorbachev; some administration officials saw him as a democratic reformer, but others suspected him of trying to make the minimum changes necessary to restore the Soviet Union to a competitive position with the United States.

[ 163 ] In 1989, all the Communist governments collapsed in Eastern Europe. Gorbachev declined to send in the Soviet military, effectively abandoning the Brezhnev Doctrine . The U.S. was not directly involved in these upheavals, but the Bush administration avoided gloating over the demise of the Eastern Bloc to avoid undermining further democratic reforms.

[ 164 ] Bush and Gorbachev met at the Malta Summit in December 1989. Though many on the right remained wary of Gorbachev, Bush came away believing that Gorbachev would negotiate in good faith.

[ 165 ] For the remainder of his term, Bush sought cooperative relations with Gorbachev, believing he was the key to peace.

[ 166 ] The primary issue at the Malta Summit was the potential reunification of Germany . While Britain and France were wary of a reunified Germany, Bush joined German chancellor Helmut Kohl in pushing for German reunification.

[ 167 ] Bush believed that a reunified Germany would serve American interests.

[ 168 ] After extensive negotiations, Gorbachev agreed to allow a reunified Germany to be a part of NATO, and Germany officially reunified in October 1990 after paying billions of marks to Moscow.

[ 169 ] Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev at the Helsinki Summit in 1990 Gorbachev used force to suppress nationalist movements within the Soviet Union itself.

[ 170 ] A crisis in Lithuania left Bush in a difficult position, as he needed Gorbachev's cooperation in the reunification of Germany and feared that the collapse of the Soviet Union could leave nuclear arms in dangerous hands. The Bush administration mildly protested Gorbachev's suppression of Lithuania's independence movement but took no action to intervene directly.

[ 171 ] Bush warned independence movements of the disorder that could come with secession from the Soviet Union; in a 1991 address that critics labeled the " Chicken Kiev speech ", he cautioned against "suicidal nationalism".

[ 172 ] In July 1991, Bush and Gorbachev signed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START I) treaty, in which both countries agreed to cut their strategic nuclear weapons by 30 percent.

[ 173 ] In August 1991, hard-line Communists launched a coup against Gorbachev; while the coup quickly fell apart, it broke the remaining power of Gorbachev and the central Soviet government.

[ 174 ] Later that month, Gorbachev resigned as general secretary of the Communist party , and Russian president Boris Yeltsin ordered the seizure of Soviet property. Gorbachev clung to power as the President of the Soviet Union until December 1991, when the Soviet Union dissolved .

[ 175 ] Fifteen states emerged from the Soviet Union, and of those states, Russia was the largest and most populous. Bush and Yeltsin met in February 1992, declaring a new era of "friendship and partnership".

[ 176 ] In January 1993, Bush and Yeltsin agreed to START II , which provided for further nuclear arms reductions on top of the original START treaty.

[ 177 ] Invasion of Panama Main article: United States invasion of Panama Through the late 1980s, the U.S. provided aid to Manuel Noriega , the anti-Communist leader of Panama. Noriega had long-standing ties to United States intelligence agencies, including during Bush's tenure as Director of Central Intelligence, and was also deeply involved in drug trafficking .

[ 178 ] In May 1989, Noriega annulled the results of a democratic presidential election in which Guillermo Endara had been elected. Bush objected to the annulment of the election and worried about the status of the Panama Canal with Noriega still in office.

[ 179 ] Bush dispatched 2,000 soldiers to the country, where they began conducting regular military exercises violating prior treaties.

[ 180 ] After Panamanian forces shot a U.S. serviceman in December 1989, Bush ordered the United States invasion of Panama , known as "Operation Just Cause". The invasion was the first large-scale American military operation unrelated to the Cold War in more than 40 years. American forces quickly took control of the Panama Canal Zone and Panama City . Noriega surrendered on January 3, 1990, and was quickly transported to a prison in the United States. Twenty-three Americans died in the operation, while another 394 were wounded. Noriega was convicted and imprisoned on racketeering and drug trafficking charges in April 1992.

[ 179 ] Historian Stewart Brewer argues that the invasion "represented a new era in American foreign policy" because Bush did not justify the invasion under the Monroe Doctrine or the threat of Communism, but rather because it was in the best interests of the United States.

[ 181 ] Gulf War Main article: Gulf War Bush meets with Robert Gates , General Colin Powell , Secretary Dick Cheney and others about the situation in the Persian Gulf, 1991 Faced with massive debts and low oil prices in the aftermath of the Iran–Iraq War , Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein decided to conquer the country of Kuwait, a small, oil-rich country situated on Iraq's southern border.

[ 182 ] After Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, Bush imposed economic sanctions on Iraq and assembled a multi-national coalition opposed to the invasion.

[ 183 ] Some in the administration feared that a failure to respond to the invasion would embolden Hussein to attack Saudi Arabia or Israel.

[ 184 ] Robert Gates attempted to convince Brent Scowcroft that Bush should tone down the rhetoric but Bush insisted it was his primary concern to discourage other countries from "unanswered aggression".

[ 185 ] Bush also wanted to ensure continued access to oil, as Iraq and Kuwait collectively accounted for 20 percent of the world's oil production, and Saudi Arabia produced another 26 percent of the world's oil supply.

[ 186 ] At Bush's insistence, in November 1990, the United Nations Security Council approved a resolution authorizing the use of force if Iraq did not withdraw from Kuwait by January 15, 1991.

[ 187 ] Gorbachev's support and China's abstention helped ensure passage of the United Nations resolution.

[ 188 ] Bush convinced Britain, France, and other nations to commit soldiers to an operation against Iraq. He won important financial backing from Germany, Japan, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.

[ 189 ] In January 1991, Bush asked Congress to approve a joint resolution authorizing a war against Iraq.

[ 190 ] Bush believed that the United Nations resolution had already provided him with the necessary authorization to launch a military operation against Iraq. Still, he wanted to show that the nation was united behind military action.

[ 191 ] Despite the opposition of a majority of Democrats in both the House and the Senate, Congress approved the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 1991 .

[ 190 ] After the January 15 deadline passed without an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, U.S. and coalition forces conducted a bombing campaign that devastated Iraq's power grid and communications network and resulted in the desertion of about 100,000 Iraqi soldiers. In retaliation, Iraq launched Scud missiles at Israel and Saudi Arabia, but most missiles did little damage. On February 23, coalition forces began a ground invasion into Kuwait, evicting Iraqi forces by the end of February 27. About 300 Americans and approximately 65 soldiers from other coalition nations died during the military action.

[ 192 ] A ceasefire was arranged on March 3, and the United Nations passed a resolution establishing a peacekeeping force in a demilitarized zone between Kuwait and Iraq.

[ 193 ] A March 1991 Gallup poll showed that Bush had an approval rating of 89 percent, the highest presidential approval rating in the history of Gallup polling.

[ 194 ] After 1991, the United Nations maintained economic sanctions against Iraq, and the United Nations Special Commission was assigned to ensure that Iraq did not revive its weapons of mass destruction program .

[ 195 ] NAFTA Main article: North American Free Trade Agreement From left to right: (standing) President Carlos Salinas , President Bush, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney ; (seated) Jaime Serra Puche , Carla Hills , and Michael Wilson at the NAFTA Initialing Ceremony, October 1992 In 1987, the U.S. and Canada reached a free trade agreement that eliminated many tariffs between the two countries. President Reagan had intended it as the first step towards a larger trade agreement to eliminate most tariffs among the United States, Canada, and Mexico.

[ 196 ] The Bush administration, along with the Progressive Conservative Canadian prime minister Brian Mulroney , spearheaded the negotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with Mexico. In addition to lowering tariffs, the proposed treaty would affect patents, copyrights, and trademarks.

[ 197 ] In 1991, Bush sought fast track authority , which grants the president the power to submit an international trade agreement to Congress without the possibility of amendment. Despite congressional opposition led by House Majority Leader Dick Gephardt , both houses of Congress voted to grant Bush fast track authority. NAFTA was signed in December 1992, after Bush lost reelection, [ 198 ] but President Clinton won ratification of NAFTA in 1993.

[ 199 ] NAFTA was controversial for its impact on wages, jobs, and overall economic growth.

[ 200 ] In 2020, it was replaced entirely by the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA).

Domestic affairs Economy and fiscal issues The U.S. economy had generally performed well since emerging from recession in late 1982 , but it slipped into a mild recession in 1990 . The unemployment rate rose from 5.9 percent in 1989 to a high of 7.8 percent in mid-1991.

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] Large federal deficits , spawned during the Reagan years, rose from $152.1 billion in 1989 [ 203 ] to $220 billion for 1990; [ 204 ] the $220 billion deficit represented a threefold increase since 1980.

[ 205 ] As the public became increasingly concerned about the economy and other domestic affairs, Bush's well-received handling of foreign affairs became less of an issue for most voters.

[ 206 ] Bush's top domestic priority was to end federal budget deficits, which he saw as a liability for the country's long-term economic health and standing in the world.

[ 207 ] As he was opposed to major defense spending cuts [ 208 ] and had pledged not to raise taxes, the president had major difficulties in balancing the budget.

[ 209 ] Bush and congressional leaders agreed to avoid major changes to the budget for fiscal year 1990, which began in October 1989. However, both sides knew spending cuts or new taxes would be necessary for the following year's budget to avoid the draconian automatic domestic spending cuts required by the Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Balanced Budget Act of 1987.

[ 210 ] Bush and other leaders also wanted to cut deficits because Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan refused to lower interest rates and thus stimulate economic growth unless the federal budget deficit was reduced.

[ 211 ] In a statement released in late June 1990, Bush said that he would be open to a deficit reduction program which included spending cuts, incentives for economic growth, budget process reform, as well as tax increases.

[ 212 ] To fiscal conservatives in the Republican Party, Bush's statement represented a betrayal, and they heavily criticized him for compromising so early in the negotiations.

[ 213 ] In September 1990, Bush and congressional Democrats announced a compromise to cut mandatory and discretionary programs funding while raising revenue, partly through a higher gas tax. The compromise additionally included a "pay as you go" provision that required that new programs be paid for at the time of implementation.

[ 214 ] House Minority Whip Newt Gingrich led the conservative opposition to the bill, strongly opposing any form of tax increase.

[ 215 ] Some liberals also criticized the budget cuts in the compromise, and in October, the House rejected the deal, resulting in a brief government shutdown. Without the strong backing of the Republican Party, Bush agreed to another compromise bill, this one more favorable to Democrats. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (OBRA-90), enacted on October 27, 1990, dropped much of the gasoline tax increase in favor of higher income taxes on top earners. It included cuts to domestic spending, but the cuts were not as deep as those proposed in the original compromise. Bush's decision to sign the bill damaged his standing with conservatives and the general public, but it also laid the groundwork for the budget surpluses of the late 1990s.

[ 216 ] Discrimination "Even the strongest person couldn't scale the Berlin Wall to gain the elusive promise of independence that lay just beyond. And so, together we rejoiced when that barrier fell. And now I sign legislation which takes a sledgehammer to another wall, one which has for too many generations separated Americans with disabilities from the freedom they could glimpse, but not grasp." —Bush's remarks at the signing ceremony for the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 [ 217 ] The disabled had not received legal protections under the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964, and many faced discrimination and segregation by the time Bush took office. In 1988, Lowell P. Weicker Jr.

and Tony Coelho introduced the Americans with Disabilities Act, which barred employment discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities. The bill had passed the Senate but not the House and was reintroduced in 1989. Though some conservatives opposed the bill due to its costs and potential burdens on businesses, Bush strongly supported it, partly because his son, Neil, had struggled with dyslexia . After the bill passed both houses of Congress, Bush signed the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 into law in July 1990.

[ 218 ] The act required employers and public accommodations to make "reasonable accommodations" for disabled people while providing an exception when such accommodations imposed an "undue hardship".

[ 219 ] Senator Ted Kennedy later led the congressional passage of a separate civil rights bill designed to facilitate launching employment discrimination lawsuits.

[ 220 ] In vetoing the bill, Bush argued that it would lead to racial quotas in hiring.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] In November 1991, Bush signed the Civil Rights Act of 1991 , which was largely similar to the bill he had vetoed in the previous year.

[ 220 ] In August 1990, Bush signed the Ryan White CARE Act , the largest federally funded program dedicated to assisting persons living with HIV/AIDS .

[ 223 ] Throughout his presidency, the AIDS epidemic grew dramatically in the U.S. and around the world, and Bush often found himself at odds with AIDS activist groups who criticized him for not placing a high priority on HIV/AIDS research and funding. Frustrated by the administration's lack of urgency on the issue, ACT UP dumped the ashes of deceased HIV/AIDS patients on the White House lawn during a viewing of the AIDS Quilt in 1992.

[ 224 ] By that time, HIV had become the leading cause of death in the U.S. for men aged 25–44.

[ 225 ] Environment See also: Global Change Research Act of 1990 , U.S. Global Change Research Program , and National Climate Assessment In June 1989, the Bush administration proposed a bill to amend the Clean Air Act . Working with Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell , the administration won passage of the amendments over the opposition of business-aligned members of Congress who feared the impact of tougher regulations.

[ 226 ] The legislation sought to curb acid rain and smog by requiring decreased emissions of chemicals such as sulfur dioxide , [ 227 ] and was the first major update to the Clean Air Act since 1977.

[ 228 ] Bush also signed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 in response to the Exxon Valdez oil spill . However, the League of Conservation Voters criticized some of Bush's other environmental actions, including his opposition to stricter auto-mileage standards.

[ 229 ] Points of Light Main article: Points of Light Bush devoted attention to voluntary service to solve some of America's most serious social problems. He often used the "thousand points of light" theme to describe the power of citizens to solve community problems. In his 1989 inaugural address, Bush said, "I have spoken of a thousand points of light, of all the community organizations that are spread like stars throughout the Nation, doing good." [ 230 ] During his presidency, Bush honored numerous volunteers with the Daily Point of Light Award, a tradition that his presidential successors continued.

[ 231 ] In 1990, the Points of Light Foundation was created as a nonprofit organization in Washington to promote this spirit of volunteerism .

[ 232 ] In 2007, the Points of Light Foundation merged with the Hands On Network to create a new organization, Points of Light .

[ 233 ] Judicial appointments Further information: George H. W. Bush Supreme Court candidates , George H. W. Bush judicial appointments , and George H. W. Bush judicial appointment controversies Bush appointed Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court in 1991.

Bush appointed two justices to the Supreme Court of the United States . In 1990, Bush appointed a largely unknown state appellate judge, David Souter , to replace liberal icon William J. Brennan Jr.

[ 234 ] Souter was easily confirmed and served until 2009, but joined the liberal bloc of the court, disappointing Bush.

[ 234 ] In 1991, Bush nominated conservative federal judge Clarence Thomas to succeed Thurgood Marshall , a long-time liberal stalwart. Thomas, the former head of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), faced heavy opposition in the Senate, as well as from pro-choice groups and the NAACP . His nomination faced another difficulty when Anita Hill accused Thomas of having sexually harassed her during his time as the chair of EEOC. Thomas won confirmation in a narrow 52–48 vote; 43 Republicans and 9 Democrats voted to confirm Thomas's nomination, while 46 Democrats and 2 Republicans voted against confirmation.

[ 235 ] Thomas became one of the most conservative justices of his era.

[ 236 ] Other issues Bush's education platform consisted mainly of offering federal support for a variety of innovations, such as open enrollment, incentive pay for outstanding teachers, and rewards for schools that improve performance with underprivileged children.

[ 237 ] Though Bush did not pass a major educational reform package during his presidency, his ideas influenced later reform efforts, including Goals 2000 and the No Child Left Behind Act .

[ 238 ] Bush signed the Immigration Act of 1990 , [ 239 ] which led to a 40 percent increase in legal immigration to the United States .

[ 240 ] The act more than doubled the number of visas given to immigrants on the basis of job skills.

[ 241 ] In the wake of the savings and loan crisis , Bush proposed a $50 billion package to rescue the savings and loans industry, and also proposed the creation of the Office of Thrift Supervision to regulate the industry. Congress passed the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 , which incorporated most of Bush's proposals.

[ 242 ] Public image Bush's approval ratings (red) compared to his disapproval ratings (blue) during his presidency Bush was widely seen as a "pragmatic caretaker" president who lacked a unified and compelling long-term theme in his efforts.

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] [ 245 ] A Bush sound bite , referring to the issue of overarching purpose as "the vision thing", has become a metonym applied to other political figures accused of similar difficulties.

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] [ 248 ] [ 249 ] [ 250 ] [ 251 ] His ability to gain broad international support for the Gulf War and the war's result were seen as both a diplomatic and military triumph, [ 252 ] rousing bipartisan approval, [ 253 ] though his decision to withdraw without removing Saddam Hussein left mixed feelings, and attention returned to the domestic front and a souring economy.

[ 254 ] A New York Times article mistakenly depicted Bush as being surprised to see a supermarket barcode reader ; [ 255 ] [ 256 ] the report of his reaction exacerbated the notion that he was "out of touch".

[ 255 ] Bush was popular throughout most of his presidency. After the Gulf war concluded in February 1991, his approval rating saw a high of 89 percent, before gradually declining for the rest of the year, and eventually falling below 50 percent according to a January 1992 Gallup poll.

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] [ 259 ] His sudden drop in his favorability was likely due to the early 1990s recession , which shifted his image from "conquering hero" to "politician befuddled by economic matters".

[ 260 ] At the elite level, several commentators and political experts lamented the state of American politics in 1991–1992 and reported the voters were angry. Many analysts blamed the poor quality of national election campaigns.

[ 261 ] 1992 presidential campaign Main article: George H. W. Bush 1992 presidential campaign Further information: 1992 United States presidential election Bush announced his reelection bid in early 1992; with a coalition victory in the Persian Gulf War and high approval ratings, Bush's reelection initially looked likely.

[ 262 ] As a result, many leading Democrats, including Mario Cuomo , Dick Gephardt, and Al Gore , declined to seek their party's presidential nomination.

[ 263 ] However, Bush's tax increase angered many conservatives, who believed that Bush had strayed from the conservative principles of Ronald Reagan.

[ 264 ] He faced a challenge from conservative political columnist Pat Buchanan in the 1992 Republican primaries .

[ 265 ] Bush fended off Buchanan's challenge and won his party's nomination at the 1992 Republican National Convention . Still, the convention adopted a socially conservative platform strongly influenced by the Christian right .

[ 266 ] Bush was defeated in the 1992 presidential election by Bill Clinton .

Meanwhile, the Democrats nominated Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas. A moderate who was affiliated with the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), Clinton favored welfare reform, deficit reduction, and a tax cut for the middle class.

[ 267 ] In early 1992, the race took an unexpected twist when Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot launched a third-party bid, claiming that neither Republicans nor Democrats could eliminate the deficit and make government more efficient. His message appealed to voters across the political spectrum disappointed with both parties' perceived fiscal irresponsibility.

[ 268 ] Perot also attacked NAFTA, which he claimed would lead to major job losses.

[ 269 ] National polling taken in mid-1992 showed Perot in the lead, but Clinton experienced a surge through effective campaigning and the selection of Senator Al Gore, a popular and relatively young Southerner, as his running mate.

[ 270 ] Clinton won the election, taking 43 percent of the popular vote and 370 electoral votes, while Bush won 37.5 percent of the popular vote and 168 electoral votes.

[ 271 ] Perot won 19% of the popular vote, one of the highest totals for a third-party candidate in U.S. history, drawing equally from both major candidates, according to exit polls.

[ 272 ] Clinton performed well in the Northeast, the Midwest, and the West Coast, while also waging the strongest Democratic campaign in the South since the 1976 election.

[ 273 ] Several factors were important in Bush's defeat. The ailing economy which arose from recession may have been the main factor in Bush's loss, as 7 in 10 voters said on election day that the economy was either "not so good" or "poor".

[ 274 ] [ 275 ] On the eve of the 1992 election, the unemployment rate stood at 7.8%, which was the highest it had been since 1984.

[ 276 ] The president was also damaged by his alienation of many conservatives in his party.

[ 277 ] Bush partially blamed Perot for his defeat, though exit polls showed that Perot drew his voters about equally from Clinton and Bush.

[ 278 ] Despite his defeat, Bush left office with a 56 percent job approval rating in January 1993.

[ 279 ] Like many of his predecessors, Bush issued a series of pardons during his last days in office. In December 1992, he granted executive clemency to six former senior government officials implicated in the Iran-Contra scandal, most prominently former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger .

[ 280 ] The charges against the six were that they lied to or withheld information from Congress. The pardons effectively brought an end to the Iran-Contra scandal.

[ 281 ] According to Seymour Martin Lipset , the 1992 election had several unique characteristics. Voters felt that economic conditions were worse than they were, which harmed Bush. A rare event was the presence of a strong third-party candidate. Liberals launched a backlash against 12 years of a conservative White House. The chief factor was Clinton uniting his party and winning over several heterogeneous groups.

[ 282 ] Post-presidency (1993–2018) Main article: Post-presidency of George H. W. Bush Appearances H. W. Bush (left) and his son George W. Bush in the Oval Office , January 2001 After leaving office, Bush and his wife built a retirement house in the community of West Oaks, Houston .

[ 283 ] He established a presidential office within the Park Laureate Building on Memorial Drive in Houston.

[ 284 ] He also frequently spent time at his vacation home in Kennebunkport, took annual cruises in Greece, went on fishing trips in Florida, and visited the Bohemian Club in Northern California. He declined to serve on corporate boards but delivered numerous paid speeches and was an adviser to The Carlyle Group , a private equity firm.

[ 285 ] He never published his memoirs, but he and Brent Scowcroft co-wrote A World Transformed , a 1998 work on foreign policy. Portions of his letters and his diary were later published as The China Diary of George H. W. Bush and All the Best, George Bush .

[ 286 ] During a 1993 visit to Kuwait, Bush was targeted in an assassination plot directed by the Iraqi Intelligence Service . President Clinton retaliated when he ordered the firing of 23 cruise missiles at Iraqi Intelligence Service headquarters in Baghdad .

[ 287 ] Bush did not publicly comment on the assassination attempt or the missile strike, but privately spoke with Clinton shortly before the strike took place.

[ 288 ] In the 1994 gubernatorial elections , his sons George W. and Jeb concurrently ran for Governor of Texas and Governor of Florida . Concerning their political careers, he advised them both that "[a]t some point both of you may want to say 'Well, I don't agree with my Dad on that point' or 'Frankly I think Dad was wrong on that.' Do it. Chart your own course, not just on the issues but on defining yourselves".

[ 289 ] George W. won his race against Ann Richards while Jeb lost to Lawton Chiles . After the results came in, the elder Bush told ABC, "I have very mixed emotions. Proud father, is the way I would sum it all up." [ 290 ] Jeb would again run for governor of Florida in 1998 and win at the same time that his brother George W. won re-election in Texas. It marked the second time in United States history that a pair of brothers served simultaneously as governors (the first of which spanned from 1967 to 1971, when Nelson Rockefeller and brother Winthrop Rockefeller were governors of New York and Arkansas respectively).

[ 291 ] George and Barbara Bush, 2001 Bush supported his son's candidacy in the 2000 presidential election but did not actively campaign in the election and did not deliver a speech at the 2000 Republican National Convention .

[ 292 ] George W. Bush defeated Al Gore in the 2000 election and was re-elected in 2004. Bush and his son thus became the second father–son pair to each serve as President of the United States, following John Adams and John Quincy Adams .

[ 293 ] Through previous administrations, the elder Bush had ubiquitously been known as "George Bush" or "President Bush", but following his son's election, the need to distinguish between them has made retronymic forms such as "George H. W. Bush" and "George Bush Sr." and colloquialisms such as "Bush 41" and "Bush the Elder" more common.

[ 294 ] Bush advised his son on some personnel choices, approving of the selection of Dick Cheney as running mate and the retention of George Tenet as CIA Director. However, he was not consulted on all appointments, including that of his old rival, Donald Rumsfeld, as Secretary of Defense.

[ 295 ] Though he avoided giving unsolicited advice to his son, Bush and his son also discussed some policy matters, especially regarding national security issues.

[ 296 ] In his retirement, Bush used the public spotlight to support various charities.

[ 297 ] Despite earlier political differences with Bill Clinton, the two former presidents eventually became friends.

[ 298 ] They appeared together in television ads, encouraging aid for victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami and Hurricane Katrina .

[ 299 ] However, when interviewed by Jon Meacham, Bush criticized Donald Rumsfeld, Dick Cheney, and even his son George W. Bush for their handling of foreign policy after the September 11 attacks .

[ 300 ] Final years From left to right: George H. W. Bush, Barack Obama , George W. Bush , Bill Clinton , and Jimmy Carter Bush supported Republican John McCain in the 2008 presidential election, [ 301 ] and Republican Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election, [ 302 ] but both were defeated by Democrat Barack Obama . In 2011, Obama awarded Bush with the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the highest civilian honor in the United States.

[ 303 ] Bush supported his son Jeb's bid in the 2016 Republican primaries .

[ 304 ] Jeb Bush's campaign struggled, however, and he withdrew from the race during the primaries. Neither George H. W. nor George W. Bush endorsed the eventual Republican nominee, Donald Trump ; [ 305 ] all three Bushes emerged as frequent critics of Trump's policies and speaking style, while Trump frequently criticized George W. Bush's presidency. George H. W. later said he voted for the Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton , in the general election.

[ 306 ] After the election, Bush wrote a letter to President-elect Donald Trump in January 2017 to inform him that because of his poor health, he would not be able to attend Trump's inauguration on January 20; he gave him his best wishes.

[ 307 ] In August 2017, after the violence at Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia , both presidents Bush released a joint statement saying, "America must always reject racial bigotry, anti-Semitism, and hatred in all forms[. ...] As we pray for Charlottesville, we are all reminded of the fundamental truths recorded by that city's most prominent citizen in the Declaration of Independence: we are all created equal and endowed by our Creator with unalienable rights." [ 308 ] [ 309 ] On April 17, 2018, Barbara Bush died at the age of 92 [ 310 ] at her home in Houston, Texas. Her funeral was held at St. Martin's Episcopal Church in Houston four days later.

[ 311 ] [ 312 ] Bush, along with former presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush (son), Bill Clinton and First Ladies Melania Trump , Michelle Obama , Laura Bush (daughter-in-law) and Hillary Clinton attended the funeral and posed together for a photo as a sign of unity.

[ 313 ] [ 314 ] On November 1, 2018, Bush went to the polls to vote early in the midterm elections. This would be his final public appearance.

[ 315 ] Death and funeral Main article: Death and state funeral of George H. W. Bush Bush lying in state in the U.S. Capitol rotunda After a long battle with vascular Parkinson's disease , Bush died at his home in Houston on November 30, 2018, at the age of 94.

[ 316 ] [ 317 ] At the time of his death he was the longest-lived U.S. president until March 22, 2019, when Jimmy Carter surpassed his lifespan.

[ 318 ] [ 319 ] He was also the third-oldest vice president .

[ h ] Bush lay in state in the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol from December 3 through December 5; he was the 12th U.S. president to be accorded this honor.

[ 321 ] [ 322 ] Then, on December 5, Bush's casket was transferred from the Capitol rotunda to Washington National Cathedral where a state funeral was held.

[ 323 ] After the funeral, Bush's body was transported to George H.W. Bush Presidential Library in College Station, Texas , where he was buried next to his wife Barbara and daughter Robin.

[ 324 ] At the funeral, former president George W. Bush eulogized his father saying,
"He looked for the good in each person, and he usually found it." [ 323 ] Personal life In May 1991, The New York Times revealed that Bush had developed Graves' disease , a non-contagious thyroid condition that his wife Barbara also had.

[ 325 ] Bush had two separate hip replacement surgeries in 2000 and 2007.

[ 326 ] Thereafter, Bush started to experience weakness in his legs, which was attributed to vascular parkinsonism , a form of Parkinson's disease. He progressively developed problems walking, initially needing a walking stick for mobility aid before he eventually came to rely on a wheelchair from 2011 onwards.

[ 327 ] Bush was a lifelong Episcopalian and a member of St. Martin's Episcopal Church in Houston. As President, Bush regularly attended services at St. John's Episcopal Church in Washington D.C.

[ 328 ] He cited various moments in his life on the deepening of his faith, including his escape from Japanese forces in 1944, and the death of his three-year-old daughter Robin in 1953.

[ 329 ] His faith was reflected in his "thousand points of light" speech, his support for prayer in schools, and his support for the pro-life movement (following his election as vice president).

[ 330 ] [ 329 ] Shortly after his death, it was revealed that Bush secretly financed the education and food expenses of a schoolboy from the Philippines under the assumed name "George Walker" through the charity Compassion International .

[ 331 ] [ 332 ] Legacy Historical reputation Bush visits NAS JRB during Hurricane Katrina relief efforts, 2005 This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Polls of historians and political scientists have ranked Bush in the top half of presidents. A 2018 poll of the American Political Science Association 's Presidents and Executive Politics section ranked Bush as the 17th best president out of 44.

[ 333 ] A 2017 C-SPAN poll of historians also ranked Bush as the 20th best president out of 43.

[ 334 ] Richard Rose described Bush as a "guardian" president, and many other historians and political scientists have similarly described Bush as a passive, hands-off president who was "largely content with things as they were".

[ 335 ] Professor Steven Knott writes that "[g]enerally the Bush presidency is viewed as successful in foreign affairs but a disappointment in domestic affairs." [ 336 ] Biographer Jon Meacham writes that, after he left office, many Americans viewed Bush as "a gracious and underappreciated man who had many virtues but who had failed to project enough of a distinctive identity and vision to overcome the economic challenges of 1991–92 and to win a second term." [ 337 ] Bush himself noted that his legacy was "lost between the glory of Reagan ... and the trials and tribulations of my sons." [ 338 ] In the 2010s, Bush was fondly remembered for his willingness to compromise, which contrasted with the intensely partisan era that followed his presidency.

[ 339 ] In 2018, Vox highlighted Bush for his "pragmatism" as a moderate Republican president by working across the aisle.

[ 340 ] They specifically noted Bush's accomplishments within the domestic policy by making bipartisan deals, including raising the tax budget among the wealthy with the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990. Bush also helped pass the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 which The New York Times described as "the most sweeping anti-discrimination law since the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

[ 341 ] In response to the Exxon Valdez oil spill, Bush built another bipartisan coalition to strengthen the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990.

[ 342 ] [ 343 ] Bush also championed and signed into a law the Immigration Act of 1990, a sweeping bipartisan immigration reform act that made it easier for immigrants to legally enter the county, while also granting immigrants fleeing violence the temporary protected status visa, as well as lifted the pre-naturalization English testing process, and finally "eliminated the exclusion of homosexuals under what Congress now deemed the medically unsound classification of 'sexual deviant' that was included in the 1965 act ." [ 344 ] [ 345 ] Bush stated, "Immigration is not just a link to our past but it's also a bridge to America's future".

[ 346 ] According to USA Today , the legacy of Bush's presidency was defined by his victory over Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait and by his presiding over the dissolution of the Soviet Union and German reunification .

[ 347 ] Michael Beschloss and Strobe Talbott praise Bush's handling of the Soviet Union, especially how he prodded Gorbachev in terms of releasing control over the satellite states and permitting German unification—and especially a united Germany in NATO.

[ 348 ] Andrew Bacevich judges the Bush administration as "morally obtuse" in the light of its "business-as-usual" attitude towards China after the massacre in Tiananmen Square and its uncritical support of Gorbachev as the Soviet Union disintegrated.

[ 349 ] David Rothkopf argues: In the recent history of U.S. foreign policy, there has been no president, nor any president's team, who, when confronted with profound international change and challenges, responded with such a thoughtful and well-managed foreign policy...[the Bush administration was] a bridge over one of the great fault lines of history [that] ushered in a "new world order" it described with great skill and professionalism.

[ 350 ] However, TIME has criticized Bush's domestic policies involving "drugs, homelessness, racial hostility, education gaps, [and] issues with the environment", and it argues that these issues in the United States became worse in the 21st century primarily due to Bush setting a poor example and his handling of these concepts during his presidency.

[ 351 ] Memorials, awards, and honors Main article: List of awards and honors received by George H. W. Bush The George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum on the west campus of Texas A&M University in College Station, Texas , 2011 In 1990, Time magazine named him the Man of the Year .

[ 352 ] In 1997, the Houston Intercontinental Airport was renamed as the George Bush Intercontinental Airport .

[ 353 ] In 1999, the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia , was named the George Bush Center for Intelligence in his honor.

[ 354 ] In 2011, Bush, an avid golfer, was inducted in the World Golf Hall of Fame .

[ 355 ] The USS George H.W. Bush (CVN-77), the tenth and last Nimitz -class supercarrier of the United States Navy, was named for Bush.

[ 356 ] [ 357 ] Bush is commemorated on a postage stamp that was issued by the United States Postal Service in 2019.

[ 358 ] In December 2020, the United States Mint honored Bush with a Presidential Dollar coin.

The George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum , the tenth U.S.

presidential library , was completed in 1997.

[ 359 ] It contains the presidential and vice presidential papers of Bush and the vice presidential papers of Dan Quayle.

[ 360 ] The library is located on a 90-acre (36 ha) site on the west campus of Texas A&M University in College Station, Texas.

[ 361 ] Texas A&M University also hosts the Bush School of Government and Public Service , a graduate public policy school .

[ 361 ] In 2012, Phillips Academy also awarded Bush its Alumni Award of Distinction.

[ 362 ] See also Electoral history of George H. W. Bush List of members of the American Legion List of presidents of the United States List of presidents of the United States by previous experience Notes ^ Before the outcome of the 2000 United States presidential election , he was usually referred to simply as " George Bush " but became more commonly known as " George H. W. Bush ", " Bush Senior ," " Bush 41 ," and even " Bush the Elder " to distinguish him from his eldest son, George W. Bush , who served as the 43rd U.S. president from 2001 to 2009.

^ Bush later purchased the estate, which is now known as the Bush compound .

[ 10 ] ^ For decades, Bush was considered the youngest aviator in the U.S. Navy during his period of service, [ 17 ] but such claims are now regarded as speculation.

[ 18 ] His official Navy biography called him "the youngest" in 2001, [ 19 ] but by 2018 the Navy biography described him as "one of the youngest".

[ 20 ] ^ Bush's fellow crew members for the mission were William G. White and John Delaney. According to the accounts of an American pilot and a Japanese individual, another parachute from Bush's aircraft opened, but the bodies of White and Delaney were never recovered.

[ 24 ] ^ At the time of his wife's death on April 17, 2018, George H. W. had been married to Barbara for 73 years, the longest presidential marriage in American history at that point.

[ 35 ] The length of their marriage was surpassed in 2019 by the marriage of Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter .

[ 36 ] ^ Biographer Jon Meacham writes that it was widely assumed at the time that Donald Rumsfeld had engineered Bush's appointment as CIA Director since the post was regarded as a "political graveyard". Meacham writes that it is more likely that the key factor in Bush's appointment was that Ford believed Bush would work better with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger than would Elliot Richardson , his original pick for the CIA post.

[ 88 ] ^ The 1988 presidential election remains the only presidential election since 1948 in which either party won a third consecutive term.

[ 154 ] ^ The longest-lived U.S. vice president is John Nance Garner , who died on November 7, 1967, 15 days short of his 99th birthday.

[ 320 ] References ^ "George Herbert Walker Bush" . Naval History and Heritage Command. August 29, 2019.

Archived from the original on May 1, 2017 . Retrieved January 12, 2020 .

^ "George H.W. Bush, American Diplomat" .

Association for Diplomatic Studies & Training .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

"In Memoriam: George Herbert Walker Bush (1924–2018): Veteran, Statesman, Diplomat" .

Department of State, The National Museum of American Diplomacy . December 20, 2018.

"George H.W. Bush: Diplomats Remember" .

American Foreign Service Association .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

"President George H.W. Bush: Foreign Policy" .

Study.com .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

Pamela Falk (December 3, 2018).

"George H.W. Bush stood out as tough negotiator on the world stage" . CBS News.

"George H.W. Bush Professorship of International Relations" .

Johns Hopkins University, Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies . July 14, 2016.

Archived from the original on November 10, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

^ Kelly, Jon (December 2, 2018).

"George HW Bush: What makes a one-term president?" .

BBC News . Archived from the original on August 17, 2021 . Retrieved March 22, 2022 .

^ "Presidential Avenue: George Bush" . Presidential Avenue. Archived from the original on October 8, 2007 . Retrieved March 29, 2008 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 19–20.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 8–9.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 16–17.

^ Eun Kyung Kim (August 14, 2015).

"Jenna Bush Hager welcomes second daughter — named after George H.W. Bush" .

Today .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2017 . Retrieved November 28, 2016 .

The new bundle of joy is named after Jenna's grandfather and former President George H.W. Bush, whose nickname growing up was "Poppy." ^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 20–21.

^ Bumiller, Elisabeth (July 8, 2002).

"White House Letter; At Parents' Home, Bush Resumes Role of Son" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2008 . Retrieved April 2, 2008 .

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 25.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 27.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 27–36.

^ "Former President George Bush honored at his 60th reunion at Phillips Academy, Andover" . Phillips Academy. June 8, 2002. Archived from the original on April 1, 2008 . Retrieved March 29, 2008 .

^ a b c Knott, Stephen (October 4, 2016).

"George H. W. Bush: Life Before the Presidency" . Charlottesville, Virginia: Miller Center, the University of Virginia.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved April 24, 2018 .

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 54.

^ Boyd, Gerald M. (November 9, 1988).

"A Victor Free to Set His Own Course" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 21, 2018 . Retrieved December 4, 2018 .

^ Siegel, Rachel (December 1, 2018).

"For George H.W. Bush, Pearl Harbor changed everything, and World War II made him a hero" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Lieutenant Junior Grade George Bush, USNR" . Naval Historical Center. April 6, 2001. Archived from the original on April 10, 2010.

^ a b c "George Herbert Walker Bush" . Navy History and Heritage Command. December 1, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 1, 2018 . Retrieved December 2, 2018 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 56–57.

^ Adams, Kathy (January 10, 2009).

"San Jacinto veterans reunite, recall serving with Bush" .

The Virginian-Pilot . Landmark Communications.

Archived from the original on December 9, 2019 . Retrieved December 9, 2019 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 57–59.

^ a b Meacham 2015 , pp. 60–63.

^ Bradley, James (2003).

Flyboys: A True Story of Courage . Little, Brown and Company.

ISBN 978-0-316-10584-2 .

^ "The Faith of George HW Bush" .

The Christian Post . June 26, 2017.

Archived from the original on April 11, 2019 . Retrieved April 11, 2019 .

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 66.

^ Washuk, Bonnie (December 1, 2018).

"George H.W. Bush called Lewiston-Auburn home during WWII" .

Sun Journal .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2023 . Retrieved May 31, 2023 .

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 69.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 70.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 41.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 56.

^ Markovich, Jeremy (January 6, 2017).

"George H.W. Bush and Barbara Pierce are wed: Jan. 6, 1945" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved November 17, 2017 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 406–407.

^ Siegel, Rachel (April 22, 2018).

" 'You were the reason': Barbara and George Bush's love story remembered at her funeral" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ "Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter just became the longest-married presidential couple" .

CNN Politics . October 17, 2019.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2019 . Retrieved October 18, 2019 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 97–100.

^ Withers, Rachel (December 2, 2018).

"George H.W. Bush was a champion for people with disabilities" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on April 13, 2022 . Retrieved April 13, 2022 .

^ Kakutani, Michiko (November 11, 2014).

"Love Flows, President to President" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved November 14, 2014 .

^ "School House to White House: The Education of the Presidents" . Washington, D.C.: National Archives. Spring 2007.

Archived from the original on August 21, 2011 . Retrieved March 29, 2008 .

^ Berkower, Simone.

"Cheerleading of the '20s: Epitome of masculinity" .

Yale Daily News .

Archived from the original on October 21, 2016 . Retrieved July 30, 2016 .

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 72.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 78.

^ Chawkins, Steve (October 11, 2005).

"Two Future Presidents Slept Here — latimes" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2017 . Retrieved May 17, 2017 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 77, 83.

^ "George Bush Collection" . George Bush Presidential Library and Museum.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved July 30, 2016 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 94–96.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 92–93.

^ "National Archives NextGen Catalog" . National Archives.

Archived from the original on May 14, 2023 . Retrieved May 14, 2023 .

^ Perin, Monica (April 25, 1999).

"Adios, Zapata!" .

Houston Business Journal .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2012 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ Bush, George W.

41: A Portrait of My Father.

Crown Publishers, 2014, p. 64.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 144–146.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 130–131.

^ " '63 F.B.I. Memo Ties Bush to Intelligence Agency" .

The New York Times . Associated Press. July 11, 1988.

Archived from the original on December 7, 2019 . Retrieved November 18, 2019 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 112–114.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 116–117.

^ a b Naftali 2007 , p. 13.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 120–122.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 133.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 130–132.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 133–134.

^ a b "Bush, George Herbert Walker" . Scholastic Library Publishing, Inc. Archived from the original on June 15, 2008 . Retrieved March 29, 2008 .

^ "House – August 16, 1967" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

113 (17).

U.S. Government Printing Office : 22778.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 21, 2022 . Retrieved February 27, 2022 .

^ "House – April 10, 1968" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

114 (8).

U.S. Government Printing Office : 9621.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 28, 2022 . Retrieved February 27, 2022 .

^ "George H.W. Bush (Part 1)" .

American Experience .

Season 20. Episode 13 . May 5, 2008.

PBS .

WGBH . Retrieved November 14, 2022 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 136–137.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 141–142.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 146–147.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 150.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 153–154.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 152, 157–158.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 773–775.

^ Austin, Anthony (October 31, 1971).

"Crushing Defeat for the U.S., or A Blessing In Disguise?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 17, 2019 . Retrieved December 2, 2018 .

^ Saunders 2014 , p. 39.

^ Saunders 2014 , pp. 38–39.

^ Perlstein, Rick (2008).

Nixonland : the rise of a president and the fracturing of America . Internet Archive. New York : Scribner. p. 707.

ISBN 978-0-7432-4302-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 162–163.

^ "President Richard Nixon and the Presidents" .

nixontapes.org . Archived from the original on April 9, 2022 . Retrieved March 30, 2020 .

CDHW 156-016 11/29/1972 Unknown time between 10:10 am and 1:47 pm P, GHWB [1] Archived December 11, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Transcript - Episode 4: Turn It Off" . NBC News. November 13, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 19, 2019 . Retrieved January 30, 2020 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 163–164.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 166–167.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 170–173.

^ "George HW on Nixon resignation" .

U.S. News & World Report . July 16, 2006. Archived from the original on June 24, 2008 . Retrieved March 29, 2008 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 176–177.

^ Bush, George H. W. (2011). Engel, Jeffrey A. (ed.).

The China Diary of George H.W. Bush: The Making of a Global President . Princeton University Press. p. 36.

ISBN 978-1-4008-2961-3 .

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 181.

^ "The George Bush Center for Intelligence" . Central Intelligence Agency. April 5, 2007. Archived from the original on June 12, 2007 . Retrieved September 5, 2011 .

^ a b Meacham 2015 , pp. 189–193.

^ "FIFA's Dirty Wars" .

The New Republic . December 15, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ "Quand Pinochet tuait hors du Chili" .

L'Express . October 30, 1999.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ Dowd, Maureen (November 28, 1988).

"Will Bush and Dole End Their Grand Old Rivalry?" .

The New York Times . p. A1.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ "CIA Briefings of Presidential Candidates; Chapter 5: In-Depth Discussions With Carter" . Central Intelligence Agency: Center for the Study of Intelligence. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007 . Retrieved October 11, 2007 .

^ "George H. W. Bush" . Presidential Timeline of the Twentieth Century. Archived from the original on May 3, 2008 . Retrieved July 30, 2016 .

^ "President George H. W. Bush: Kyiv National Taras Shevchenko University" . Ukrainian Embassy. May 21, 2004. Archived from the original on May 19, 2008 . Retrieved March 29, 2008 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 209–210.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 211, 214–215.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 215–217.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 221–222.

^ Noble, Jason (November 30, 2018).

"George H.W. Bush in Iowa: The family campaign" .

The Des Moines Register .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2023 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ Quinn, Ken (January 18, 2004).

"Caucus-goers gave Bush 'Big Mo' " .

Des Moines Register . p. A15.

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 – via Newspapers.com .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Hatfield, Mark (with the Senate Historical Office) (1997).

"Vice Presidents of the United States: George H. W. Bush (1981–1989)" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 23, 2003 . Retrieved November 4, 2015 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 228–229.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 230–233.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 233–235.

^ Neikirk, William R. (March 13, 1988).

"Bush conjures up voodoo economics" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 211–212.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 236–238.

^ Cannon, Lou; Broder, David S. (July 17, 1980).

"Reagan Nominated, Picks Bush" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2018 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 242–255.

^ Rossinow 2015 , pp. 23–27.

^ Rossinow 2015 , pp. 27–28.

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 149–151.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 267.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 264–265.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 275–277.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 280–281.

^ Bumiller, Elisabeth (June 9, 2004).

"The 40th President: Between 2 First Families, A Complicated Rapport" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2019 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ Leuchtenburg 2015 , pp. 601–604.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 267–268.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 285–287.

^ Leuchtenburg 2015 , pp. 620–621.

^ Rossinow 2015 , pp. 166–169, 173.

^ Rossinow 2015 , p. 173.

^ "1984 Presidential Election Results" . David Leip.

Archived from the original on September 30, 2007 . Retrieved May 25, 2007 .

^ Herring 2008 , p. 894.

^ Patterson 2005 , p. 215.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 897–898.

^ Greene 2015 , p. 90; Meacham 2015 , pp. 315–316.

^ Boyd, Gerald M. (July 14, 1985).

"Reagan Transfers Power to Bush For 8-Hour Period of 'Incapacity' " .

The New York Times . p. A1.

Archived from the original on April 5, 2019 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ "The Iran-Contra Affair 20 Years On" . George Washington University. November 20, 2006.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2015 . Retrieved April 3, 2008 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 299–305.

^ Rossinow 2015 , pp. 202–204.

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 210–211.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 305.

^ Wilson, Scott (November 8, 2013).

"When should a president say he's sorry?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2014 . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ Butterfield, Fox (April 15, 1988).

"Iran Falls Short in Drive at U.N. To Condemn U.S. in Airbus Case" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2019 . Retrieved July 28, 2021 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 295–296.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 297–298.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 30–31.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 318, 326.

^ Apple, R. W. Jr. (February 10, 1988).

"Bush and Simon Seen as Hobbled by Iowa's Voting" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2008 . Retrieved April 4, 2008 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 322–325.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 35–37.

^ a b "1988: George H. W. Bush Gives the 'Speech of his Life' " . NPR. 2000.

Archived from the original on October 22, 2019 . Retrieved April 4, 2008 .

^ Greene 2015 , p. 43.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 40–41.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 37–39.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 39, 47.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 44–46.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 47–49.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 347–348.

^ "1988 Presidential General Election Results" .

Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2020 . Retrieved May 21, 2018 .

^ Greene 2015 , p. 49.

^ Silver, Nate (July 18, 2013).

"The White House Is Not a Metronome" .

FiveThirtyEight .

Archived from the original on July 15, 2019 . Retrieved November 18, 2019 .

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 224–225.

^ "George H. W. Bush: Inaugural Address" .

Bushlibrary.tamu.edu . January 20, 1989. Archived from the original on April 20, 2004.

^ a b Greene 2015 , pp. 53–55.

^ Naftali 2007 , pp. 69–70.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 56–57.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 55–56.

^ Naftali 2007 , pp. 66–67.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 110–112.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 368–369.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 904–906.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 385–387.

^ Naftali 2007 , pp. 91–93.

^ Heilbrunn, Jacob (March 31, 1996).

"Together Again" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 28, 2016 . Retrieved August 25, 2016 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 400–402.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 126, 134–137.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 120–121.

^ Herring 2008 , p. 907.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 907, 913–914.

^ Greene 2015 , p. 204.

^ Naftali 2007 , pp. 137–138.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 205–206.

^ Wines, Michael (February 2, 1992).

"Bush and Yeltsn Declare Formal End to Cold War; Agree to Exchange Visits" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 22, 2019 . Retrieved August 24, 2016 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 238–239.

^ Dinges, John (1990).

Our Man in Panama . New York City: Random House. pp. 50, 88.

ISBN 978-0-8129-1950-9 – via Internet Archive.

^ a b Patterson 2005 , pp. 226–227.

^ Franklin, Jane (2001).

"Panama: Background and Buildup to Invasion of 1989" . Rutgers University. Archived from the original on July 4, 2008 . Retrieved April 11, 2008 .

^ Brewer, Stewart (2006).

Borders and Bridges: A History of U.S.-Latin American Relations . Greenwood. p. 146.

ISBN 9780275982041 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 139–141.

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 230–232.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 908–909.

^ "Robert M. Gates Oral History" . Rector and Visitors of the University of Virginia. Miller Center . Retrieved March 29, 2024 .

^ Patterson 2005 , p. 233.

^ Patterson 2005 , p. 232.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 146–147, 159.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 149–151.

^ a b Patterson 2005 , pp. 232–233.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 160–161.

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 233–235.

^ Greene 2015 , p. 165.

^ Waterman 1996 , p. 337.

^ Patterson 2005 , p. 236.

^ Wilentz 2008 , pp. 313–314.

^ "Frequently Asked Questions: NAFTA" . Federal Express.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved April 11, 2008 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 222–223.

^ "NAFTA" . Duke University. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008 . Retrieved July 30, 2016 .

^ Zarroli, Jim (December 8, 2013).

"NAFTA Turns 20, To Mixed Reviews" . NPR.

Archived from the original on August 6, 2019 . Retrieved August 24, 2016 .

^ Lohr, Steve (December 25, 1991).

"Accepting the Harsh Truth Of a Blue-Collar Recession" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2022 .

^ Blue-collar Towns Have Highest Jobless Numbers Archived December 26, 2024, at the Wayback Machine , Hartford Courant [Connecticut], W. Joseph Campbell, September 1, 1991.

^ Redburn, Tom (October 28, 1989).

"Budget Deficit for 1989 Is Put at $152.1 Billion : Spending: Congress and the White House remain locked in a stalemate over a capital gains tax cut" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on May 5, 2020 . Retrieved June 7, 2018 .

^ Uchitelle, Louis (October 27, 1990).

"The Struggle in Congress; U.S. Deficit for 1990 Surged to Near-Record $220.4 Billion, but How Bad Is That?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved June 7, 2018 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 72–73.

^ Waterman 1996 , pp. 340–341.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 360–361.

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 228–229.

^ "George H. W. Bush: Domestic Affairs" . Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. October 4, 2016.

Archived from the original on January 31, 2017 . Retrieved January 18, 2017 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 95–97.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 409–410.

^ Balz, Dan; Yang, John E. (June 27, 1990).

"Bush Abandons Campaign Pledge, Calls for New Taxes" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 7, 2018 .

^ Heclo, Hugh (2014).

"Chapter 2: George Bush and American Conservatism" . In Nelson, Michael; Perry, Barbara A. (eds.).

41: Inside the Presidency of George H. W. Bush . Cornell University Press. pp.

68–69 .

ISBN 978-0-8014-7927-4 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 100–104.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 446–447.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 104–106.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 395.

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 90–92.

^ Griffin, Rodman (December 27, 1991).

"The Disabilities Act" . CQPress . Retrieved August 25, 2016 .

^ a b Greene 2015 , pp. 79–80.

^ Devroy, Ann . "Bush Vetoes Civil Rights Bill; Measure Said to Encourage Job Quotas; Women, Minorities Sharply Critical".

The Washington Post October 23, 1990, Print.

^ Holmes, Steven A. (October 23, 1990).

"President Vetoes Bill on Job Rights; Showdown is Set" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved March 21, 2013 .

^ Stack, Liam (December 3, 2018).

" 'He Did Not Lead on AIDS': With Bush, Activists See a Mixed Legacy" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved April 29, 2020 .

^ Domonoske, Camila (December 4, 2018).

" 'Kinder Gentler Indifference': Activists Challenge George H.W. Bush's Record On AIDS" . NPR.

Archived from the original on March 27, 2020 . Retrieved April 29, 2020 .

^ "Update: Mortality Attributable to HIV Infection Among Persons Aged 25–44 Years – United States, 1991 and 1992" .

The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report . Atlanta, Georgia: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. November 19, 1993. pp.

869– 872. 42(45).

Archived from the original on June 17, 2020 . Retrieved April 29, 2020 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 92–94.

^ "Bush Signs Major Revision of Anti-Pollution Law" .

The New York Times . November 16, 1990.

Archived from the original on August 28, 2016 . Retrieved August 25, 2016 .

^ Shabecoff, Philip (April 4, 1990).

"Senators Approve Clean Air Measure By a Vote of 89-11" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2018 . Retrieved August 25, 2016 .

^ Brown, Elizabeth (March 19, 1991).

"Conservation League Gives Bush 'D' on Environment" .

The Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on May 19, 2018 . Retrieved August 25, 2016 .

^ The Points of Light Movement: The President's Report to the Nation . Executive Office of the President, 1993. 1993.

^ Haven, Stephanie (July 15, 2013).

"Obama, Bush present 5,000th Daily Point of Light Award for volunteers" . CBS News.

Archived from the original on December 4, 2019 . Retrieved November 18, 2019 .

^ Perry, Suzanne (October 15, 2009).

"After Two Tough Years, New Points of Light Charity Emerges" .

Chronicle of Philanthropy .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2015 . Retrieved May 23, 2013 .

^ Edward, Deborah (2008).

"Getting to Yes: The Points of Light and Hands On Network Merger" (PDF) .

RGK Center for Philanthropy and Community Service, the University of Texas at Austin .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 21, 2013 . Retrieved May 23, 2013 .

^ a b Crawford Greenburg, Jan (May 1, 2009).

"Supreme Court Justice Souter to Retire" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on July 21, 2020 . Retrieved August 24, 2016 .

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 243–244.

^ Totenberg, Nina (October 11, 2011).

"Clarence Thomas' Influence On The Supreme Court" . NPR.

Archived from the original on March 23, 2013 . Retrieved August 24, 2016 .

^ Campbell, Colin; Rockman, Bert (1991).

The Bush Presidency: First Appraisals . Chatham, New Jersey: Chatham House Publishers, Inc. p.

83 .

ISBN 0-934540-90-X .

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 239–240.

^ Schultz, Jeffrey D.; Haynie, Kerry L.; Aoki, Andrew L.; McCulloch, Anne M. (2000).

Encyclopedia of Minorities in American Politics: African Americans and Asian Americans . Oryx Press.

ISBN 978-1-57356-148-8 .

^ Fix, Michael (1991).

The Paper Curtain: Employer Sanctions' Implementation, Impact, and Reform . The Urban Institute.

ISBN 978-0-87766-550-2 .

^ Pear, Robert (October 29, 1990).

"Major Immigration Bill Is Sent to Bush" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 28, 2016 . Retrieved August 25, 2016 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 97–100.

^ "The Independent George H. W. Bush" .

The Independent . UK. January 22, 2009.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Howard, Michael (November 1, 1998).

"The Prudence Thing: George Bush's Class Act" .

Foreign Affairs .

77 (November/December 1998): 130– 134.

doi : 10.2307/20049135 .

ISSN 0015-7120 .

JSTOR 20049135 .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2013 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Ajemian, Robert (January 26, 1987).

"Where Is the Real George Bush?" .

Time . Archived from the original on January 8, 2010 . Retrieved May 3, 2010 .

^ "Quotations : Oxford Dictionaries Online" . Askoxford.com. Archived from the original on February 4, 2003 . Retrieved July 30, 2016 .

^ Thomas, Helen; Crawford, Craig (2009).

Listen Up, Mr. President: Everything You Always Wanted Your President to Know and Do . Scribner.

ISBN 978-1-4391-4815-0 .

^ "Joseph A. Palermo: Meg Whitman's "Vision Thing" " .

HuffPost . September 26, 2009.

Archived from the original on September 29, 2009 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ "It's time to do the 'vision' thing" .

Barre Montpelier Times Argus . September 29, 2009. Archived from the original on February 4, 2013 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Mazurak, Zbigniew.

"Sarah Palin as a GOP Nominee?" . The Reality Check.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Rothkopf, David (October 1, 2009).

"Obama does not want to become known as 'The Great Ditherer' " .

Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on March 26, 2014 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Freidel, Frank; Sidey, Hugh (2006).

"George H. W. Bush" .

The Presidents of the United States of America . White House Historical Association . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

^ "Modest Bush Approval Rating Boost at War's End: Summary of Findings – Pew Research Center for the People & the Press" . People-press.org. April 18, 2003.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2011 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ "George H. W. Bush" .

American Experience . PBS. October 3, 1990. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ a b Goldberg, Jonah (August 22, 2008).

"The Corner: The Supermarket Scanner Story Cont'd" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2017 . Retrieved June 26, 2017 .

^ Rosenthal, Andrew (February 5, 1992).

"Bush Encounters the Supermarket, Amazed" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved November 5, 2015 .

^ "Stop panicking in public, Mr. President" .

Democrat and Chronicle . January 21, 1992.

Archived from the original on July 29, 2023 . Retrieved July 29, 2023 – via Newspapers.com .

^ Moore, David W. (September 24, 2001).

"Bush Job Approval Highest in Gallup History" .

Gallup Inc.

Archived from the original on July 29, 2023 . Retrieved July 29, 2023 .

^ "Presidential Job Approval Center" .

Gallup Inc.

Retrieved July 29, 2023 .

^ "Maybe I'm Amazed" .

Snopes.com . April 1, 2001. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012 . Retrieved April 11, 2008 .

^ Troy, Gil (1995).

"Stumping in the Bookstores: A Literary History of the 1992 Presidential Campaign" .

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

25 (4): 697– 710.

ISSN 0360-4918 .

JSTOR 27551506 .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2021 . Retrieved March 13, 2021 .

^ Kornacki, Steve (January 2, 2015).

"What if Mario Cuomo had run for president?" . MSNBC.

Archived from the original on August 25, 2016 . Retrieved August 25, 2016 .

^ Waterman 1996 , pp. 337–338.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 444–445.

^ Patterson 2005 , p. 246.

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 251–252.

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 247–248.

^ "The Perot Vote" . President and Fellows of Harvard College.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2008 . Retrieved April 23, 2008 .

^ Patterson 2005 , p. 251.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 504–506.

^ "1992 Presidential General Election Results" .

Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections .

Archived from the original on May 22, 2018 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

^ Holmes, Steven A. (November 5, 1992).

"The 1992 Elections: Disappointment – News Analysis – An Eccentric but No Joke; Perot's Strong Showing Raises Questions On What Might Have Been, and Might Be –" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2008 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Patterson 2005 , pp. 252–253.

^ R. W. Apple Jr. (November 4, 1992).

"THE 1992 ELECTIONS: NEWS ANALYSIS; The Economy's Casualty –" .

The New York Times . Pennsylvania; Ohio; New England States (Us); Michigan; West Coast; New Jersey; Middle East.

Archived from the original on September 18, 2008 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Lazarus, David (June 9, 2004).

"Downside of the Reagan Legacy" .

The San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2008 . Retrieved April 11, 2008 .

^ WSJ Research (2015).

"How the Presidents Stack Up: A Look at U.S. Presidents' Job Approval Ratings (George H.W. Bush)" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2008 . Retrieved November 4, 2015 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 233–234.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 521.

^ Langer, Gary (January 17, 2001).

"Poll: Clinton Legacy Mixed" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2008 . Retrieved April 11, 2008 .

^ Mcdonald, Dian (December 24, 1992).

"Bush pardons Weinberger, Five Other Tied to Iran-Contra" . Federation of American Scientists. Archived from the original on April 21, 2008 . Retrieved April 11, 2008 .

^ Carl Levin, and Henry Hyde, "The Iran-Contra Pardons-Was It Wrong for Ex-President Bush to Pardon Six Defendants".

American Bar Association Journal 79 (1993): 44–45. Levin says yes, Hyde says no.

^ Lipset, Seymour Martin (1993).

"The Significance of the 1992 Election" .

PS: Political Science and Politics .

26 (1): 7– 16.

doi : 10.2307/419496 .

ISSN 1049-0965 .

JSTOR 419496 .

S2CID 227288247 .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2021 . Retrieved March 13, 2021 .

^ Feldman, Claudia (December 13, 1992).

"Moving back to the 'hood .../CITIZEN BUSH" .

Houston Chronicle . p. Lifestyle p. 1. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012.

^ " Bushes upbeat for step-down Archived October 10, 2018, at the Wayback Machine ".

Fort Worth Star-Telegram . January 10, 1993. 1 News. Retrieved October 15, 2012. "Bush's Houston office will be in the Park Laureate Building on Memorial Drive" ^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 540–541.

^ Lozada, Carlos (December 1, 2018).

"The memoir I wish George H.W. Bush had written" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2019 . Retrieved November 18, 2019 .

^ "frontline: the long road to war: assassination" . PBS.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2019 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 541–543.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 546–549.

^ Verhovek, Sam Howe (November 9, 1994).

"The 1994 Elections: The Nation The Bushes; Texas Elects George W. While Florida Rejects Jeb" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved December 4, 2017 .

^ Rosenbaum, David E. (November 4, 1998).

"George W. Bush Is Re-elected in Texas; His Brother Jeb Is Victorious in Florida" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 552–555.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 560.

^ Bush, George W.

(2014).

41: A Portrait of My Father . Crown Publishers. p.

265 .

ISBN 978-0-553-44778-1 .

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 554, 563–564.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 567–568.

^ Meacham 2015 , pp. 582–583.

^ Healy, Patrick (May 19, 2007).

"A Candidacy That May Test a Friendship's Ties" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved May 22, 2011 .

^ "People of the Year: Bill Clinton and George H. W. Bush" .

ABC News . December 27, 2005.

Archived from the original on March 2, 2019 . Retrieved September 5, 2010 .

^ Graham, David A. (November 5, 2015).

"George H.W. Bush's Feuds With Donald Rumsfeld and Dick Cheney Go Back 40 Years" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2021 . Retrieved August 26, 2021 .

^ "George H. W. Bush Endorses McCain for President" .

The Washington Post . February 18, 2008.

Archived from the original on April 3, 2019 . Retrieved March 28, 2008 .

^ "George H.W. Bush endorses Romney" .

United Press International . March 29, 2012.

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved August 23, 2017 .

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 598.

^ "Bush father, son want Jeb Bush to run for White House" .

The Arizona Republic . November 11, 2014.

Archived from the original on April 3, 2019 . Retrieved February 18, 2020 .

^ Collins, Eliza.

"Bush 41, 43 won't be endorsing Trump" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ Selk, Avi (November 4, 2017).

"White House attacks legacies of both Bush presidents after reports they refused to vote for Trump" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2019 . Retrieved November 4, 2017 .

^ Garcia, Feliks (January 18, 2017).

"George HW Bush sends personal note to Donald Trump on why he can't attend inauguration" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved January 18, 2017 .

^ "Both Presidents Bush Condemn Hatred a Day After Trump's Press Conference" .

Time .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2021 . Retrieved May 3, 2020 .

^ "Presidents George Bush and G.W. Bush issue joint statement condemning racism and anti-Semitism" .

Vox . August 16, 2017.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2020 . Retrieved May 3, 2020 .

^ Nemy, Enid (April 17, 2018).

"Barbara Bush, Wife of 41st President and Mother of 43rd, Dies at 92" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022.

^ Kamath, Tulsi (April 17, 2018).

"Bush family releases details on Barbara Bush's funeral, public visitation" .

Houston Chronicle .

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved April 18, 2018 .

^ Linge, Mary Kay (April 21, 2018).

"Presidents pay their respects as Barbara Bush is laid to rest" .

New York Post .

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved April 21, 2018 .

^ Winsor, Morgan (April 21, 2018).

"Barbara Bush remembered at funeral as 'the first lady of the greatest generation' " .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2018 . Retrieved April 21, 2018 .

^ "The story behind that viral photo of the past 4 presidents all in the same place" .

CNN . April 23, 2018.

Archived from the original on July 15, 2020 . Retrieved May 8, 2020 .

^ "George H.W. Bush Was Last Seen in Public 1 Month Before Death — and It Was to Vote with His Dog" .

People .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2020 . Retrieved May 8, 2020 .

^ "Former President George H.W. Bush dead at 94" .

ABC News . December 1, 2018.

Archived from the original on April 14, 2019 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ Nagourney, Adam (November 30, 2018).

"George Bush, 41st President, Dies at 94" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ Bowden, John (November 25, 2017).

"Bush 41 becomes longest-living president in US history" .

The Hill . Washington, D.C . Retrieved November 25, 2017 .

^ Barrow, Bill (March 22, 2019).

"Jimmy Carter's new milestone: Longest-lived U.S. president" .

The Detroit News .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2019 . Retrieved March 22, 2019 .

^ Lewis, Janna (January 22, 2009).

"Texans who were presidents, vice-presidents" .

Fort Hood Sentinel . Fort Hood, Texas.

Archived from the original on April 5, 2019 . Retrieved April 22, 2018 .

^ Pergram, Chad; Shaw, Adam (December 1, 2018).

"George H.W. Bush to lie in state in US Capitol; Trump to attend funeral" .

John Roberts contributed to this report. Fox News.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved January 21, 2019 .

^ "Individuals Who Have Lain in State or in Honor" . Washington, D.C.: Office of the Historian, U.S. House of Representatives.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2018 . Retrieved January 21, 2019 .

^ a b "Thousands honor former President George H.W. Bush at National Cathedral funeral" . CBS News. December 6, 2018.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2023 . Retrieved January 19, 2019 .

^ Fernandez, Manny (December 12, 2018).

"For George Bush, One Last Funeral, and then a 70-Mile Train Ride" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2022.

^ Altman, Lawrence (May 10, 1991).

"In Strange Twist, Bush Is Suffering From Same Gland Disease as Wife" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2019 . Retrieved June 5, 2018 .

^ Burke, Monte (March 25, 2010).

"George H. W. Bush's Sporting Life" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on July 23, 2021 . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ Solomon, John (March 21, 2011).

"George H.W. Bush - Revisited" .

The Center for Public Integrity .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2021 . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ Paulsen, David (December 4, 2018).

"Bush remembered as lifelong Episcopalian with deep ties to his church" .

Episcopal News Service . Retrieved June 27, 2021 .

^ a b Smith, Gary S. (June 26, 2017).

"The Faith of George HW Bush" .

The Christian Post .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved June 1, 2018 .

^ Johnston, Lori (December 1, 2018).

"George H.W. Bush helped lead GOP toward evangelicalism" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2018 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ "George HW Bush's sponsorship made me successful, says Filipino man" .

BBC News . December 21, 2018.

Archived from the original on November 9, 2024 . Retrieved November 9, 2024 .

^ Tantuco, Vernise (December 20, 2018).

"How George H.W. Bush secretly helped a Filipino boy for 10 years" .

Rappler . Retrieved November 9, 2024 .

^ Rottinghaus, Brandon; Vaughn, Justin S. (February 19, 2018).

"How Does Trump Stack Up Against the Best — and Worst — Presidents?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 10, 2019.

^ "Presidential Historians Survey 2017" .

C-SPAN .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2017 . Retrieved May 14, 2018 .

^ Greene 2015 , pp. 255–256.

^ Knott, Stephen (October 4, 2016).

"George H. W. Bush: Impact and Legacy" .

Miller Center . University of Virginia.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2019 . Retrieved November 18, 2019 .

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 567.

^ Meacham 2015 , p. 595.

^ Shesol, Jeff (November 13, 2015).

"What George H. W. Bush Got Wrong" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on August 25, 2019 . Retrieved August 30, 2016 .

^ "The George H.W. Bush promise that changed the Republican Party" .

Vox . May 4, 2018.

Archived from the original on November 2, 2020 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 – via YouTube.

^ "A Law for Every American" .

The New York Times . July 27, 1990 . Retrieved October 30, 2020 .

^ Medina, Monica (December 2, 2018).

"We can breathe easier - literally - thanks to George H.W. Bush" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2020 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

^ "Lessons in Bipartisanship: The 1990 Clean Air Act amendments" .

Environmental America . November 15, 2017.

Archived from the original on August 15, 2022.

^ Glass, Andrew (November 29, 2018).

"Bush signs immigration reform statute into law, Nov. 29, 1990" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved October 29, 2020 .

^ Morrison, Bruce (December 4, 2018).

"Bush 41's immigration plan actually worked" .

Houston Chronicle .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved October 30, 2020 .

^ "George H.W. Bush on Immigration" .

Immmigration Act Signing Ceremony . C-SPAN. November 30, 1990.

Archived from the original on September 8, 2020 . Retrieved October 30, 2002 .

^ "Remembering Former President George H.W. Bush's life and legacy" .

USA Today . December 1, 2018.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ Michael R. Beschloss and Strobe Talbott, At the Highest Levels: The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War (Boston, 1993), pp. 470-72.

^ Andrew J. Bacevich, American Empire: The Realities and Consequences of U.S. Diplomacy (2002), 64–68, quoted in Sparrow, p. 143.

^ Rothkopf, David (2009).

Running the World: The Inside Story of the National Security Council and the Architects of American Power . PublicAffairs. p. 261.

ISBN 9780786736003 .

^ Jacobs, Sam ; Rothman, Lily; Benedict, Julie Blume; Cassidy, Catherine , eds. (2023). "George H.W. Bush".

TIME Person of the Year: 95 Years of the World's Most Influential People .

Time . p. 63.

^ Church, George J. (January 7, 1991).

"A Tale of Two Bushes" .

Time .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2019 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ Benito, Marcelino (December 2, 2018).

"George H.W. Bush's legacy lives on at Houston airport named after him" . KHOU 11.

^ Courson, Paul (April 26, 1999).

"Former President Bush honored at emotional ceremony renaming CIA headquarters" . CNN.

Archived from the original on August 1, 2020 . Retrieved January 20, 2019 .

^ "Bush, George H.W." Archived from the original on September 29, 2018 . Retrieved June 1, 2018 .

^ "Future USS George H. W. Bush to Transit" . Naval Sea Systems Command Public Affairs. December 18, 2008. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012 . Retrieved December 22, 2008 .

^ Jones, Matthew (January 10, 2009).

"Carrier awaits a call to come to life in ceremony today" .

The Virginian Pilot . Landmark Communications. Archived from the original on February 4, 2009 . Retrieved January 10, 2009 .

^ "Texas ceremony marks issuing of George H.W. Bush stamp" .

Associated Press News . June 12, 2019 . Retrieved September 8, 2019 .

^ "National Archives Accepts Bush Library as Tenth Presidential Library" (Press release).

National Archives and Records Administration . November 6, 1997.

Archived from the original on December 4, 2019 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ "The Birth of the Tenth Presidential Library: The Bush Presidential Materials Project, 1993–1994" . George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on April 10, 2007 . Retrieved March 22, 2007 .

^ a b Heathman, Claire (July 3, 2013).

"How Texas A&M became home to the George Bush Presidential Library and Museum" .

The Bryan-College Station Eagle .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2019 . Retrieved November 30, 2018 .

^ "Finis Origine Pendent All-School Meeting: October 20, 2022" . October 24, 2022.

Archived from the original on July 28, 2023 . Retrieved July 28, 2023 – via YouTube.

Works cited Greene, John Robert (2015).

The Presidency of George Bush (2nd ed.). University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-2079-1 .

Herring, George C. (2008).

From Colony to Superpower; U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-507822-0 .

Leuchtenburg, William E.

(2015).

The American President: From Teddy Roosevelt to Bill Clinton . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195176162 .

Meacham, Jon (2015).

Destiny and Power: The American Odyssey of George Herbert Walker Bush . Random House.

ISBN 978-1-4000-6765-7 .

Naftali, Timothy (2007).

George H. W. Bush . Times Books.

ISBN 978-0-8050-6966-2 .

Patterson, James (2005).

Restless Giant: The United States from Watergate to Bush v. Gore . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195122169 .

Rossinow, Douglas C. (2015).

The Reagan Era: A History of the 1980s . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 9780231538657 .

Saunders, Harold (July 2014). "What Really Happened in Bangladesh: Washington, Islamabad, and the Genocide in East Pakistan".

Foreign Affairs .

93 (3): 36– 42.

Waterman, Richard W. (1996). "Storm Clouds on the Political Horizon: George Bush at the Dawn of the 1992 Presidential Election".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

26 (2): 337– 349.

JSTOR 27551581 .

Wilentz, Sean (2008).

The Age of Reagan . HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-074480-9 .

Further reading Secondary sources The Presidents: George H. W. Bush .

American Experience (Television production).

PBS . 2008. Archived from the original on August 27, 2009 . Retrieved October 8, 2014 .

Andrew, Christopher (1996).

For the President's Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush . Harper Perennial. pp.

503– 536.

ISBN 978-0-06-092178-1 .

Barilleaux, Ryan J.; Stuckey, Mary E. (1992).

Leadership and the Bush Presidency: Prudence or Drift in an Era of Change . New York: Praeger.

ISBN 978-0-275-94418-6 .

Becker, Jean (2021).

The Man I Knew: The Amazing Story of George H. W. Bush's Post-Presidency . Twelve.

ISBN 978-1-53-873530-5 .

Becker, Jean (2024).

Character Matters: And Other Life Lessons from George H. W. Bush . Twelve.

ISBN 978-1-53-875857-1 .

Brands, H. W. (2004). "George Bush and the Gulf War of 1991".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

34 (1): 113– 131.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-5705.2004.00038.x .

JSTOR 27552567 .

Cox, Michael; Hurst, Steven (2002).

" 'His Finest Hour?' George Bush and the Diplomacy of German Unification" .

Diplomacy and Statecraft .

13 (4): 123– 150.

doi : 10.1080/714000344 .

ISSN 0959-2296 .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2024 . Retrieved May 28, 2024 .

Cull, Nicholas J. (January 2010). "Speeding the Strange Death of American Public Diplomacy: The George H. W. Bush Administration and the US Information Agency".

Diplomatic History .

34 (1): 47– 69.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.2009.00832.x .

JSTOR 24916033 .

Ducat, Stephen J. (2004).

The Wimp Factor: Gender Gaps, Holy Wars, and the Politics of Anxious Masculinity . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0-8070-4344-8 .

Duffy, Michael ; Goodgame, Dan (1992).

Marching in Place: The Status Quo Presidency of George Bush . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-73720-7 .

Engel, Jeffrey A. (January 2010). "A Better World...but Don't Get Carried Away: The Foreign Policy of George H. W. Bush Twenty Years On".

Diplomatic History .

34 (1): 25– 46.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.2009.00831.x .

JSTOR 24916032 .

Engel, Jeffrey A. (2017).

When the World Seemed New: George H. W. Bush and the End of the Cold War . Boston; New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 9781328511652 .

OCLC 1016805975 . Retrieved May 27, 2024 .

Fitzwater, Marlin (1995).

Call the Briefing . New York: Times Books.

ISBN 978-0-7388-3458-0 .

Green, Fitzhugh (1989).

George Bush: An Intimate Portrait . New York: Hippocrene.

ISBN 978-0-8705-2783-8 .

Han, Lori Cox (2011).

A Presidency Upstaged: The Public Leadership of George H. W. Bush . College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 9781603442206 .

OCLC 639940951 .

Hyams, Joe (1991).

Flight of the Avenger: George Bush at War . San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovic.

ISBN 978-0-15-131469-0 .

Kelley, Kitty (2004).

The Family: The True Story of the Bush Dynasty . London: Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-50324-2 .

Maynard, Christopher (2008).

Out of the Shadow: George H. W. Bush and the End of the Cold War . College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 9781603440394 .

OCLC 190596196 .

McBride, Tim (June 12, 2009).

"The President Who Treated Me Like a Son" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2020 . Retrieved October 8, 2014 .

Meacham, Jon (2024).

The Call to Serve: The Life of an American President, George Herbert Walker Bush: A Visual Biography . College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 9780593729458 .

OCLC 639940951 .

Podhoretz, John (1993).

Hell of a Ride: Backstage at the White House Follies, 1989–1993 . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-79648-8 .

Smith, Curt (2014).

George H. W. Bush: Character at the Core . Potomac Books.

ISBN 978-1-61-234685-4 .

Smith, Jean Edward (1992).

George Bush's War . New York: Henry Holt & Company.

ISBN 978-0-8050-1388-7 .

Sununu, John H.

(2015).

The Quiet Man: The Indispensable Presidency of George H. W. Bush . Broadside Books.

ISBN 978-0-06-238428-7 .

Troy, Gil (Fall 1995). "Stumping in the Bookstores: A Literary History of the 1992 Presidential Campaign".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

25 (4: Perceptions of the Presidency): 697– 710.

JSTOR 27551506 .

Updegrove, Mark K.

(2017).

The Last Republicans: Inside the Extraordinary Relationship between George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush . Harper.

ISBN 978-0-06-265412-0 .

Wicker, Tom (2004).

George Herbert Walker Bush . Lipper/Viking.

ISBN 978-0-670-03303-4 .

Primary sources Bush, George H. W. (1987).

Looking Forward: An Autobiography . New York: Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-14181-9 .

Bush, George H. W.; Scowcroft, Brent (1998).

A World Transformed . New York: Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-679-43248-7 .

Bush, George H. W. (1999).

All the Best, George Bush . New York: Scribner.

ISBN 978-0-684-83958-5 .

Bush, George H. W.; Bush, Barbara (2009).

"Interview with: George W. Bush, Barbara Bush" (Interview). Interviewed by McGrath, Jim. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013 . Retrieved October 8, 2014 .

Bush, George W. (2014).

41: A Portrait of My Father . Crown.

ISBN 978-0-553-44778-1 .

Bush Koch, Dorothy (2006).

My Father, My President: A Personal Account of the Life of George H. W. Bush . Grand Central Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-446-57990-2 .

Bush, George H. W. (2011). Engel, Jeffrey A. (ed.).

The China Diary of George H. W. Bush: The Making of a Global President . Princeton UP.

ISBN 978-1-4008-2961-3 .

External links George H. W. Bush at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource George H.W. Bush Presidential Library Center White House biography Full audio of a number of Bush speeches Miller Center of Public Affairs George H. W. Bush collected news and commentary at The New York Times United States Congress.

"George H. W. Bush (id: B001166)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

1992 election episode in CNN's Race for the White House Extensive essays on Bush and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs Appearances on C-SPAN "Life Portrait of George H. W. Bush" , from C-SPAN 's American Presidents: Life Portraits , December 13, 1999 George H. W. Bush Archived January 16, 2017, at the Wayback Machine an American Experience documentary Works by George H. W. Bush at Project Gutenberg George H. W. Bush at Find a Grave v t e George H. W. Bush 41st President of the United States (1989–1993) 43rd Vice President of the United States (1981–1989) Director of Central Intelligence (1976–1977) UN Ambassador (1971–1973) U.S. Representative for TX–7 (1967–1971) Presidency Transition Inauguration Timeline 1989 1990 1991 1992 January 1993 Environmental policy Soviet Union summits Malta Helsinki Invasion of Panama Chemical Weapons Accord Gulf War 1991 Madrid Conference National Space Council New world order Somali Civil War Unified Task Force Negotiations for the North American Free Trade Agreement Cannabis policy Vomiting incident Broccoli comments White House horseshoe pit Presidential pardons International trips Oval Office desk Cabinet Quayle vice presidency Judicial appointments Thomas Supreme Court candidates controversies Executive orders Presidential proclamations Life Presidential Library Bush School of Government and Public Service Walker's Point Estate Post-presidency Death and state funeral Speeches Joint session of Congress (1989) State of the Union addresses 1990 1991 1992 Chicken Kiev Elections U.S. Senate 1964 1970 U.S. House 1966 1968 Vice Presidential 1980 campaign selection convention election transition 1984 campaign convention election Presidential 1980 campaign primaries 1988 campaign primaries running mate selection convention "a thousand points of light" "Read my lips: no new taxes" debates election 1992 campaign primaries convention debates election Clinton transition Public image Saturday Night Live parodies The X-Presidents Presidential Reunion (2010 short film) The Naked Gun 2½: The Smell of Fear (1991) What It Takes: The Way to the White House (1993) The Silence of the Hams (1994) George Bush: The Life of a Lone Star Yankee (1997) The Family: The Real Story of the Bush Dynasty (2004) George H.W. Bush (2008) Bad for Democracy (2008) Family of Secrets (2009) 41: A Portrait of My Father (2014 book) Destiny and Power (2015 book) Books A World Transformed (1998) All the Best (1999) Legacy Bibliography Presidential Library George H. W. Bush Monument Medal of Freedom Bush School of Government Reagan Award George Bush Intercontinental Airport USS George H.W. Bush (CVN-77) Official White House portrait Family Barbara Bush (wife) George W. Bush (son presidency ) Pauline Robinson Bush (daughter) Jeb Bush (son) Neil Bush (son) Marvin Bush (son) Dorothy Bush Koch (daughter) Barbara Bush Coyne (granddaughter) Jenna Bush Hager (granddaughter) George P. Bush (grandson) Lauren Bush (granddaughter) Pierce Bush (grandson) Prescott Bush (father) Dorothy Walker Bush (mother) Nancy Walker Bush Ellis (sister) Jonathan Bush (brother) William H. T. Bush (brother) Samuel P. Bush (grandfather) George Herbert Walker (grandfather) James Smith Bush (great-grandfather) Obadiah Bush (great-great-grandfather) Millie (family dog) Sully (service dog) ← Ronald Reagan Bill Clinton → ← Walter Mondale Dan Quayle → Category Offices and distinctions Party political offices Preceded by Roy Whittenburg Republican nominee for U.S. Senator from Texas ( Class 1 ) 1964 , 1970 Succeeded by Alan Steelman Preceded by Bob Dole Chair of the Republican National Committee 1973–1974 Succeeded by Mary Louise Smith Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 1980 , 1984 Succeeded by Dan Quayle Preceded by Ronald Reagan Republican nominee for President of the United States 1988 , 1992 Succeeded by Bob Dole U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by John Dowdy Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas's 7th congressional district 1967–1971 Succeeded by William Reynolds Archer Jr Diplomatic posts Preceded by Charles Yost United States Ambassador to the United Nations 1971–1973 Succeeded by John A. Scali Preceded by Colin Crowe President of the United Nations Security Council May 1972 Succeeded by Lazar Mojsov Government offices Preceded by William Colby Director of Central Intelligence 1976–1977 Succeeded by Stansfield Turner Political offices Preceded by Walter Mondale Vice President of the United States 1981–1989 Succeeded by Dan Quayle Preceded by Ronald Reagan President of the United States 1989–1993 Succeeded by Bill Clinton Awards and achievements Preceded by Rudy Giuliani Recipient of the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award 2007 Succeeded by Natan Sharansky Articles related to George H. W. Bush v t e Bush family Bush–Davis–Walker family political line Bush family Bush (surname) Prescott Bush ancestors Obadiah Newcomb Bush (1797–1851) Samuel Prescott Bush (1863–1948) James Smith Bush (1825–1889) Samuel P. Bush and Flora Sheldon Prescott Sheldon Bush Prescott Bush (1895–1972) and Dorothy Wear Walker (1901–1992) George Herbert Walker Bush (m.) Barbara Pierce Nancy Walker Bush Ellis Jonathan James Bush William Henry Trotter Bush George H. W. Bush (1924–2018) Nancy Walker Bush Ellis (1926–2021) Jonathan Bush (1931–2021) George Walker Bush (m.) Laura Lane Welch Pauline Robinson Bush John Ellis Bush (m.) Columba Bush Neil Mallon Bush Marvin Pierce Bush Dorothy Walker Bush (m.) Robert P. Koch John Prescott Ellis Alexander Ellis III Josiah Wear Ellis Billy Bush Jonathan S. Bush George W. Bush (b. 1946) Jeb Bush (b. 1953) Neil Bush (b. 1955) Barbara Pierce Bush Jenna Welch Bush George Prescott Bush Lauren Bush (m.) David Lauren Walker's Point Estate Buckeye Steel Castings G. H. Walker & Co.

The Family: The Real Story of the Bush Dynasty Family of Secrets Political line W.

v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington ( 1789–1797 ) John Adams ( 1797–1801 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1801–1809 ) James Madison ( 1809–1817 ) James Monroe ( 1817–1825 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1825–1829 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1829–1837 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1837–1841 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1841 ) John Tyler ( 1841–1845 ) James K. Polk ( 1845–1849 ) Zachary Taylor ( 1849–1850 ) Millard Fillmore ( 1850–1853 ) Franklin Pierce ( 1853–1857 ) James Buchanan ( 1857–1861 ) Abraham Lincoln ( 1861–1865 ) Andrew Johnson ( 1865–1869 ) Ulysses S. Grant ( 1869–1877 ) Rutherford B. Hayes ( 1877–1881 ) James A. Garfield ( 1881 ) Chester A. Arthur ( 1881–1885 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1889–1893 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1893–1897 ) William McKinley ( 1897–1901 ) Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901–1909 ) William Howard Taft ( 1909–1913 ) Woodrow Wilson ( 1913–1921 ) Warren G. Harding ( 1921–1923 ) Calvin Coolidge ( 1923–1929 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1929–1933 ) Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1933–1945 ) Harry S. Truman ( 1945–1953 ) Dwight D. Eisenhower ( 1953–1961 ) John F. Kennedy ( 1961–1963 ) Lyndon B. Johnson ( 1963–1969 ) Richard Nixon ( 1969–1974 ) Gerald Ford ( 1974–1977 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1977–1981 ) Ronald Reagan ( 1981–1989 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1989–1993 ) Bill Clinton ( 1993–2001 ) George W. Bush ( 2001–2009 ) Barack Obama ( 2009–2017 ) Donald Trump ( 2017–2021 ) Joe Biden ( 2021–2025 ) Donald Trump ( 2025–present ) Presidency timelines Washington J. Adams McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Unsuccessful major party candidates for President of the United States Thomas Jefferson ( 1796 ) John Adams ( 1800 ) Charles C. Pinckney ( 1804 , 1808 ) DeWitt Clinton ( 1812 ) Rufus King ( 1816 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1824 ) William H. Crawford ( 1824 ) Henry Clay ( 1824 , 1832 , 1844 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1828 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1836 ) Hugh Lawson White ( 1836 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1840 ) Lewis Cass ( 1848 ) Winfield Scott ( 1852 ) John C. Frémont ( 1856 ) Stephen A. Douglas ( 1860 ) George B. McClellan ( 1864 ) Horatio Seymour ( 1868 ) Horace Greeley ( 1872 ) Samuel J. Tilden ( 1876 ) Winfield Scott Hancock ( 1880 ) James G. Blaine ( 1884 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1888 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1892 ) William J. Bryan ( 1896 , 1900 , 1908 ) Alton B. Parker ( 1904 ) William Howard Taft ( 1912 ) Charles Evans Hughes ( 1916 ) James M. Cox ( 1920 ) John W. Davis ( 1924 ) Al Smith ( 1928 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1932 ) Alf Landon ( 1936 ) Wendell Willkie ( 1940 ) Thomas E. Dewey ( 1944 , 1948 ) Adlai Stevenson ( 1952 , 1956 ) Richard Nixon ( 1960 ) Barry Goldwater ( 1964 ) Hubert Humphrey ( 1968 ) George McGovern ( 1972 ) Gerald Ford ( 1976 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1980 ) Walter Mondale ( 1984 ) Michael Dukakis ( 1988 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1992 ) Bob Dole ( 1996 ) Al Gore ( 2000 ) John Kerry ( 2004 ) John McCain ( 2008 ) Mitt Romney ( 2012 ) Hillary Clinton ( 2016 ) Donald Trump ( 2020 ) Kamala Harris ( 2024 ) All presidential candidates Presidents Third-party candidates v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e Vice Presidents of the United States John Adams ( 1789–1797 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1797–1801 ) Aaron Burr ( 1801–1805 ) George Clinton ( 1805–1812 ) Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814) Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825) John C. Calhoun (1825–1832) Martin Van Buren (1833–1837) Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841) John Tyler (1841) George M. Dallas (1845–1849) Millard Fillmore (1849–1850) William R. King (1853) John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861) Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865) Andrew Johnson (1865) Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873) Henry Wilson (1873–1875) William A. Wheeler (1877–1881) Chester A. Arthur (1881) Thomas A. Hendricks (1885) Levi P. Morton (1889–1893) Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897) Garret Hobart (1897–1899) Theodore Roosevelt (1901) Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909) James S. Sherman (1909–1912) Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921) Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923) Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Charles Curtis (1929–1933) John N. Garner (1933–1941) Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945) Harry S. Truman (1945) Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953) Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963) Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969) Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977) Walter Mondale (1977–1981) George H. W. Bush (1981–1989) Dan Quayle ( 1989–1993 ) Al Gore ( 1993–2001 ) Dick Cheney ( 2001–2009 ) Joe Biden ( 2009–2017 ) Mike Pence ( 2017–2021 ) Kamala Harris ( 2021–2025 ) JD Vance ( 2025–present ) Category List v t e Directors of central intelligence and the Central Intelligence Agency Central intelligence Souers Vandenberg Hillenkoetter Smith Dulles McCone Raborn Helms Schlesinger Colby Bush Turner Casey Webster Gates Woolsey Deutch Tenet Goss Central Intelligence Agency Goss Hayden Panetta Petraeus Brennan Pompeo Haspel Burns Ratcliffe v t e United States ambassadors to the United Nations Stettinius Johnson Austin Lodge Wadsworth Stevenson Goldberg Ball Wiggins Yost Bush Scali Moynihan Scranton Young McHenry Kirkpatrick Walters Pickering Perkins Albright Richardson Burleigh Holbrooke Cunningham Negroponte Danforth Patterson Bolton Wolff Khalilzad Rice DiCarlo Power Sison Haley Cohen Craft Mills Thomas-Greenfield Shea Italics indicates acting v t e United States ambassadors to China Great Qing Empire Commissioner Cushing (Envoy) Everett Davis Parker ( chargé d’affaires ) Marshall McLane Parker Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary Reed Ward Burlingame Browne Low Avery Seward Angell Young Denby Conger Rockhill Calhoun Republic of China ( Beijing / Nanjing ) Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary Calhoun Reinsch Crane Schurman MacMurray Johnson Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Johnson Gauss Hurley Stuart Republic of China ( Taipei ) Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Rankin Drumright Kirk Wright McConaughy Unger People's Republic of China Chiefs of the U.S. Liaison Office in Beijing Bruce Bush Gates Woodcock Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Woodcock Hummel Lord Lilley Roy Sasser Prueher Randt Huntsman Locke Baucus Branstad Burns Perdue See also: American Institute in Taiwan v t e George W. Bush 43rd President of the United States (2001–2009) 46th Governor of Texas (1995–2000) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition Inaugurations 2001 2005 Timeline 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 January 2009 Domestic policy Legislation and programs Economic policy Foreign policy International trips Bush Doctrine Russia summits Slovenia Slovakia War in Afghanistan Patriot Act No Child Left Behind Act 2003 invasion of Iraq Status of Forces Agreement Relations with Iran Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act USA Freedom Corps Department of Homeland Security Space policy Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty "War on Terror" President's Council on Service and Civic Participation award Dismissal of U.S. attorneys controversy Email controversy Judicial appointments Supreme Court candidates John Roberts Harriet Miers Samuel Alito controversies Cabinet Cheney vice presidency Pardons Impeachment efforts Executive orders Presidential proclamations State funeral of Ronald Reagan State funeral of Gerald Ford Obama transition Life and legacy Childhood home Early life and career Presidential library Official White House portrait Military service controversy Killian documents controversy authenticity issues Professional life Governorship of Texas Prairie Chapel Ranch Walker's Point Estate Clinton Bush Haiti Fund Speeches Joint session of Congress (Feb 2001) Remarks at the Islamic Center of Washington (2001) Joint session of Congress (September 11 attacks) (2001) Mission Accomplished (2003) State of the Union addresses 2002 ( "Axis of evil" ) 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Elections U.S. House 1978 Gubernatorial 1994 1998 Presidential 2000 campaign primaries running mate selection convention debates election Bush v. Gore 2004 campaign primaries convention debates election Public image Bushisms Nicknames As the subject of books and films Fictionalized portrayals Miss Me Yet?

" Yo, Blair " Books A Charge to Keep (1999) Decision Points (2010) 41: A Portrait of My Father (2014) Portraits of Courage (2017) Out of Many, One (2021) Popular culture Fahrenheit 9/11 (2004 documentary) W.

(2008 film) Family Laura Bush (wife) Barbara Pierce Bush (daughter) Jenna Bush Hager (daughter) George H. W. Bush (father presidency ) Barbara Bush (mother) Robin Bush (sister) Jeb Bush (brother) Neil Bush (brother) Marvin Bush (brother) Dorothy Bush Koch (sister) Barney (dog) Miss Beazley (dog) India (cat) Spot Fetcher (dog) ← Bill Clinton Barack Obama → Category v t e Cabinet of President Richard Nixon (1969–1974) Cabinet Vice President Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) None (1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Secretary of State William P. Rogers (1969–1973) Henry Kissinger (1973–1974) Secretary of the Treasury David M. Kennedy (1969–1971) John Connally (1971–1972) George Shultz (1972–1974) William E. Simon (1974) Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird (1969–1973) Elliot Richardson (1973) James R. Schlesinger (1973–1974) Attorney General John N. Mitchell (1969–1972) Richard Kleindienst (1972–1973) Elliot Richardson (1973) William B. Saxbe (1974) Postmaster General Winton M. Blount (1969–1971) Secretary of the Interior Wally Hickel (1969–1970) Rogers Morton (1971–1974) Secretary of Agriculture Clifford M. Hardin (1969–1971) Earl Butz (1971–1974) Secretary of Commerce Maurice Stans (1969–1972) Peter G. Peterson (1972–1973) Frederick B. Dent (1973–1974) Secretary of Labor George Shultz (1969–1970) James Day Hodgson (1970–1973) Peter J. Brennan (1973–1974) Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Robert Finch (1969–1970) Elliot Richardson (1970–1973) Caspar Weinberger (1973–1974) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development George W. Romney (1969–1973) James Thomas Lynn (1973–1974) Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe (1969–1973) Claude Brinegar (1973–1974) Cabinet-level Director of the Bureau of the Budget Robert P. Mayo (1969–1970) Director of the Office of Management and Budget George Shultz (1970–1972) Caspar Weinberger (1972–1973) Roy Ash (1973–1974) Ambassador to the United Nations Charles Yost (1969–1971) George H. W. Bush (1971–1973) John A. Scali (1973–1974) Counselor to the President Arthur F. Burns (1969) Daniel Patrick Moynihan (1969–1970) Bryce Harlow (1969–1970) Robert Finch (1970–1972) Donald Rumsfeld (1970–1971) Anne L. Armstrong (1973–1974) Dean Burch (1974) Kenneth Rush (1974) v t e Cabinet of President Ronald Reagan (1981–1989) Cabinet Vice President George H. W. Bush (1981–1989) Secretary of State Alexander Haig (1981–1982) George Shultz (1982–1989) Secretary of the Treasury Donald Regan (1981–1985) James Baker (1985–1988) Nicholas F. Brady (1988–1989) Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger (1981–1987) Frank Carlucci (1987–1989) Attorney General William French Smith (1981–1985) Edwin Meese (1985–1988) Dick Thornburgh (1988–1989) Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt (1981–1983) William P. Clark Jr.

(1983–1985) Donald P. Hodel (1985–1989) Secretary of Agriculture John R. Block (1981–1986) Richard Lyng (1986–1989) Secretary of Commerce Malcolm Baldrige Jr.

(1981–1987) William Verity Jr.

(1987–1989) Secretary of Labor Raymond J. Donovan (1981–1985) Bill Brock (1985–1987) Ann Dore McLaughlin (1987–1989) Secretary of Health and Human Services Richard Schweiker (1981–1983) Margaret Heckler (1983–1985) Otis Bowen (1985–1989) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Samuel Pierce (1981–1989) Secretary of Transportation Drew Lewis (1981–1983) Elizabeth Dole (1983–1987) James H. Burnley IV (1987–1989) Secretary of Energy James B. Edwards (1981–1983) Donald P. Hodel (1983–1985) John S. Herrington (1985–1989) Secretary of Education Terrel Bell (1981–1984) William Bennett (1985–1988) Lauro Cavazos (1988–1989) Cabinet-level Director of the Office of Management and Budget David Stockman (1981–1985) James C. Miller III (1985–1988) Joe Wright (1988–1989) Director of Central Intelligence William J. Casey (1981–1987) William H. Webster (1987–1989) Trade Representative Bill Brock (1981–1985) Clayton Yeutter (1985–1989) Ambassador to the United Nations Jeane Kirkpatrick (1981–1985) Vernon A. Walters (1985–1989) Counselor to the President Edwin Meese (1981–1985) None (1985–1989) v t e Cabinet of President George H. W. Bush (1989–1993) Cabinet Vice President Dan Quayle ( 1989–1993 ) Secretary of State James Baker (1989–1992) Lawrence Eagleburger (1992–1993) Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas F. Brady (1989–1993) Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney (1989–1993) Attorney General Dick Thornburgh (1989–1991) William Barr (1991–1993) Secretary of the Interior Manuel Lujan Jr.

(1989–1993) Secretary of Agriculture Clayton Yeutter (1989–1991) Ed Madigan (1991–1993) Secretary of Commerce Robert Mosbacher (1989–1992) Barbara Franklin (1992–1993) Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole (1989–1990) Lynn M. Martin (1991–1993) Secretary of Health and Human Services Louis W. Sullivan (1989–1993) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Jack Kemp (1989–1993) Secretary of Transportation Samuel K. Skinner (1989–1991) Andrew Card (1992–1993) Secretary of Energy James D. Watkins (1989–1993) Secretary of Education Lauro Cavazos (1989–1990) Lamar Alexander (1991–1993) Secretary of Veterans Affairs Ed Derwinski (1989–1992) Cabinet-level Director of the Office of Management and Budget Richard Darman (1989–1993) Trade Representative Carla Anderson Hills (1989–1993) Counselor to the President None (1989–1992) Clayton Yeutter (1992–1993) v t e ( ← 1976 ) 1980 United States presidential election ( 1984 → ) Republican Party Convention Primaries results Candidates Nominee: Ronald Reagan campaign positions VP nominee: George H. W. Bush Other candidates John B. Anderson Howard Baker George H. W. Bush ( campaign ) John Connally Phil Crane Bob Dole Ben Fernandez Harold Stassen Democratic Party Convention Primaries results Candidates Incumbent nominee: Jimmy Carter campaign Incumbent VP nominee: Walter Mondale Other candidates: Jerry Brown Ted Kennedy campaign speech Ron Dellums Independent Candidate John B. Anderson Running mate Patrick Lucey Other independent and third-party candidates Libertarian Party Nominee Ed Clark VP nominee David Koch Citizens Party Nominee Barry Commoner VP nominee LaDonna Harris Communist Party Nominee Gus Hall VP nominee Angela Davis Peace and Freedom Party Nominee: Maureen Smith VP Nominee: Elizabeth Cervantes Barron Prohibition Party Nominee Ben Bubar VP nominee Earl Dodge Socialist Party Nominee David McReynolds VP nominee Diane Drufenbrock Socialist Workers Party Nominee Andrew Pulley Alternate nominees Richard Congress Clifton DeBerry Workers World Party Nominee Deirdre Griswold VP nominee Gavrielle Holmes Independents and other candidates Lyndon LaRouche Warren Spannaus Other 1980 elections House Senate Gubernatorial v t e ( ← 1980 ) 1984 United States presidential election ( 1988 → ) Republican Party Convention Primaries results Candidates Incumbent nominee: Ronald Reagan campaign positions Incumbent VP nominee: George H. W. Bush Other candidates: Ben Fernandez Harold Stassen Democratic Party Convention Primaries results Candidates Nominee: Walter Mondale campaign VP nominee: Geraldine Ferraro Other candidates: Reubin Askew Alan Cranston John Glenn Gary Hart Fritz Hollings Jesse Jackson campaign George McGovern Third-party and independent candidates Citizens Party Nominee Sonia Johnson VP nominee Richard Walton Communist Party Nominee Gus Hall VP nominee Angela Davis Libertarian Party Nominee David Bergland VP nominee Jim Lewis Other candidates Gene Burns Earl Ravenal Mary Ruwart Prohibition Party Nominee Earl Dodge Socialist Equality Party Nominee Edward Winn VP nominee Helen Halyard Socialist Party Nominee Sonia Johnson VP nominee Richard Walton Socialist Workers Party Nominee Melvin T. Mason VP nominee Matilde Zimmermann Workers World Party Nominee Larry Holmes Alternate nominee Gavrielle  Holmes VP nominee Gloria La Riva Independents and other candidates Charles Doty Larry Flynt Larry "Bozo" Harmon Lyndon LaRouche running mate: Billy Davis Other 1984 elections House Senate Gubernatorial v t e ( ← 1984 ) 1988 United States presidential election ( 1992 → ) Republican Party Convention Primaries results Candidates Nominee: George H. W. Bush campaign VP nominee: Dan Quayle Other candidates: Bob Dole Pete du Pont Ben Fernandez Alexander Haig Jack Kemp Paul Laxalt Isabell Masters Pat Robertson Donald Rumsfeld Harold Stassen Democratic Party Convention Primaries results Candidates Nominee: Michael Dukakis campaign VP nominee: Lloyd Bentsen Other candidates: Douglas Applegate Bruce Babbitt Joe Biden campaign positions David Duke Dick Gephardt Al Gore campaign Gary Hart Jesse Jackson campaign Lyndon LaRouche campaign positions Andy Martin Patricia Schroeder Paul Simon James Traficant Third-party and independent candidates Libertarian Party Convention Nominee: Ron Paul campaign positions VP nominee: Andre Marrou Other candidates: Jim Lewis Russell Means New Alliance Party Nominee: Lenora Fulani Populist Party Nominee: David Duke Prohibition Party Nominee: Earl Dodge VP nominee: George Ormsby Socialist Equality Party Nominee: Edward Winn Socialist Party Nominee: Willa Kenoyer VP nominee: Ron Ehrenreich Socialist Workers Party Nominee: James Warren VP nominee: Kathleen Mickells Workers World Party Nominee: Larry Holmes VP nominee: Gloria La Riva Independents and others Jack Herer Lyndon LaRouche Herbert G. Lewin William A. Marra Eugene McCarthy Other 1988 elections: House Senate Gubernatorial v t e ( ← 1988 ) 1992 United States presidential election ( 1996 → ) Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Bill Clinton campaign positions VP nominee: Al Gore Other candidates: Larry Agran Jerry Brown Tom Harkin campaign Bob Kerrey Lyndon LaRouche campaign positions Tom Laughlin Eugene McCarthy Paul Tsongas Douglas Wilder Charles Woods Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Incumbent nominee: George H. W. Bush campaign Incumbent VP nominee: Dan Quayle Other candidates: Pat Buchanan David Duke Jack Fellure Isabell Masters Pat Paulsen Tennie Rogers Harold Stassen Independent Candidate: Ross Perot campaign VP candidate: James Stockdale Other independent and third-party candidates Libertarian Party Convention Nominee: Andre Marrou VP nominee: Nancy Lord Natural Law Party Nominee John Hagelin VP nominee Mike Tompkins New Alliance Party Nominee Lenora Fulani VP nominee Maria Elizabeth Muñoz Prohibition Party Nominee Earl Dodge VP nominee George Ormsby Socialist Party USA Nominee J. Quinn Brisben VP nominee Barbara Garson Socialist Workers Party Nominee James Warren VP nominee Willie Mae Reid U.S. Taxpayers Party Nominee Howard Phillips VP nominee Albion W. Knight Jr.

Workers World Party Nominee Gloria La Riva VP nominee Larry Holmes Independents and other candidates Ronald Daniels (running mate: Asiba Tupahache ) Bo Gritz Isabell Masters Other 1992 elections House Senate Gubernatorial v t e Time Persons of the Year 1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mohandas Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh S. Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) 1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) 1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wałęsa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeff Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Barack Obama (2012) Pope Francis (2013) Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr.

Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014) Angela Merkel (2015) Donald Trump (2016) The Silence Breakers (2017) The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital (2018) Greta Thunberg (2019) Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020) Elon Musk (2021) Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022) Taylor Swift (2023) Donald Trump (2024) v t e Theodore Roosevelt Award winners 1967: Eisenhower 1968: Saltonstall 1969: White 1970: Hovde 1971: Kraft Jr.

1972: Holland 1973: Omar Bradley 1974: Owens 1975: Ford 1976: Hamilton 1977: Tom Bradley 1978: Zornow 1979: Chandler 1980: Cooley 1981: Linkletter 1982: Cosby 1983: Palmer 1984: Lawrence 1985: Fleming 1986: Bush 1987: Zable 1988: Not presented 1989: Ebert 1990: Reagan 1991: Gibson 1992: Kemp 1993: Alexander 1994: Johnson 1995: Mathias 1996: Wooden 1997: Payne 1998: Dole 1999: Richardson 2000: Staubach 2001: Cohen 2002: Shriver 2003: de Varona 2004: Page 2005: Ride 2006: Kraft 2007: Tagliabue 2008: Glenn 2009: Albright 2010: Mitchell 2011: Dunwoody 2012: Allen 2013: Dungy 2014: Mills 2015: Jackson 2016: Ueberroth 2017: Brooke-Marciniak 2018: Wilmore 2019: Caslen 2020: Delaney 2021: McLendon 2022: Boudreaux 2023: Shields 2024: Catena 2025: Sloan Green v t e National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners 1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959: Douglas MacArthur 1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg 1961: John F. Kennedy 1962: Byron "Whizzer" White 1963: Roger Blough 1964: Donold B. Lourie 1965: Juan T. Trippe 1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik 1967: Frederick L. Hovde 1968: Chester J. LaRoche 1969: Richard Nixon 1970: Thomas J. Hamilton 1971: Ronald Reagan 1972: Gerald Ford 1973: John Wayne 1974: Gerald B. Zornow 1975: David Packard 1976: Edgar B. Speer 1977: Louis H. Wilson 1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy 1979: William P. Lawrence 1980: Walter J. Zable 1981: Justin W. Dart 1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown , Willie Davis , Jack Kemp , Ron Kramer , Jim Swink 1983: Jack Kemp 1984: John F. McGillicuddy 1985: William I. Spencer 1986: William H. Morton 1987: Charles R. Meyer 1988: Clinton E. Frank 1989: Paul Brown 1990: Thomas H. Moorer 1991: George H. W. Bush 1992: Donald R. Keough 1993: Norman Schwarzkopf 1994: Thomas S. Murphy 1995: Harold Alfond 1996: Gene Corrigan 1997: Jackie Robinson 1998: John H. McConnell 1999: Keith Jackson 2000: Fred M. Kirby II 2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs 2002: George Steinbrenner 2003: Tommy Franks 2004: William V. Campbell 2005: Jon F. Hanson 2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden 2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach 2008: John Glenn 2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman 2010: Bill Cosby 2011: Robert Gates 2012: Roscoe Brown 2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell 2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss 2015: Condoleezza Rice 2016: Archie Manning 2017: None awarded 2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman 2019: Mark Harmon v t e Individuals lain in state , in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay (1852) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) Stevens (1868) Sumner (1874) Wilson (1875) Garfield (1881) Logan (1886) McKinley (1901) L'Enfant (1909) Dewey (1917) Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921) Harding (1923) W. H. Taft (1930) Pershing (1948) R. A. Taft (1953) Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) MacArthur (1964) H. Hoover (1964) Eisenhower (1969) Dirksen (1969) J. E. Hoover (1972) Johnson (1973) Humphrey (1978) Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984) Pepper (1989) Reagan (2004, funeral ) Ford (2006–07, funeral ) Inouye (2012) McCain (2018) Bush (2018, funeral ) Lewis (2020) Dole (2021) Reid (2022) Carter (2024–25, funeral ) National Statuary Hall Cummings (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) Young (2022) House Chamber Hooper (1875) Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown (1996) Old Senate Chamber Chase (1873) Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson (1998) Parks (2005) Graham (2018) Sicknick (2021) Evans (2021) Williams (2022) Lain in repose East Room Harrison (1841) Taylor (1850) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) McKinley (1901) Harding (1923) Roosevelt (1945) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren (1974) Marshall (1993) Burger (1995) Brennan (1997) Blackmun (1999) Rehnquist (2005) Scalia (2016) Stevens (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) O'Connor (2023) Senate Chamber Byrd (2010) Lautenberg (2013) Bold : Presidents and chief justices v t e Refusenik movement and 1990s post-Soviet aliyah ( c.

1970 – 2000) Background Causes The Holocaust Antisemitism in the Soviet Union Joseph Stalin Zionism Six-Day War Emigration from the Eastern Bloc Slánský trial Anti-cosmopolitan campaign Jewish groups Ashkenazim Mountain Jews Karaim Krymchaks Bukharan Jews Georgian Jews Events Dymshits–Kuznetsov hijacking affair 1970s aliyah Jackson–Vanik amendment Helsinki Accords Freedom Sunday for Soviet Jews Operation Solomon Dissolution of the Soviet Union People Soviet Union Commonwealth of Independent States Pro-government / antisemitic Leonid Brezhnev Yuri Andropov Mikhail Gorbachev Mikhail Suslov David Dragunsky Yakov Fishman Adolf Shayevich Emomali Rahmon Jewish Ida Nudel Natan Sharansky Yuli Edelstein Eduard Kuznetsov Iosif Begun United States Jimmy Carter Ronald Reagan George H. W. Bush George Shultz Henry M. Jackson Charles Vanik Menachem Mendel Schneerson Meir Kahane Israel Golda Meir Yitzhak Rabin Shimon Peres Menachem Begin Yitzhak Shamir Benjamin Netanyahu Simcha Dinitz Avraham Burg Nehemiah Levanon Yehuda Lapidot Other Pro-Soviet Władysław Gomułka Pro-Jewish Nicolae Ceaușescu Organisations Soviet Union Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of the Russian Federation Anti-Zionist Committee of the Soviet Public Moscow Helsinki Group Pamyat United States Jewish Defense League American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee Union of Councils for Soviet Jews National Coalition Supporting Soviet Jewry Israel Nativ Jewish Agency Aftermath Russian Jews in Israel Yisrael BaAliyah Channel 9 v t e Freedom Award laureates Willy Brandt (1957) Winston Churchill (1958) William Joseph Donovan (1959) Richard Evelyn Byrd (1960) George Meany (1965) David Dubinsky (1966) David Sarnoff (1967) Lucius D. Clay (1969) Jacob K. Javits (1970) Bruno Kreisky (1975) Leo Cherne (1976) Hubert Humphrey (1977) Joseph Buttinger (1978) Mary Pillsbury Lord (1979) Lane Kirkland , Irena Kirkland (1981) Elie Wiesel , John C. Whitehead (1987) Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan , Lech Wałęsa (1989) Fang Lizhi , Li Shuxian (1991) Cyrus Vance (1992) George Soros , Dwayne Andreas (1993) Theodore J. Forstmann , Felix Rohatyn (1994) Aung San Suu Kyi , Sadako Ogata , Richard Holbrooke (1995) Robert P. De Vecchi (1997) Madeleine Albright (1999) John McCain (2001) Reynold Levy , Hamid Karzai (2002) Václav Havel (2003) Roméo Dallaire (2004) George H.W. Bush , Bill Clinton (2005) Ellen Johnson Sirleaf (2006) António Guterres , Angelina Jolie (2007) Kofi Annan (2008) Brokaw family (2011) John C. Whitehead (2012) George Soros (2013) The humanitarian aid worker (2014) Shimon Peres (2015) Spyros Galinos (2016) Portals : 1980s 1990s Biography Business and economics History Politics Connecticut Texas United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rhtnh
Cached time: 20250817113525
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.967 seconds
Real time usage: 4.503 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 50298/1000000
Revision size: 207100/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1638992/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 410377/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 57/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1150060/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.228/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24410677/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3550.150      1 -total
 34.34% 1219.246      2 Template:Reflist
 14.53%  515.764      2 Template:Navboxes
 14.15%  502.448      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 13.62%  483.428     99 Template:Cite_news
 12.68%  450.132    173 Template:Sfn
 11.57%  410.858     68 Template:Cite_web
 10.24%  363.695     32 Template:Navbox
  6.45%  229.011     48 Template:Cite_book
  5.27%  187.197     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11955:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817113525 and revision id 1306374905. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_H._W._Bush&oldid=1306374905 " Categories : Recipients of the Distinguished Flying Cross (United States) Recipients of the Air Medal George H. W. Bush 1924 births 2018 deaths 1980 United States vice-presidential candidates 1984 United States vice-presidential candidates 20th-century American businesspeople 20th-century American diplomats 20th-century American Episcopalians 20th-century American naval officers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century members of the United States House of Representatives 20th-century presidents of the United States 20th-century vice presidents of the United States 21st-century American Episcopalians 21st-century American non-fiction writers Acting presidents of the United States Ambassadors of the United States to China American businesspeople in the oil industry American male non-fiction writers American politicians with disabilities American people of the Gulf War American political writers Aviators from Texas Bush family Candidates in the 1980 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1988 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1992 United States presidential election Cold War CIA chiefs Deaths from Parkinson's disease in Texas Directors of the Central Intelligence Agency Delta Kappa Epsilon Episcopalians from Texas Fathers of presidents of the United States Ford administration personnel Grand Crosses Special Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Livingston family Members of the Sons of the American Revolution Members of Skull and Bones Military personnel from Connecticut Nixon administration cabinet members People from Greenwich, Connecticut People from Kennebunkport, Maine People from Midland, Texas Politicians from Milton, Massachusetts People of the Cold War Permanent representatives of the United States to the United Nations Phillips Academy alumni Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Presidents of the United States Reagan administration cabinet members Recipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class Recipients of the Order of the White Lion Recipients of the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award Republican National Committee chairs Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Texas Republican Party presidents of the United States Republican Party vice presidents of the United States Rice University staff Schuyler family Shot-down aviators Time Person of the Year Texas Republicans United States Navy pilots of World War II Vice presidents of the United States World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Writers from Texas Yale Bulldogs baseball players Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from May 2025 Pages using infobox officeholder with ambassador from or minister from Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 11:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George H. W. Bush 156 languages Add topic

