Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Diacritics specific to non-Latin alphabets Toggle Diacritics specific to non-Latin alphabets subsection 2.1 Arabic 2.2 Greek 2.3 Hebrew 2.4 Korean 2.5 Sanskrit and Indic 2.6 Syriac 3 Non-alphabetic scripts 4 Alphabetization or collation 5 Generation with computers 6 Languages with letters containing diacritics Toggle Languages with letters containing diacritics subsection 6.1 Latin script 6.1.1 Baltic 6.1.2 Celtic 6.1.3 Finno-Ugric 6.1.4 Germanic 6.1.5 Romance 6.1.6 Slavic 6.1.7 Turkic 6.1.8 Other 6.2 Cyrillic letters 7 Diacritics that do not produce new letters Toggle Diacritics that do not produce new letters subsection 7.1 English 7.2 Other languages 8 Transliteration 9 Limits Toggle Limits subsection 9.1 Orthographic 9.2 Unorthographic/ornamental 10 List of diacritics in Unicode 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Diacritic 73 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Modifier mark added to a letter For the academic journal, see Diacritics (journal) .

Latin letter A with multiple diacritics This article contains special characters .

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols .

This page uses notation for orthographic or other linguistic analysis.

For the meaning of  how ⟨ ⟩ , | | , / / , and [ ] are used here, see this page .

A diacritic (also diacritical mark , diacritical point , diacritical sign , or accent ) is a glyph added to a letter or to a basic glyph. The term derives from the Ancient Greek διακριτικός ( diakritikós , "distinguishing"), from διακρίνω ( diakrínō , "to distinguish"). The word diacritic is a noun , though it is sometimes used in an attributive sense, whereas diacritical is only an adjective . Some diacritics, such as the acute ⟨ó⟩ , grave ⟨ò⟩ , and circumflex ⟨ô⟩ (all shown above an 'o'), are often called accents . Diacritics may appear above or below a letter or in some other position such as within the letter or between two letters.

The main use of diacritics in Latin script is to change the sound-values of the letters to which they are added. Historically, English has used the diaeresis diacritic to indicate the correct pronunciation of ambiguous words, such as "coöperate", without which the <oo> letter sequence could be misinterpreted to be pronounced /ˈkuːpəreɪt/ . Other examples are the acute and grave accents, which can indicate that a vowel is to be pronounced differently than is  normal in that position, for example not reduced to /ə/ or silent as in the case of the two uses of the letter e in the noun résumé (as opposed to the verb resume ) and the help sometimes provided in the pronunciation of some words such as doggèd , learnèd , blessèd , and especially words pronounced differently than normal in poetry (for example movèd , breathèd ).

Most other words with diacritics in English are borrowings from languages such as French to better preserve the spelling, such as the diaeresis on naïve and Noël , the acute from café , the circumflex in the word crêpe , and the cedille in façade . All these diacritics, however, are frequently omitted in writing, and English is the only major modern European language that does not have diacritics in common usage.

[ a ] In Latin-script alphabets in other languages diacritics may distinguish between homonyms , such as the French là ("there") versus la ("the"), which are both pronounced /la/ . In Gaelic type , a dot over a consonant indicates lenition of the consonant in question. In other writing systems , diacritics may perform other functions.

Vowel pointing systems, namely the Arabic harakat and the Hebrew niqqud systems, indicate vowels that are not conveyed by the basic alphabet. The Indic virama ( ् etc.) and the Arabic sukūn ( ـْـ ) mark the absence of vowels.

Cantillation marks indicate prosody . Other uses include the Early Cyrillic titlo stroke ( ◌҃ ) and the Hebrew gershayim ( ״ ), which, respectively, mark abbreviations or acronyms , and Greek diacritical marks, which showed that letters of the alphabet were being used as numerals . In Vietnamese and the Hanyu Pinyin official romanization system for Mandarin in China, diacritics are used to mark the tones of the syllables in which the marked vowels occur.

In orthography and collation , a letter modified by a diacritic may be treated either as a new, distinct letter or as a letter–diacritic combination. This varies from language to language and may vary from case to case within a language.

In some cases, letters are used as "in-line diacritics", with the same function as ancillary glyphs, in that they modify the sound of the letter preceding them, as in the case of the "h" in the English pronunciation of "sh" and "th".

[ 2 ] Such letter combinations are sometimes even collated as a single distinct letter. For example, the spelling sch was traditionally often treated as a separate letter in German. Words with that spelling were listed after all other words spelled with s in card catalogs in the Vienna public libraries, for example (before digitization).

Types [ edit ] Larger renditions of these glyphs are given at § List of diacritics in Unicode , below Among the types of diacritic used in alphabets based on the Latin script are: accents (so called because the acute, grave, and circumflex were originally used to indicate different types of pitch accents in the polytonic transcription of Greek ) ◌́ – acute ( Latin : apex ); for example ó ◌̀ – grave ; for example ò ◌̂ – circumflex ; for example ô ◌̌ – caron , wedge; for example ǒ ◌̋ – double acute ; for example ő ◌̏ – double grave ; for example ȍ one dot ◌̇ – an overdot is used in many orthographies and transcriptions; for example ȯ ◌̣ – an underdot is also used in many orthographies and transcriptions; for example ọ ◌·◌ – an interpunct is used in the Catalan ela geminada (l·l) ◌͘ – a dot above right is used in Pe̍h-ōe-jī tittle , the superscript dot of the modern lowercase Latin ⟨i⟩ and ⟨j⟩ two dots : two overdots ( ◌̈ ) are used for umlaut , diaeresis and others; (for example ö ) two underdots ( ◌̤ ) are used in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) and the ALA-LC romanization system ◌ː – triangular colon , used in the IPA to mark long vowels (the "dots" are triangular, not circular).

curves ◌̆ – breve ; for example ŏ ◌̑ – inverted breve ; for example ȏ ◌͗ – sicilicus , a palaeographic diacritic similar to a caron or breve ◌̃ – tilde ; for example õ ◌҃ – titlo vertical stroke ◌̩ – a subscript vertical stroke is used in IPA to mark syllabicity and in Rheinische Dokumenta to mark a schwa ◌̍ – a superscript vertical stroke is used in Pe̍h-ōe-jī macron or horizontal line ◌̄ – macron ; for example ō ◌̱ – underbar overlays ◌⃓ – vertical bar through the character ◌̷ – slash through the character; for example ø ◌̵ – crossbar through the character ring ◌̊ – overring : for example å superscript curls ◌̓ – apostrophe ◌̒ – inverted apostrophe ◌̔ – reversed apostrophe ◌̉ – hook above ( Vietnamese : dấu hỏi ) ◌̛ – horn ( Vietnamese : dấu móc ); for example ơ subscript curls ◌̦ – undercomma ; for example ș ◌̧ – cedilla ; for example ç ◌̡ ◌̢ – hook , left or right, sometimes superscript ◌̨ – ogonek ; for example ǫ double marks (over or under two base characters) ◌͝◌ – double breve ◌͡◌ – tie bar or top ligature ◌᷍◌ – double circumflex ◌͞◌ – longum ◌͠◌ – double tilde double sub/superscript diacritics ◌̧ ̧ – double cedilla ◌̨ ̨ – double ogonek ◌̈ ̈ – double diaeresis ◌ͅͺ – double ypogegrammeni The tilde, dot, comma, titlo , apostrophe, bar, and colon are sometimes diacritical marks, but also have other uses.

Not all diacritics occur adjacent to the letter they modify. In the Wali language of Ghana, for example, an apostrophe indicates a change of vowel quality, but occurs at the beginning of the word, as in the dialects ’Bulengee and ’Dolimi . Because of vowel harmony , all vowels in a word are affected, so the scope of the diacritic is the entire word. In abugida scripts, like those used to write Hindi and Thai , diacritics indicate vowels, and may occur above, below, before, after, or around the consonant letter they modify.

The tittle (dot) on the letter ⟨i⟩ or the letter ⟨j⟩ , of the Latin alphabet originated as a diacritic to clearly distinguish ⟨i⟩ from the minims (downstrokes) of adjacent letters. It first appeared in the 11th century in the sequence ii (as in ingeníí ), then spread to i adjacent to m, n, u , and finally to all lowercase i s. The ⟨j⟩ , originally a variant of i , inherited the tittle. The shape of the diacritic developed from initially resembling today's acute accent to a long flourish by the 15th century. With the advent of Roman type it was reduced to the round dot we have today.

[ 3 ] Several languages of eastern Europe use diacritics on both consonants and vowels, whereas in western Europe digraphs are more often used to change consonant sounds. Most languages in Europe use diacritics on vowels, aside from English where there are typically none (with some exceptions ).

Diacritics specific to non-Latin alphabets [ edit ] Arabic [ edit ] Further information: Arabic diacritics (ئ ؤ إ أ and stand alone ء) hamza : indicates a glottal stop .

(ــًــٍــٌـ) tanwīn ( تنوين ) symbols: Serve a grammatical role in Arabic . The sign ـً is most commonly written in combination with alif , e.g.

ـًا .

(ــّـ) shadda : Gemination (doubling) of consonants.

(ٱ) waṣla : Comes most commonly at the beginning of a word. Indicates a type of hamza that is pronounced only when the letter is read at the beginning of the talk.

(آ) madda : A written replacement for a hamza that is followed by an alif, i.e. ( ءا ). Read as a glottal stop followed by a long /aː/ , e.g.

ءاداب، ءاية، قرءان، مرءاة are written out respectively as آداب، آية، قرآن، مرآة . This writing rule does not apply when the alif that follows a hamza is not a part of the stem of the word, e.g.

نتوءات is not written out as نتوآت as the stem نتوء does not have an alif that follows its hamza .

(ــٰـ) superscript alif (also "short" or "dagger alif": A replacement for an original alif that is dropped in the writing out of some rare words, e.g.

لاكن is not written out with the original alif found in the word pronunciation, instead it is written out as لٰكن .

ḥarakāt (In Arabic: حركات also called تشكيل tashkīl ): (ــَـ) fatḥa (a) (ــِـ) kasra (i) (ــُـ) ḍamma (u) (ــْـ) sukūn (no vowel) The ḥarakāt or vowel points serve two purposes: They serve as a phonetic guide. They indicate the presence of short vowels ( fatḥa , kasra , or ḍamma ) or their absence ( sukūn ).

At the last letter of a word, the vowel point reflects the inflection case or conjugation mood .

For nouns, The ḍamma is for the nominative, fatḥa for the accusative, and kasra for the genitive.

For verbs, the ḍamma is for the imperfective, fatḥa for the perfective, and the sukūn is for verbs in the imperative or jussive moods.

Vowel points or tashkīl should not be confused with consonant points or iʿjam ( إعجام ) – one, two or three dots written above or below a consonant to distinguish between letters of the same or similar form .

Greek [ edit ] Further information: Greek diacritics These diacritics are used in addition to the acute, grave, and circumflex accents and the diaeresis: ◌ͺ – iota subscript ( ᾳ, εͅ, ῃ, ιͅ, οͅ, υͅ, ῳ ) ῾◌ – rough breathing ( Ancient Greek : δασὺ πνεῦμα , romanized : dasỳ pneûma , Latin : spīritus asper ): aspiration ᾿◌ – smooth (or soft) breathing ( Ancient Greek : ψιλὸν πνεῦμα , romanized : psilòn pneûma , Latin : spīritus lēnis ): lack of aspiration Hebrew [ edit ] Further information: Hebrew diacritics Genesis 1:9 "And God said, Let the waters be collected".

Letters in black, niqqud in red , cantillation in blue Niqqud ּ – Dagesh ּ – Mappiq ֿ – Rafe ׁ – Shin dot (at top right corner) ׂ – Sin dot (at top left corner) ְ – Shva ֻ – Kubutz ֹ◌ – Holam ָ – Kamatz ַ – Patakh ֶ – Segol ֵ – Tzeire ִ – Hiriq ( Cantillation marks do not generally render correctly; refer to Hebrew cantillation#Names and shapes of the ta'amim for a complete table together with instructions for how to maximize the possibility of viewing them in a web browser.) Other ׳ – Geresh ״ – Gershayim Korean [ edit ] Hangul , the Korean alphabet The diacritics 〮 and 〯 , known as Bangjeom ( 방점; 傍點 ), were used to mark pitch accents in Hangul for Middle Korean . They were written to the left of a syllable in vertical writing and above a syllable in horizontal writing.

Sanskrit and Indic [ edit ] Further information: Brahmic scripts Devanagari scripts (from Brahmic family) compound letters, which are vowels combined with consonants, have diacritics. Here, क (k) is shown with vowel diacritics.  That is: ा, ि, े, ु, ौ ़, ः , etc.

Syriac [ edit ] Further information: Syriac alphabet A dot above and a dot below a letter represent [a] , transliterated as a or ă , Two diagonally-placed dots above a letter represent [ɑ] , transliterated as ā or â or å , Two horizontally-placed dots below a letter represent [ɛ] , transliterated as e or ĕ ; often pronounced [ɪ] and transliterated as i in the East Syriac dialect , Two diagonally-placed dots below a letter represent [e] , transliterated as ē , A dot underneath the Beth represent a soft [v] sound, transliterated as v A tilde (~) placed under Gamel represent a [dʒ] sound, transliterated as j The letter Waw with a dot below it represents [u] , transliterated as ū or u , The letter Waw with a dot above it represents [o] , transliterated as ō or o , The letter Yōḏ with a dot beneath it represents [i] , transliterated as ī or i , A tilde (~) under Kaph represent a [t͡ʃ] sound, transliterated as ch or č , A semicircle under Peh represents an [f] sound, transliterated as f or ph .

In addition to the above vowel marks, transliteration of Syriac sometimes includes ə , e̊ or superscript e (or often nothing at all) to represent an original Aramaic schwa that became lost later on at some point in the development of Syriac.

[ 4 ] Some transliteration schemes find its inclusion necessary for showing spirantization or for historical reasons.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Non-alphabetic scripts [ edit ] Some non-alphabetic scripts also employ symbols that function essentially as diacritics.

Non-pure abjads (such as Hebrew and Arabic script) and abugidas use diacritics for denoting vowels . Hebrew and Arabic also indicate consonant doubling and change with diacritics; Hebrew and Devanagari use them for foreign sounds. Devanagari and related abugidas also use a diacritical mark called a virama to mark the absence of a vowel. In addition, Devanagari uses the moon-dot chandrabindu ( ँ ) for vowel nasalization.

Unified Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics use several types of diacritics, including the diacritics with alphabetic properties known as Medials and Finals. Although long vowels originally were indicated with a negative line through the Syllabic glyphs, making the glyph appear broken, in the modern forms, a dot above is used to indicate vowel length. In some of the styles, a ring above indicates a long vowel with a [j] off-glide. Another diacritic, the "inner ring" is placed at the glyph's head to modify [p] to [f] and [t] to [θ]. Medials such as the "w-dot" placed next to the Syllabics glyph indicates a [w] being placed between the syllable onset consonant and the nucleus vowel. Finals indicate the syllable coda consonant; some of the syllable coda consonants in word medial positions, such as with the "h-tick", indicate the fortification of the consonant in the syllable following it.

The Japanese hiragana and katakana syllabaries use the dakuten (◌゛) and handakuten (◌゜) (in Japanese: 濁点 and 半濁点) symbols, also known as nigori (濁 "muddying") or ten-ten (点々 "dot dot") and maru (丸 "circle"), to indicate voiced consonants or other phonetic changes.

Emoticons are commonly created with diacritic symbols, especially Japanese emoticons on popular imageboards .

Alphabetization or collation [ edit ] Main article: Collation Different languages use different rules to put diacritic characters in alphabetical order. For example, French and Portuguese treat letters with diacritical marks the same as the underlying letter for purposes of ordering and dictionaries. The Scandinavian languages and the Finnish language , by contrast, treat the characters with diacritics ⟨å⟩ , ⟨ä⟩ , and ⟨ö⟩ as distinct letters of the alphabet, and sort them after ⟨z⟩ . Usually ⟨ä⟩ (a-umlaut) and ⟨ö⟩ (o-umlaut) [used in Swedish and Finnish] are sorted as equivalent to ⟨æ⟩ (ash) and ⟨ø⟩ (o-slash) [used in Danish and Norwegian]. Also, aa , when used as an alternative spelling to ⟨å⟩ , is sorted as such. Other letters modified by diacritics are treated as variants of the underlying letter, with the exception that ⟨ü⟩ is frequently sorted as ⟨y⟩ .

Languages that treat accented letters as variants of the underlying letter usually alphabetize words with such symbols immediately after similar unmarked words. For instance, in German where two words differ only by an umlaut, the word without it is sorted first in German dictionaries (e.g.

schon and then schön , or fallen and then fällen ). However, when names are concerned (e.g. in phone books or in author catalogues in libraries), umlauts are often treated as combinations of the vowel with a suffixed ⟨e⟩ ; Austrian phone books now treat characters with umlauts as separate letters (immediately following the underlying vowel).

In Spanish, the grapheme ⟨ñ⟩ is considered a distinct letter, different from ⟨n⟩ and collated between ⟨n⟩ and ⟨o⟩ , as it denotes a different sound from that of a plain ⟨n⟩ . But the accented vowels ⟨á⟩ , ⟨é⟩ , ⟨í⟩ , ⟨ó⟩ , ⟨ú⟩ are not separated from the unaccented vowels ⟨a⟩ , ⟨e⟩ , ⟨i⟩ , ⟨o⟩ , ⟨u⟩ , as the acute accent in Spanish only modifies stress within the word or denotes a distinction between homonyms , and does not modify the sound of a letter.

For a comprehensive list of the collating orders in various languages, see Collating sequence .

Generation with computers [ edit ] Main article: Unicode input German keyboard with umlaut letters Modern computer technology was developed mostly in countries that speak Western European languages (particularly English), and many early binary encodings were developed with a bias favoring English—a language written without diacritical marks. With computer memory and computer storage at premium, early character sets were limited to the Latin alphabet, the ten digits and a few punctuation marks and conventional symbols.  The American Standard Code for Information Interchange ( ASCII ), first published in 1963, encoded just 95 printable characters. It included just four free-standing diacritics—acute, grave, circumflex and tilde—which were to be used by backspacing and overprinting the base letter. The ISO/IEC 646 standard (1967) defined national variations that replace some American graphemes with precomposed characters (such as ⟨é⟩ , ⟨è⟩ and ⟨ë⟩ ), according to language—but remained limited to 95 printable characters.

Unicode was conceived to solve this problem by assigning every known character its own code; if this code is known, most modern computer systems provide a method to input it . For historical reasons, almost all the letter-with-accent combinations used in European languages were given unique code points and these are called precomposed characters . For other languages, it is usually necessary to use a combining character diacritic together with the desired base letter. Unfortunately, even as of 2024, many applications and web browsers remain unable to operate the combining diacritic concept properly.

Depending on the keyboard layout and keyboard mapping , it is more or less easy to enter letters with diacritics on computers and typewriters. Keyboards used in countries where letters with diacritics are the norm, have keys engraved with the relevant symbols. In other cases, such as when the US international or UK extended mappings are used, the accented letter is created by first pressing the key with the diacritic mark, followed by the letter to place it on. This method is known as the dead key technique, as it produces no output of its own but modifies the output of the key pressed after it.

Languages with letters containing diacritics [ edit ] The following languages have letters with diacritics that are orthographically distinct from those without diacritics.

Latin script [ edit ] Baltic [ edit ] Latvian has the following letters: ⟨ ā ⟩ , ⟨ ē ⟩ , ⟨ ī ⟩ , ⟨ ū ⟩ , ⟨ č ⟩ , ⟨ ģ ⟩ , ⟨ ķ ⟩ , ⟨ ļ ⟩ , ⟨ ņ ⟩ , ⟨ š ⟩ , ⟨ ž ⟩ Lithuanian . In general usage, where letters appear with the caron ( ⟨č⟩ , ⟨š⟩ and ⟨ž⟩ ), they are considered as separate letters from ⟨c⟩ , ⟨s⟩ or ⟨z⟩ and collated separately; letters with the ogonek ( ⟨ ą ⟩ , ⟨ ę ⟩ , ⟨ į ⟩ and ⟨ ų ⟩ ), the macron ( ⟨ ū ⟩ ) and the overdot ( ⟨ ė ⟩ ) are considered as separate letters as well, but not given a unique collation order.

Celtic [ edit ] Welsh uses the circumflex, diaeresis, acute, and grave accents on its seven vowels ⟨a⟩ , ⟨e⟩ , ⟨i⟩ , ⟨o⟩ , ⟨u⟩ , ⟨w⟩ , ⟨y⟩ (hence the composites ⟨â⟩ , ⟨ê⟩ , ⟨î⟩ , ⟨ô⟩ , ⟨û⟩ , ⟨ŵ⟩ , ⟨ŷ⟩ , ⟨ä⟩ , ⟨ë⟩ , ⟨ï⟩ , ⟨ö⟩ , ⟨ü⟩ , ⟨ẅ⟩ , ⟨ÿ⟩ , ⟨á⟩ , ⟨é⟩ , ⟨í⟩ , ⟨ó⟩ , ⟨ú⟩ , ⟨ẃ⟩ , ⟨ý⟩ , ⟨à⟩ , ⟨è⟩ , ⟨ì⟩ , ⟨ò⟩ , ⟨ù⟩ , ⟨ẁ⟩ , ⟨ỳ⟩ ). However all except the circumflex (which is used as a macron) are fairly rare.

Following spelling reforms since the 1970s, Scottish Gaelic uses graves only, which can be used on any vowel ( ⟨ à ⟩ , ⟨ è ⟩ , ⟨ ì ⟩ , ⟨ ò ⟩ , ⟨ ù ⟩ ). Formerly acute accents could be used on ⟨á⟩ , ⟨ó⟩ and ⟨é⟩ , which were used to indicate a specific vowel quality. With the elimination of these accents, the new orthography relies on the reader having prior knowledge of pronunciation of a given word.

Manx uses the cedilla diacritic ⟨ ç ⟩ combined with h to give the digraph ⟨çh⟩ (pronounced /tʃ/ ) to mark the distinction between it and the digraph ⟨ch⟩ (pronounced /h/ or /x/ ). Other diacritics used in Manx included the circumflex and diaeresis, as in ⟨â⟩ , ⟨ê⟩ , ⟨ï⟩ , etc. to mark the distinction between two similarly spelled words but with slightly differing pronunciation.

Irish uses only acute accents to mark long vowels, following the 1948 spelling reform.

Lenition is indicated using an overdot in Gaelic type ( ⟨ ċ ⟩ , ⟨ḋ⟩ , ⟨ḟ⟩ , ⟨ ġ ⟩ , ⟨ṁ⟩ , ⟨ṗ⟩ , ⟨ ṡ ⟩ , ⟨ṫ⟩ ); in Roman type , a suffixed ⟨h⟩ is used. Thus, a ṁáṫair is equivalent to a mháthair .

Breton does not have a single orthography (spelling system), but uses diacritics for a number of purposes. The diaeresis is used to mark that two vowels are pronounced separately and not as a diphthong/digraph. The circumflex is used to mark long vowels, but usually only when the vowel length is not predictable by phonology. Nasalization of vowels may be marked with a tilde, or following the vowel with the letter ⟨ñ⟩ . The plural suffix -où is used as a unified spelling to represent a suffix with a number of pronunciations in different dialects, and to distinguish this suffix from the digraph ⟨ou⟩ which is pronounced as /u:/ . An apostrophe is used to distinguish ⟨c'h⟩ , pronounced /x/ as the digraph ⟨ch⟩ is used in other Celtic languages, from the French-influenced digraph ch, pronounced /ʃ/ .

Finno-Ugric [ edit ] Estonian has a distinct letter ⟨ õ ⟩ , which contains a tilde. Estonian vowels with double-dot diacritics ⟨ä⟩ , ⟨ö⟩ , ⟨ü⟩ are similar to German, but these are also distinct letters, unlike German umlauted letters. All four have their own place in the alphabet, between ⟨w⟩ and ⟨x⟩ .

Carons in ⟨š⟩ or ⟨ž⟩ appear only in foreign proper names and loanwords . Also these are distinct letters, placed in the alphabet between s and t .

Finnish uses double-dotted vowels ( ⟨ä⟩ and ⟨ö⟩ ). As in Swedish and Estonian, these are regarded as individual letters, rather than 'vowel + diacritic' combinations (as happens in German). It also uses the characters ⟨å⟩ , ⟨š⟩ and ⟨ž⟩ in foreign names and loanwords. In the Finnish and Swedish alphabets, ⟨å⟩ , ⟨ä⟩ and ⟨ö⟩ collate as separate letters after ⟨z⟩ , the others as variants of their base letter.

Hungarian uses the double-dot, the acute and double acute diacritics (the last is unique to Hungarian): ( ⟨ö⟩ , ⟨ü⟩ ), ( ⟨á⟩ , ⟨é⟩ , ⟨í⟩ , ⟨ó⟩ , ⟨ú⟩ ) and ( ⟨ő⟩ , ⟨ű⟩ ). The acute accent indicates the long form of a vowel (in case of ⟨i⟩ / ⟨í⟩ , ⟨o⟩ / ⟨ó⟩ , ⟨u⟩ / ⟨ú⟩ ) while the double acute performs the same function for ⟨ö⟩ and ⟨ü⟩ . The acute accent can also indicate a different sound (more open, as in case of ⟨a⟩ / ⟨á⟩ , ⟨e⟩ / ⟨é⟩ ). Both long and short forms of the vowels are listed separately in the Hungarian alphabet , but members of the pairs ⟨a⟩ / ⟨á⟩ , ⟨e⟩ / ⟨é⟩ , ⟨i⟩ / ⟨í⟩ , ⟨o⟩ / ⟨ó⟩ , ⟨ö⟩ / ⟨ ő ⟩ , ⟨u⟩ / ⟨ú⟩ and ⟨ü⟩ / ⟨ ű ⟩ are collated in dictionaries as the same letter.

Livonian has the following letters: ⟨ā⟩ , ⟨ä⟩ , ⟨ ǟ ⟩ , ⟨ ḑ ⟩ , ⟨ē⟩ , ⟨ī⟩ , ⟨ļ⟩ , ⟨ņ⟩ , ⟨ō⟩ , ⟨ ȯ ⟩ , ⟨ ȱ ⟩ , ⟨ õ ⟩ , ⟨ ȭ ⟩ , ⟨ŗ⟩ , ⟨š⟩ , ⟨ț⟩ , ⟨ū⟩ , ⟨ž⟩ .

Germanic [ edit ] German uses the two-dots diacritic ( German : umlaut ): letters ⟨ ä ⟩ , ⟨ ö ⟩ , ⟨ ü ⟩ , used to indicate the fronting of back vowels (see umlaut (linguistics) ).

Dutch uses acute, circumflex, grave and two-dots diacritics with most vowels and cedilla with c, as in French. This results in ⟨ á ⟩ , ⟨ à ⟩ , ⟨ ä ⟩ , ⟨ é ⟩ , ⟨ è ⟩ , ⟨ ê ⟩ , ⟨ ë ⟩ , ⟨ í ⟩ , ⟨ î ⟩ , ⟨ ï ⟩ , ⟨ ó ⟩ , ⟨ ô ⟩ , ⟨ ö ⟩ , ⟨ ú ⟩ , ⟨ û ⟩ , ⟨ ü ⟩ and ⟨ ç ⟩ . This is mostly on words (and names) originating from French (like crème, café, gêne, façade ). The acute accent is also used to stress the vowel (like één ). The two-dots diacritic is used as a linguistic diaeresis (a vowel hiatus ) that splits the two vowels, e.g., reële, reünie, coördinatie ), rather than to indicate a linguistic umlaut as used in German.

Afrikaans uses 16 additional vowel forms, both uppercase and lowercase: ⟨ á ⟩ , ⟨ ä ⟩ , ⟨ é ⟩ , ⟨ è ⟩ , ⟨ ê ⟩ , ⟨ ë ⟩ , ⟨ í ⟩ , ⟨ î ⟩ , ⟨ ï ⟩ , ⟨ ó ⟩ , ⟨ ô ⟩ , ⟨ ö ⟩ , ⟨ ú ⟩ , ⟨ û ⟩ , ⟨ ü ⟩ , ⟨ ý ⟩ .

Faroese uses acutes and some additional letters. All are considered separate letters and have their own place in the alphabet: ⟨ á ⟩ , ⟨ í ⟩ , ⟨ ó ⟩ , ⟨ ú ⟩ , ⟨ ý ⟩ and ⟨ ø ⟩ .

Icelandic uses acutes and other additional letters. All are considered separate letters, and have their own place in the alphabet: ⟨ á ⟩ , ⟨ é ⟩ , ⟨ í ⟩ , ⟨ ó ⟩ , ⟨ ú ⟩ , ⟨ ý ⟩ and ⟨ ö ⟩ .

Danish and Norwegian use additional characters like the o-slash ⟨ ø ⟩ and the a-overring ⟨ å ⟩ . These letters come after ⟨z⟩ and ⟨ æ ⟩ in the order ⟨ø⟩ , ⟨å⟩ . Historically, the ⟨å⟩ has developed from a ligature by writing a small superscript ⟨a⟩ over a lowercase ⟨a⟩ ; if an ⟨å⟩ character is unavailable, some Scandinavian languages allow the substitution of a doubled a , thus ⟨aa⟩ . The Scandinavian languages collate these letters after ⟨z⟩ , but have different national collation standards.

Swedish uses a-diaeresis ( ⟨ ä ⟩ ) and o-diaeresis ( ⟨ ö ⟩ ) in the place of ash ( ⟨æ⟩ ) and slashed o ( ⟨ ø ⟩ ) in addition to the a-overring ( ⟨å⟩ ). Historically, the two-dots diacritic for the Swedish letters ⟨ä⟩ and ⟨ö⟩ developed from a small Gothic ⟨e⟩ written above the letters. These letters are collated after ⟨z⟩ , in the order ⟨å⟩ , ⟨ä⟩ , ⟨ö⟩ .

Romance [ edit ] In Asturian , Galician and Spanish , the character ⟨ ñ ⟩ is a letter and collated between n and o .

Asturian uses an underdot: ⟨ Ḷ ⟩ ( lower case , ⟨ḷ⟩ ), and ⟨ Ḥ ⟩ ( lower case ⟨ḥ⟩ ) [ 7 ] Catalan uses the acute accent ⟨é⟩ , ⟨í⟩ , ⟨ó⟩ , ⟨ú⟩ , the grave accent ⟨à⟩ , ⟨è⟩ , ⟨ò⟩ , the diaeresis ⟨ï⟩ , ⟨ü⟩ , the cedilla ⟨ç⟩ , and the interpunct ⟨l·l⟩ .

In Valencian , the circumflex ⟨â⟩ , ⟨ê⟩ , ⟨î⟩ , ⟨ô⟩ , ⟨û⟩ may also be used.

Corsican uses the following in its alphabet : ⟨À⟩ / ⟨à⟩ , ⟨È⟩ / ⟨è⟩ , ⟨Ì⟩ / ⟨ì⟩ , ⟨Ò⟩ / ⟨ò⟩ , ⟨Ù⟩ / ⟨ù⟩ .

French uses four diacritics, appearing on vowels (circumflex, acute, grave, diaeresis) and the cedilla appearing in ⟨ç⟩ .

Italian uses two diacritics, appearing on vowels (acute, grave) Leonese : could use ⟨ñ⟩ or ⟨ nn ⟩ .

Portuguese uses a tilde with the vowels ⟨a⟩ and ⟨o⟩ and a cedilla with c.

Romanian uses a breve on the letter a ( ⟨ ă ⟩ ) to indicate the sound schwa /ə/ , as well as a circumflex over the letters a ( ⟨ â ⟩ ) and i ( ⟨ î ⟩ ) for the sound /ɨ/ . Romanian also writes a comma below the letters s ( ⟨ ș ⟩ ) and t ( ⟨ ț ⟩ ) to represent the sounds /ʃ/ and /t͡s/ , respectively. These characters are collated after their non-diacritic equivalent.

Spanish uses acute accents ( ⟨á⟩ , ⟨é⟩ , ⟨í⟩ , ⟨ó⟩ , ⟨ú⟩ ) to indicate stress falling on a different syllable than the one it would fall on based on default rules, and to distinguish certain one-syllable homonyms (e.g.

el (masculine singular definite article) and él [he]). The acute accent is also used to break up sequences of vowels that would normally be pronouced as a diphthong into two syllables, as in the word reír . Diaeresis is used on u only, to distinguish the combinations gue, gui /ge/, /gi/ from güe, güi /gwe/, /gwi/ , e.g.

vergüenza, lingüística . The tilde on ⟨ñ⟩ is not considered a diacritic as ⟨ñ⟩ is considered a distinct letter from ⟨n⟩ , not a mutated form of it.

Slavic [ edit ] Gaj's Latin alphabet , used in Croatian and latinized Serbian , has the symbols ⟨ č ⟩ , ⟨ ć ⟩ , ⟨ đ ⟩ , ⟨ š ⟩ and ⟨ ž ⟩ , which are considered separate letters and are listed as such in dictionaries and other contexts in which words are listed according to alphabetical order. It also has one digraph including a diacritic, dž , which is also alphabetized independently, and follows ⟨ d ⟩ and precedes ⟨ đ ⟩ in the alphabetical order.

The Czech alphabet uses the acute (lowercase á é í ó ú ý , uppercase Á É Í Ó Ú Ý ), caron (lowercase č ď ě ň ř š ť ž , uppercase Č Ď Ě Ň Ř Š Ť Ž ), and for one letter (lowercase ů , uppercase Ů ) the ring. (In ď and ť the caron is modified to look rather like an apostrophe.) Letter with caron are considered separate letters, whereas vowels are considered only as longer variants of the unaccented letters. Acute does not affect alphabetical order, letters with caron are ordered after original counterparts.

Polish has the following letters: ą ć ę ł ń ó ś ź ż . These are considered to be separate letters: each of them is placed in the alphabet immediately after its Latin counterpart (e.g.

⟨ą⟩ between ⟨a⟩ and ⟨b⟩ ), ⟨ź⟩ and ⟨ż⟩ are placed after ⟨z⟩ in that order.

The Serbian Cyrillic alphabet has no diacritics, instead it has a grapheme ( glyph ) for every letter of its Latin counterpart (including Latin letters with diacritics and the digraphs dž, lj and nj ).

The Slovak alphabet uses the acute (lowercase á é í ó ú ý ĺ ŕ , uppercase Á É Í Ó Ú Ý Ĺ Ŕ ), caron (lowercase č ď ľ ň š ť ž dž , uppercase Č Ď Ľ Ň Š Ť Ž DŽ ), umlaut ( ä Ä ) and circumflex accent ( ô Ô ). All of those are considered separate letters and are placed directly after the original counterpart in the alphabet .

[ 8 ] The basic Slovenian alphabet has the symbols ⟨ č ⟩ , ⟨ š ⟩ , and ⟨ ž ⟩ , which are considered separate letters and are listed as such in dictionaries and other contexts in which words are listed according to alphabetical order. Letters with a caron are placed right after the letters as written without the diacritic. The letter ⟨đ⟩ ('d with bar') may be used in non-transliterated foreign words, particularly names, and is placed after ⟨č⟩ and before ⟨d⟩ .

Turkic [ edit ] Azerbaijani includes the distinct Turkish alphabet letters Ç , Ğ , I , İ , Ö , Ş and Ü .

Crimean Tatar includes the distinct Turkish alphabet letters Ç , Ğ , I , İ , Ö , Ş and Ü . Unlike Turkish, Crimean Tatar also has the letter Ñ .

Gagauz includes the distinct Turkish alphabet letters Ç , Ğ , I , İ , Ö and Ü . Unlike Turkish, Gagauz also has the letters Ä , Ê Ș and Ț .

Ș and Ț are derived from the Romanian alphabet for the same sounds. Sometime the Turkish Ş may be used instead of Ș .

Turkish uses a ⟨G⟩ with a breve ( ⟨ Ğ ⟩ ), two letters with two dots ( ⟨ Ö ⟩ and ⟨ Ü ⟩ , representing two rounded front vowels), two letters with a cedilla ( ⟨ Ç ⟩ and ⟨ Ş ⟩ , representing the affricate /tʃ/ and the fricative /ʃ/ ), and also possesses a dotted capital ⟨İ⟩ (and a dotless lowercase ⟨ı⟩ representing a high unrounded back vowel). In Turkish each of these are separate letters, rather than versions of other letters, where dotted capital ⟨İ⟩ and lower case ⟨i⟩ are the same letter, as are dotless capital ⟨I⟩ and lowercase ⟨ı⟩ .

Typographically , ⟨Ç⟩ and ⟨Ş⟩ are sometimes rendered with an underdot , as in ⟨Ṣ⟩ . The new Azerbaijani, Crimean Tatar, and Gagauz alphabets are based on the Turkish alphabet and its same diacriticized letters, with some additions.

Turkmen includes the distinct Turkish alphabet letters Ç , Ö , Ş and Ü . In addition, Turkmen uses A with diaeresis ( Ä ) to represent /æ/ , N with caron ( ⟨ Ň ⟩ ) to represent the velar nasal /ŋ/ , Y with acute ( ⟨ Ý ⟩ ) to represent the palatal approximant /j/ , and Z with caron ( ⟨ Ž ⟩ ) to represent /ʒ/ .

Other [ edit ] Albanian has two special letters Ç and Ë upper and lowercase. They are placed next to the most similar letters in the alphabet, c and e correspondingly.

Esperanto has the symbols ŭ , ĉ , ĝ , ĥ , ĵ and ŝ , which are included in the alphabet, and considered separate letters.

Filipino also has the character ñ as a letter and is collated between n and o.

Modern Greenlandic does not use any diacritics, although ø and å are used to spell loanwords, especially from Danish and English.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] From 1851 until 1973, Greenlandic was written in an alphabet invented by Samuel Kleinschmidt , where long vowels and geminate consonants were indicated by diacritics on vowels (in the case of consonant gemination, the diacritics were placed on the vowel preceding the affected consonant). For example, the name Kalaallit Nunaat was spelled Kalâdlit Nunât . This scheme uses the circumflex (◌̂) to indicate a long vowel (e.g.

⟨ât, ît, ût⟩ ; modern: ⟨aat, iit, uut⟩ ), an acute accent (◌́) to indicate gemination of the following consonant: (i.e.

⟨ák, ík, úk⟩ ; modern: ⟨akk, ikk, ukk⟩ ) and, finally, a tilde (◌̃) or a grave accent (◌̀), depending on the author, indicates vowel length and gemination of the following consonant (e.g.

⟨ãt/àt, ĩt/ìt, ũt/ùt⟩ ; modern: ⟨aatt, iitt, uutt⟩ ).

⟨ê, ô⟩ , used only before ⟨r, q⟩ , are now written ⟨ee, oo⟩ in Greenlandic.

Hawaiian uses the kahakō ( macron ) over vowels, although there is some disagreement over considering them as individual letters. The kahakō over a vowel can completely change the meaning of a word that is spelled the same but without the kahakō.

Kurdish uses the symbols Ç , Ê , Î , Ş and Û with other 26 standard Latin alphabet symbols.

Lakota alphabet uses the caron for the letters č , ȟ , ǧ , š , and ž . It also uses the acute accent for stressed vowels á, é, í, ó, ú, áŋ, íŋ, úŋ.

Malay uses some diacritics such as á, ā, ç, í, ñ, ó, š, ú . Uses of diacritics was continued until late 19th century except ā and ē .

Maltese uses a C, G, and Z with a dot over them (Ċ, Ġ, Ż), and also has an H with an extra horizontal bar. For uppercase H, the extra bar is written slightly above the usual bar. For lowercase H, the extra bar is written crossing the vertical, like a t , and not touching the lower part ( Ħ , ħ). The above characters are considered separate letters. The letter 'c' without a dot has fallen out of use due to redundancy. 'Ċ' is pronounced like the English 'ch' and 'k' is used as a hard c as in 'cat'. 'Ż' is pronounced just like the English 'Z' as in 'Zebra', while 'Z' is used to make the sound of 'ts' in English (like 'tsunami' or 'maths'). 'Ġ' is used as a soft 'G' like in 'geometry', while the 'G' sounds like a hard 'G' like in 'log'. The digraph 'għ' (called għajn after the Arabic letter name ʻayn for غ) is considered separate, and sometimes ordered after 'g', whilst in other volumes it is placed between 'n' and 'o' (the Latin letter 'o' originally evolved from the shape of Phoenician ʻayin , which was traditionally collated after Phoenician nūn ).

The romanization of Syriac uses the altered letters of.

Ā , Č , Ḏ , Ē , Ë , Ġ , Ḥ , Ō , Š , Ṣ , Ṭ , Ū , Ž alongside the 26 standard Latin alphabet symbols.

[ 11 ] Vietnamese uses the horn diacritic for the letters ơ and ư ; the circumflex for the letters â , ê , and ô ; the breve for the letter ă ; and a bar through the letter đ . Separately, it also has á, à, ả, ã and ạ, the five tones used for vowels besides the flat tone 'a'.

Cyrillic letters [ edit ] Further information: Cyrillic script Belarusian and Uzbek Cyrillic have a letter ⟨ ў ⟩ .

Belarusian, Bulgarian , Russian and Ukrainian have the letter ⟨ й ⟩ .

Belarusian and Russian have the letter ⟨ ё ⟩ . In Russian, this letter is usually replaced by ⟨ е ⟩ , although it has a different pronunciation. The use of ⟨е⟩ instead of ⟨ё⟩ does not affect the pronunciation.

Ё is always used in children's books and in dictionaries. A minimal pair is все ( vs'e , "everybody" pl.) and всё ( vs'o , "everything" n. sg.). In Belarusian the replacement by ⟨е⟩ is a mistake; in Russian, it is permissible to use either ⟨е⟩ or ⟨ё⟩ for ⟨ё⟩ but the former is more common in everyday writing (as opposed to instructional or juvenile writing).

The Cyrillic Ukrainian alphabet has the letters ⟨ ґ ⟩ , ⟨ й ⟩ and ⟨ ї ⟩ . Ukrainian Latynka has many more.

Macedonian has the letters ⟨ ќ ⟩ and ⟨ ѓ ⟩ .

In Bulgarian and Macedonian the possessive pronoun ѝ ( ì , "her") is spelled with a grave accent in order to distinguish it from the conjunction и ( i , "and").

The acute accent ◌́ above any vowel in Cyrillic alphabets is used in dictionaries, books for children and foreign learners to indicate the word stress, it also can be used for disambiguation of similarly spelled words with different lexical stresses.

Diacritics that do not produce new letters [ edit ] Blackboard used in class at Harvard shows students' efforts at placing the ü and acute accent diacritic used in Spanish orthography .

English [ edit ] Main article: English terms with diacritical marks English is one of the few European languages that does not have many words that contain diacritical marks. Instead, digraphs are the main way the Modern English alphabet adapts the Latin to its phonemes. Exceptions are unassimilated foreign loanwords, including borrowings from French (and, increasingly, Spanish , like jalapeño and piñata ); however, the diacritic is also sometimes omitted from such words. Loanwords that frequently appear with the diacritic in English include café , résumé or resumé (a usage that helps distinguish it from the verb resume ), soufflé , and naïveté (see English terms with diacritical marks ). In older practice (and even among some orthographically conservative modern writers), one may see examples such as élite , mêlée and rôle.

English speakers and writers once used the diaeresis more often than now in words such as coöperation (from Fr.

coopération ), zoölogy (from Grk.

zoologia ), and seeër (now more commonly see-er or simply seer ) as a way of indicating that adjacent vowels belonged to separate syllables, but this practice has become far less common.

The New Yorker magazine is a major publication that continues to use the diaeresis in place of a hyphen for clarity and economy of space.

[ 12 ] A few English words, often when used out of context, especially in isolation, can only be distinguished from other words of the same spelling by using a diacritic or modified letter. These include exposé , lamé , maté , öre , øre , résumé and rosé.

In a few words, diacritics that did not exist in the original have been added for disambiguation, as in maté ( from Sp. and Port.

mate) , saké ( the standard Romanization of the Japanese has no accent mark ) , and Malé ( from Dhivehi މާލެ ) , to clearly distinguish them from the English words mate, sake, and male.

The acute and grave accents are occasionally used in poetry and lyrics: the acute to indicate stress overtly where it might be ambiguous ( rébel vs.

rebél ) or nonstandard for metrical reasons ( caléndar ), the grave to indicate that an ordinarily silent or elided syllable is pronounced ( warnèd, parlìament ).

In certain personal names such as Renée and Zoë , often two spellings exist, and the person's own preference will be known only to those close to them. Even when the name of a person is spelled with a diacritic, like Charlotte Brontë , this may be dropped in English-language articles, and even in official documents such as passports , due either to carelessness, the typist not knowing how to enter letters with diacritical marks, or technical reasons ( California , for example, does not allow [ clarification needed ] names with diacritics, as the computer system cannot process such characters). They also appear in some worldwide company names and/or trademarks, such as Nestlé and Citroën .

Other languages [ edit ] The following languages have letter-diacritic combinations that are not considered independent letters.

Afrikaans uses a diaeresis to mark vowels that are pronounced separately and not as one would expect where they occur together, for example voel (to feel) as opposed to voël (bird). The circumflex is used in ê, î, ô and û generally to indicate long close-mid , as opposed to open-mid vowels, for example in the words wêreld (world) and môre (morning, tomorrow). The acute accent is used to add emphasis in the same way as underlining or writing in bold or italics in English, for example Dit is jóú boek (It is your book). The grave accent is used to distinguish between words that are different only in placement of the stress, for example appel (apple) and appèl (appeal) and in a few cases where it makes no difference to the pronunciation but distinguishes between homophones. The two most usual cases of the latter are in the sayings òf... òf (either... or) and nòg... nòg (neither... nor) to distinguish them from of (or) and nog (again, still).

Aymara uses a diacritical horn over p, q, t, k, ch .

Catalan has the following composite characters: à, ç, é, è, í, ï, ó, ò, ú, ü, l·l . The acute and the grave indicate stress and vowel height , the cedilla marks the result of a historical palatalization , the diaeresis indicates either a hiatus , or that the letter u is pronounced when the graphemes gü, qü are followed by e or i , the interpunct (·) distinguishes the different values of ll/l·l .

Some orthographies of Cornish such as Kernowek Standard and Unified Cornish use diacritics, while others such as Kernewek Kemmyn and the Standard Written Form do not (or only use them optionally in teaching materials).

Dutch uses the diaeresis. For example, in ruïne it means that the u and the i are separately pronounced in their usual way, and not in the way that the combination ui is normally pronounced. Thus it works as a separation sign and not as an indication for an alternative version of the i . Diacritics can be used for emphasis ( érg koud for very cold) or for disambiguation between a number of words that are spelled the same when context does not indicate the correct meaning ( één appel = one apple, een appel = an apple; vóórkomen = to occur, voorkómen = to prevent). Grave and acute accents are used on a very small number of words, mostly loanwords. The ç also appears in some loanwords.

[ 13 ] Faroese . Non-Faroese accented letters are not added to the Faroese alphabet. These include é , ö , ü , å and recently also letters like š , ł , and ć .

Filipino has the following composite characters: á, à, â, é, è, ê, í, ì, î, ó, ò, ô, ú, ù, û . Everyday use of diacritics for Filipino is, however, uncommon, and meant only to distinguish between homonyms between a word with the usual penultimate stress and one with a different stress placement. This aids both comprehension and pronunciation if both are relatively adjacent in a text, or if a word is itself ambiguous in meaning. The letter ñ (" eñe ") is not a n with a diacritic, but rather collated as a separate letter, one of eight borrowed from Spanish. Diacritics appear in Spanish loanwords and names observing Spanish orthography rules.

Finnish . Carons in š and ž appear only in foreign proper names and loanwords , but may be substituted with sh or zh if and only if it is technically impossible to produce accented letters in the medium. Contrary to Estonian, š and ž are not considered distinct letters in Finnish.

French uses five diacritics. The grave ( accent grave ) marks the sound /ɛ/ when over an e, as in père ("father") or is used to distinguish words that are otherwise homographs such as a / à ("has"/"to") or ou / où ("or"/"where"). The acute ( accent aigu ) is only used in "é", modifying the "e" to make the sound /e/ , as in étoile ("star"). The circumflex ( accent circonflexe ) generally denotes that an "s" once followed the vowel in Old French or Latin, as in fête ("party"), the Old French being feste and the Latin being festum . Whether the circumflex modifies the vowel's pronunciation depends on the dialect and the vowel. The cedilla ( cédille ) indicates that a normally hard "c" (before the vowels "a", "o", and "u") is to be pronounced /s/ , as in ça ("that"). The diaeresis diacritic ( French : tréma ) indicates that two adjacent vowels that would normally be pronounced as one are to be pronounced separately, as in Noël ("Christmas").

Galician vowels can bear an acute ( á, é, í, ó, ú ) to indicate stress or difference between two otherwise same written words ( é , 'is' vs.

e , 'and'), but the diaeresis is only used with ï and ü to show two separate vowel sounds in pronunciation. Only in foreign words may Galician use other diacritics such as ç (common during the Middle Ages), ê , or à .

German uses the three umlauted characters ä , ö and ü . These diacritics indicate vowel changes. For instance, the word Ofen [ˈoːfən] "oven" has the plural Öfen [ˈøːfən] . The mark originated as a superscript e ; a handwritten blackletter e resembles two parallel vertical lines, like a diaeresis. Due to this history, "ä", "ö" and "ü" can be written as "ae", "oe" and "ue" respectively, if the umlaut letters are not available.

Hebrew has many various diacritic marks known as niqqud that are used above and below script to represent vowels. These must be distinguished from cantillation , which are keys to pronunciation and syntax.

The International Phonetic Alphabet uses diacritic symbols and characters to indicate phonetic features or secondary articulations.

Irish uses the acute to indicate that a vowel is long : á , é , í , ó , ú . It is known as síneadh fada "long sign" or simply fada "long" in Irish. In the older Gaelic type , overdots are used to indicate lenition of a consonant: ḃ , ċ , ḋ , ḟ , ġ , ṁ , ṗ , ṡ , ṫ .

Italian mainly has the acute and the grave ( à , è / é , ì , ò / ó , ù ), typically to indicate a stressed syllable that would not be stressed under the normal rules of pronunciation but sometimes also to distinguish between words that are otherwise spelled the same way (e.g. "e", and; "è", is). Despite its rare use, Italian orthography allows the circumflex (î) too, in two cases: it can be found in old literary context (roughly up to 19th century) to signal a syncope (fêro→fecero, they did), or in modern Italian to signal the contraction of ″-ii″ due to the plural ending -i whereas the root ends with another -i; e.g., s.

demonio, p.

demonii→demonî; in this case the circumflex also signals that the word intended is not demoni, plural of "demone" by shifting the accent (demònî, "devils"; dèmoni, "demons").

Lithuanian uses the acute , grave and tilde in dictionaries to indicate stress types in the language's pitch accent system.

Maltese also uses the grave on its vowels to indicate stress at the end of a word with two syllables or more:– lowercase letters: à, è, ì, ò, ù; capital letters: À, È, Ì, Ò, Ù Māori makes use of macrons to mark long vowels.

Occitan has the following composite characters: á, à, ç, é, è, í, ï, ó, ò, ú, ü, n·h, s·h . The acute and the grave indicate stress and vowel height , the cedilla marks the result of a historical palatalization , the diaeresis indicates either a hiatus , or that the letter u is pronounced when the graphemes gü, qü are followed by e or i , and the interpunct (·) distinguishes the different values of nh/n·h and sh/s·h (i.e., that the letters are supposed to be pronounced separately, not combined into "ny" and "sh").

Portuguese has the following composite characters: à, á, â, ã, ç, é, ê, í, ó, ô, õ, ú . The acute and the circumflex indicate stress and vowel height, the grave indicates crasis, the tilde represents nasalization, and the cedilla marks the result of a historical lenition.

Acutes are also used in Slavic language dictionaries and textbooks to indicate lexical stress , placed over the vowel of the stressed syllable. This can also serve to disambiguate meaning (e.g., in Russian писа́ть ( pisáť ) means "to write", but пи́сать ( písať ) means "to piss"), or "бо́льшая часть" (the biggest part) vs "больша́я часть" (the big part).

Spanish uses the acute and the diaeresis. The acute is used on a vowel in a stressed syllable in words with irregular stress patterns. It can also be used to "break up" a diphthong as in tío (pronounced [ˈti.o] , rather than [ˈtjo] as it would be without the accent). Moreover, the acute can be used to distinguish words that otherwise are spelled alike, such as si ("if") and sí ("yes"), and also to distinguish interrogative and exclamatory pronouns from homophones with a different grammatical function, such as donde/¿dónde?

("where"/"where?") or como/¿cómo?

("as"/"how?"). The acute may also be used to avoid typographical ambiguity, as in 1 ó 2 ("1 or 2"; without the acute this might be interpreted as "1 0 2". The diaeresis is used only over u ( ü ) for it to be pronounced [w] in the combinations gue and gui, where u is normally silent, for example ambigüedad.

In poetry, the diaeresis may be used on i and u as a way to force a hiatus. As foreshadowed above, in nasal ñ the tilde (squiggle) is not considered a diacritic sign at all, but a composite part of a distinct glyph, with its own chapter in the dictionary: a glyph that denotes the 15th letter of the Spanish alphabet.

Swedish uses the acute to show non-standard stress, for example in kafé (café) and resumé (résumé). This occasionally helps resolve ambiguities, such as ide (hibernation) versus idé (idea). In these words, the acute is not optional. Some proper names use non-standard diacritics, such as Carolina Klüft and Staël von Holstein . For foreign loanwords the original accents are strongly recommended, unless the word has been infused into the language, in which case they are optional. Hence crème fraîche but ampere . Swedish also has the letters å , ä , and ö , but these are considered distinct letters, not a and o with diacritics.

Tamil does not have any diacritics in itself, but uses the Arabic numerals 2, 3 and 4 as diacritics to represent aspirated, voiced, and voiced-aspirated consonants when Tamil script is used to write long passages in Sanskrit .

Thai has its own system of diacritics derived from Indian numerals , which denote different tones .

Vietnamese uses the acute ( dấu sắc ), the grave ( dấu huyền ), the tilde ( dấu ngã ), the underdot ( dấu nặng ) and the hook above ( dấu hỏi ) on vowels as tone indicators.

Welsh uses the circumflex, diaeresis, acute, and grave on its seven vowels a, e, i, o, u, w, y . The most common is the circumflex (which it calls to bach , meaning "little roof", or acen grom "crooked accent", or hirnod "long sign") to denote a long vowel, usually to disambiguate it from a similar word with a short vowel or a semivowel. The rarer grave accent has the opposite effect, shortening vowel sounds that would usually be pronounced long. The acute accent and diaeresis are also occasionally used, to denote stress and vowel separation respectively. The w -circumflex ŵ and the y -circumflex ŷ are among the most commonly accented characters in Welsh, but unusual in languages generally, and were until recently very hard to obtain in word-processed and HTML documents.

Transliteration [ edit ] Several languages that are not written with the Roman alphabet are transliterated , or romanized, using diacritics. Examples: Arabic has several romanisations , depending on the type of the application, region, intended audience, country, etc. many of them extensively use diacritics, e.g., some methods use an underdot for rendering emphatic consonants (ṣ, ṭ, ḍ, ẓ, ḥ). The macron is often used to render long vowels. š is often used for /ʃ/ , ġ for /ɣ/ .

Chinese has several romanizations that use the umlaut, but only on u ( ü ). In Hanyu Pinyin , the four tones of Mandarin Chinese are denoted by the macron (first tone), acute (second tone), caron (third tone) and grave (fourth tone) diacritics. Example: ā, á, ǎ, à .

Romanized Japanese ( Rōmaji ) occasionally uses macrons to mark long vowels. The Hepburn romanization system uses macrons to mark long vowels , and the Kunrei-shiki and Nihon-shiki systems use a circumflex .

Sanskrit , as well as many of its descendants, like Hindi and Bengali , uses a lossless romanization system, IAST . This includes several letters with diacritical markings, such as the macron (ā, ī, ū), over- and underdots (ṛ, ḥ, ṃ, ṇ, ṣ, ṭ, ḍ) as well as a few others (ś, ñ).

Limits [ edit ] Orthographic [ edit ] Possibly the greatest number of combining diacritics required to compose a valid character in any Unicode language is 8, for the "well-known grapheme cluster in Tibetan and Ranjana scripts" or HAKṢHMALAWARAYAṀ .

[ 14 ] It consists of U+0F67 ཧ TIBETAN LETTER HA U+0F90 ྐ TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER KA U+0FB5 ྵ TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER SSA U+0FA8 ྨ TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER MA U+0FB3 ླ TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER LA U+0FBA ྺ TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER FIXED-FORM WA U+0FBC ྼ TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER FIXED-FORM RA U+0FBB ྻ TIBETAN SUBJOINED LETTER FIXED-FORM YA U+0F82 ྂ TIBETAN SIGN NYI ZLA NAA DA An example of the rendering, which may be broken depending on the browser used: ཧྐྵྨླྺྼྻྂ Unorthographic/ornamental [ edit ] Some users have explored the limits of rendering in web browsers and other software by "decorating" words with excessive nonsensical diacritics per character to produce so-called Zalgo text .

List of diacritics in Unicode [ edit ] Diacritics for Latin script in Unicode: Diacritics in Unicode for Latin script Character Character name Unicode code point Mark General category Script ◌̀ COMBINING GRAVE ACCENT U+0300 Grave Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌́ COMBINING ACUTE ACCENT U+0301 Acute Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̂ COMBINING CIRCUMFLEX ACCENT U+0302 Circumflex Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̃ COMBINING TILDE U+0303 Tilde Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̄ COMBINING MACRON U+0304 Macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̅ COMBINING OVERLINE U+0305 Overline Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̆ COMBINING BREVE U+0306 Breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̇ COMBINING DOT ABOVE U+0307 Dot Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̈ COMBINING DIAERESIS U+0308 Diaeresis Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̉ COMBINING HOOK ABOVE U+0309 Hook Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̊ COMBINING RING ABOVE U+030A Ring Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̋ COMBINING DOUBLE ACUTE ACCENT U+030B Double acute Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̌ COMBINING CARON U+030C Caron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̍ COMBINING VERTICAL LINE ABOVE U+030D Vertical line Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̎ COMBINING DOUBLE VERTICAL LINE ABOVE U+030E Double vertical line Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̏ COMBINING DOUBLE GRAVE ACCENT U+030F Double grave Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̐ COMBINING CANDRABINDU U+0310 Candrabindu Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̑ COMBINING INVERTED BREVE U+0311 Inverted breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̒ COMBINING TURNED COMMA ABOVE U+0312 Turned comma Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̓ COMBINING COMMA ABOVE U+0313 Comma Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̔ COMBINING REVERSED COMMA ABOVE U+0314 Reversed comma Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̕ COMBINING COMMA ABOVE RIGHT U+0315 Comma right Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̖ COMBINING GRAVE ACCENT BELOW U+0316 Grave Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̗ COMBINING ACUTE ACCENT BELOW U+0317 Acute Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̘ COMBINING LEFT TACK BELOW U+0318 Left tack Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̙ COMBINING RIGHT TACK BELOW U+0319 Right tack Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̚ COMBINING LEFT ANGLE ABOVE U+031A Left angle Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̛ COMBINING HORN U+031B Horn Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̜ COMBINING LEFT HALF RING BELOW U+031C Left half ring Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̝ COMBINING UP TACK BELOW U+031D Up tack Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̞ COMBINING DOWN TACK BELOW U+031E Down tack Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̟ COMBINING PLUS SIGN BELOW U+031F Plus sign Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̠ COMBINING MINUS SIGN BELOW U+0320 Minus sign Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̡ COMBINING PALATALIZED HOOK BELOW U+0321 Palatalized hook Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̢ COMBINING RETROFLEX HOOK BELOW U+0322 Retroflex hook Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̣ COMBINING DOT BELOW U+0323 Dot Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̤ COMBINING DIAERESIS BELOW U+0324 Diaeresis Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̥ COMBINING RING BELOW U+0325 Ring Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̦ COMBINING COMMA BELOW U+0326 Comma Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̧ COMBINING CEDILLA U+0327 Cedilla Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̨ COMBINING OGONEK U+0328 Ogonek Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̩ COMBINING VERTICAL LINE BELOW U+0329 Vertical line Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̪ COMBINING BRIDGE BELOW U+032A Bridge Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̫ COMBINING INVERTED DOUBLE ARCH BELOW U+032B Double arch Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̬ COMBINING CARON BELOW U+032C Caron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̭ COMBINING CIRCUMFLEX ACCENT BELOW U+032D Circumflex Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̮ COMBINING BREVE BELOW U+032E Breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̯ COMBINING INVERTED BREVE BELOW U+032F Inverted breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̰ COMBINING TILDE BELOW U+0330 Tilde Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̱ COMBINING MACRON BELOW U+0331 Macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̲ COMBINING LOW LINE U+0332 Low line Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̳ COMBINING DOUBLE LOW LINE U+0333 Double low line Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̴ COMBINING TILDE OVERLAY U+0334 Tilde overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̵ COMBINING SHORT STROKE OVERLAY U+0335 Short stroke overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̶ COMBINING LONG STROKE OVERLAY U+0336 Long stroke overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̷ COMBINING SHORT SOLIDUS OVERLAY U+0337 Short solidus overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̸ COMBINING LONG SOLIDUS OVERLAY U+0338 Long solidus overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̹ COMBINING RIGHT HALF RING BELOW U+0339 Right half ring Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̺ COMBINING INVERTED BRIDGE BELOW U+033A Inverted bridge Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̻ COMBINING SQUARE BELOW U+033B Square Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̼ COMBINING SEAGULL BELOW U+033C Seagull Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̽ COMBINING X ABOVE U+033D X Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̾ COMBINING VERTICAL TILDE U+033E Vertical tilde Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̿ COMBINING DOUBLE OVERLINE U+033F Double overline Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌̀ COMBINING GRAVE TONE MARK U+0340 Grave tone Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌́ COMBINING ACUTE TONE MARK U+0341 Acute tone Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͆ COMBINING BRIDGE ABOVE U+0346 Bridge Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͇ COMBINING EQUALS SIGN BELOW U+0347 Equals sign Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͈ COMBINING DOUBLE VERTICAL LINE BELOW U+0348 Double vertical line Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͉ COMBINING LEFT ANGLE BELOW U+0349 Left angle Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͊ COMBINING NOT TILDE ABOVE U+034A Not tilde Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͋ COMBINING HOMOTHETIC ABOVE U+034B Homothetic Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͌ COMBINING ALMOST EQUAL TO ABOVE U+034C Almost equal to Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͍ COMBINING LEFT RIGHT ARROW BELOW U+034D Left right arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͎ COMBINING UPWARDS ARROW BELOW U+034E Upwards arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͐ COMBINING RIGHT ARROWHEAD ABOVE U+0350 Right arrowhead Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͑ COMBINING LEFT HALF RING ABOVE U+0351 Left half ring Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͒ COMBINING FERMATA U+0352 Fermata Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͓ COMBINING X BELOW U+0353 X Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͔ COMBINING LEFT ARROWHEAD BELOW U+0354 Left arrowhead Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͕ COMBINING RIGHT ARROWHEAD BELOW U+0355 Right arrowhead Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͖ COMBINING RIGHT ARROWHEAD AND UP ARROWHEAD BELOW U+0356 Right arrowhead and up arrowhead Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͗ COMBINING RIGHT HALF RING ABOVE U+0357 Right half ring Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͘ COMBINING DOT ABOVE RIGHT U+0358 Dot right Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͙ COMBINING ASTERISK BELOW U+0359 Asterisk Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͚ COMBINING DOUBLE RING BELOW U+035A Double ring Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͛ COMBINING ZIGZAG ABOVE U+035B Zigzag Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͜◌ COMBINING DOUBLE BREVE BELOW U+035C Double breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͝◌ COMBINING DOUBLE BREVE U+035D Double breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͞◌ COMBINING DOUBLE MACRON U+035E Double macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͟◌ COMBINING DOUBLE MACRON BELOW U+035F Double macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͠◌ COMBINING DOUBLE TILDE U+0360 Double tilde Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͡◌ COMBINING DOUBLE INVERTED BREVE U+0361 Double inverted breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌͢◌ COMBINING DOUBLE RIGHTWARDS ARROW BELOW U+0362 Double rightwards arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͣ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER A U+0363 Latin small letter a Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͤ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER E U+0364 Latin small letter e Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͥ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER I U+0365 Latin small letter i Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͦ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER O U+0366 Latin small letter o Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͧ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER U U+0367 Latin small letter u Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͨ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER C U+0368 Latin small letter c Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͩ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER D U+0369 Latin small letter d Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͪ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER H U+036A Latin small letter h Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͫ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER M U+036B Latin small letter m Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͬ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER R U+036C Latin small letter r Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͭ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER T U+036D Latin small letter t Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͮ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER V U+036E Latin small letter v Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ͯ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER X U+036F Latin small letter x Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪰ COMBINING DOUBLED CIRCUMFLEX ACCENT U+1AB0 Doubled circumflex Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪱ COMBINING DIAERESIS-RING U+1AB1 Diaeresis-ring Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪲ COMBINING INFINITY U+1AB2 Infinity Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪳ COMBINING DOWNWARDS ARROW U+1AB3 Downwards arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪴ COMBINING TRIPLE DOT U+1AB4 Triple dot Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪵ COMBINING X-X BELOW U+1AB5 X-x Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪶ COMBINING WIGGLY LINE BELOW U+1AB6 Wiggly line Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪷ COMBINING OPEN MARK BELOW U+1AB7 Open mark Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪸ COMBINING DOUBLE OPEN MARK BELOW U+1AB8 Double open mark Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪹ COMBINING LIGHT CENTRALIZATION STROKE BELOW U+1AB9 Light centralization stroke Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪺ COMBINING STRONG CENTRALIZATION STROKE BELOW U+1ABA Strong centralization stroke Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪻ COMBINING PARENTHESES ABOVE U+1ABB Parentheses Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪼ COMBINING DOUBLE PARENTHESES ABOVE U+1ABC Double parentheses Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᪽ COMBINING PARENTHESES BELOW U+1ABD Parentheses Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᪿ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER W BELOW U+1ABF Latin small letter w Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᫀ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER TURNED W BELOW U+1AC0 Latin small letter turned w Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷀ COMBINING DOTTED GRAVE ACCENT U+1DC0 Dotted grave Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷁ COMBINING DOTTED ACUTE ACCENT U+1DC1 Dotted acute Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷂ COMBINING SNAKE BELOW U+1DC2 Snake Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷃ COMBINING SUSPENSION MARK U+1DC3 Suspension mark Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷄ COMBINING MACRON-ACUTE U+1DC4 Macron-acute Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷅ COMBINING GRAVE-MACRON U+1DC5 Grave-macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷆ COMBINING MACRON-GRAVE U+1DC6 Macron-grave Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷇ COMBINING ACUTE-MACRON U+1DC7 Acute-macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷈ COMBINING GRAVE-ACUTE-GRAVE U+1DC8 Grave-acute-grave Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷉ COMBINING ACUTE-GRAVE-ACUTE U+1DC9 Acute-grave-acute Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷊ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER R BELOW U+1DCA Latin small letter r Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷋ COMBINING BREVE-MACRON U+1DCB Breve-macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷌ COMBINING MACRON-BREVE U+1DCC Macron-breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷍◌ COMBINING DOUBLE CIRCUMFLEX ABOVE U+1DCD Double circumflex Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷎ COMBINING OGONEK ABOVE U+1DCE Ogonek Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷏ COMBINING ZIGZAG BELOW U+1DCF Zigzag Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷐ COMBINING IS BELOW U+1DD0 Is Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷑ COMBINING UR ABOVE U+1DD1 Ur Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷒ COMBINING US ABOVE U+1DD2 Us Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷓ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER FLATTENED OPEN A ABOVE U+1DD3 Latin small letter flattened open a Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷔ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER AE U+1DD4 Latin small letter ae Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷕ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER AO U+1DD5 Latin small letter ao Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷖ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER AV U+1DD6 Latin small letter av Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷗ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER C CEDILLA U+1DD7 Latin small letter c cedilla Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷘ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER INSULAR D U+1DD8 Latin small letter insular d Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷙ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER ETH U+1DD9 Latin small letter eth Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷚ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER G U+1DDA Latin small letter g Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷛ COMBINING LATIN LETTER SMALL CAPITAL G U+1DDB Latin letter small capital g Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷜ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER K U+1DDC Latin small letter k Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷝ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER L U+1DDD Latin small letter l Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷞ COMBINING LATIN LETTER SMALL CAPITAL L U+1DDE Latin letter small capital l Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷟ COMBINING LATIN LETTER SMALL CAPITAL M U+1DDF Latin letter small capital m Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷠ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER N U+1DE0 Latin small letter n Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷡ COMBINING LATIN LETTER SMALL CAPITAL N U+1DE1 Latin letter small capital n Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷢ COMBINING LATIN LETTER SMALL CAPITAL R U+1DE2 Latin letter small capital r Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷣ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER R ROTUNDA U+1DE3 Latin small letter r rotunda Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷤ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER S U+1DE4 Latin small letter s Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷥ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER LONG S U+1DE5 Latin small letter long s Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷦ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER Z U+1DE6 Latin small letter z Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷧ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER ALPHA U+1DE7 Latin small letter alpha Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷨ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER B U+1DE8 Latin small letter b Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷩ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER BETA U+1DE9 Latin small letter beta Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷪ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER SCHWA U+1DEA Latin small letter schwa Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷫ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER F U+1DEB Latin small letter f Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷬ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER L WITH DOUBLE MIDDLE TILDE U+1DEC Latin small letter l with double middle tilde Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷭ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH LIGHT CENTRALIZATION STROKE U+1DED Latin small letter o with light centralization stroke Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷮ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER P U+1DEE Latin small letter p Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷯ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER ESH U+1DEF Latin small letter esh Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷰ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH LIGHT CENTRALIZATION STROKE U+1DF0 Latin small letter u with light centralization stroke Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷱ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER W U+1DF1 Latin small letter w Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷲ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH DIAERESIS U+1DF2 Latin small letter a with diaeresis Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷳ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER O WITH DIAERESIS U+1DF3 Latin small letter o with diaeresis Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌ᷴ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER U WITH DIAERESIS U+1DF4 Latin small letter u with diaeresis Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷵ COMBINING UP TACK ABOVE U+1DF5 Up tack Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷸ COMBINING DOT ABOVE LEFT U+1DF8 Dot left Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷹ COMBINING WIDE INVERTED BRIDGE BELOW U+1DF9 Wide inverted bridge Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷻ COMBINING DELETION MARK U+1DFB Deletion mark Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷼◌ COMBINING DOUBLE INVERTED BREVE BELOW U+1DFC Double inverted breve Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷽ COMBINING ALMOST EQUAL TO BELOW U+1DFD Almost equal to Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷾ COMBINING LEFT ARROWHEAD ABOVE U+1DFE Left arrowhead Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌᷿ COMBINING RIGHT ARROWHEAD AND DOWN ARROWHEAD BELOW U+1DFF Right arrowhead and down arrowhead Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃐◌ COMBINING LEFT HARPOON ABOVE U+20D0 Left harpoon Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃑◌ COMBINING RIGHT HARPOON ABOVE U+20D1 Right harpoon Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃒ COMBINING LONG VERTICAL LINE OVERLAY U+20D2 Long vertical line overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃓ COMBINING SHORT VERTICAL LINE OVERLAY U+20D3 Short vertical line overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃔◌ COMBINING ANTICLOCKWISE ARROW ABOVE U+20D4 Anticlockwise arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃕◌ COMBINING CLOCKWISE ARROW ABOVE U+20D5 Clockwise arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃖◌ COMBINING LEFT ARROW ABOVE U+20D6 Left arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃗◌ COMBINING RIGHT ARROW ABOVE U+20D7 Right arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃘ COMBINING RING OVERLAY U+20D8 Ring overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃙ COMBINING CLOCKWISE RING OVERLAY U+20D9 Clockwise ring overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃚ COMBINING ANTICLOCKWISE RING OVERLAY U+20DA Anticlockwise ring overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃛◌ COMBINING THREE DOTS ABOVE U+20DB Three dots Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃜◌ COMBINING FOUR DOTS ABOVE U+20DC Four dots Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃡◌ COMBINING LEFT RIGHT ARROW ABOVE U+20E1 Left right arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃥ COMBINING REVERSE SOLIDUS OVERLAY U+20E5 Reverse solidus overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃦ COMBINING DOUBLE VERTICAL STROKE OVERLAY U+20E6 Double vertical stroke overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃧ COMBINING ANNUITY SYMBOL U+20E7 Annuity symbol Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃨ COMBINING TRIPLE UNDERDOT U+20E8 Triple underdot Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃩◌ COMBINING WIDE BRIDGE ABOVE U+20E9 Wide bridge Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃪ COMBINING LEFTWARDS ARROW OVERLAY U+20EA Leftwards arrow overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃫ COMBINING LONG DOUBLE SOLIDUS OVERLAY U+20EB Long double solidus overlay Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃬ COMBINING RIGHTWARDS HARPOON WITH BARB DOWNWARDS U+20EC Rightwards harpoon with barb downwards Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃭ COMBINING LEFTWARDS HARPOON WITH BARB DOWNWARDS U+20ED Leftwards harpoon with barb downwards Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃮ COMBINING LEFT ARROW BELOW U+20EE Left arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃯ COMBINING RIGHT ARROW BELOW U+20EF Right arrow Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌⃰◌ COMBINING ASTERISK ABOVE U+20F0 Asterisk Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︠ COMBINING LIGATURE LEFT HALF U+FE20 Ligature left half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︡ COMBINING LIGATURE RIGHT HALF U+FE21 Ligature right half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︢ COMBINING DOUBLE TILDE LEFT HALF U+FE22 Double tilde left half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︣ COMBINING DOUBLE TILDE RIGHT HALF U+FE23 Double tilde right half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︤ COMBINING MACRON LEFT HALF U+FE24 Macron left half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︥ COMBINING MACRON RIGHT HALF U+FE25 Macron right half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︦◌ COMBINING CONJOINING MACRON U+FE26 Conjoining macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︧ COMBINING LIGATURE LEFT HALF BELOW U+FE27 Ligature left half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︨ COMBINING LIGATURE RIGHT HALF BELOW U+FE28 Ligature right half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︩ COMBINING TILDE LEFT HALF BELOW U+FE29 Tilde left half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︪ COMBINING TILDE RIGHT HALF BELOW U+FE2A Tilde right half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︫ COMBINING MACRON LEFT HALF BELOW U+FE2B Macron left half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︬ COMBINING MACRON RIGHT HALF BELOW U+FE2C Macron right half Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited ◌︭ COMBINING CONJOINING MACRON BELOW U+FE2D Conjoining macron Mn : Mark, nonspacing Inherited See also [ edit ] Latin-script alphabets Alt code Category:Letters with diacritics Collating sequence Combining character Compose key English terms with diacritical marks Heavy metal umlaut ISO/IEC 8859 8-bit extended-Latin-alphabet European character encodings Latin alphabet List of Latin letters List of precomposed Latin characters in Unicode List of U.S. cities with diacritics Romanization Notes [ edit ] ^ The New Yorker is reported as being unique in its continuing usage of them.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ Baum, Dan (16 December 2010).

"The New Yorker's odd mark — the diaeresis" .

dscriber . Archived from the original on 16 December 2010.

Among the many mysteries of The New Yorker is that funny little umlaut over words like coöperate and reëlect. The New Yorker seems to be the only publication on the planet that uses it, and I always found it a little pretentious until I did some research. Turns out, it's not an umlaut. It's a diaeresis.

^ Sweet, Henry (1877).

A Handbook of Phonetics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

174– 175.

Even letters with accents and diacritics [...] being only cast for a few founts, act practically as new letters. [...] We may consider the h in sh and th simply as a diacritic written for convenience on a line with the letter it modifies.

^ Oxford English Dictionary ^ Nestle, Eberhard (1888).

Syrische Grammatik mit Litteratur, Chrestomathie und Glossar . Berlin: H. Reuther's Verlagsbuchhandlung. [translated to English as Syriac grammar with bibliography, chrestomathy and glossary , by R. S. Kennedy. London: Williams & Norgate 1889].

^ Coakley, J. F. (2002).

Robinson's Paradigms and Exercises in Syriac Grammar (5th ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-926129-1 .

^ Michaelis, Ioannis Davidis (1784).

Grammatica Syriaca .

^ Gramática de la Llingua Asturiana (PDF) (3rd ed.). Academia de la Llingua Asturiana. 2001. section 1.2.

ISBN 84-8168-310-8 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-05-25 . Retrieved 2011-06-07 .

^ http://www.juls.savba.sk/ediela/psp2000/psp.pdf page 12, section I.2 ^ Grønlands sprognævn (1992) ^ Petersen (1990) ^ S.P. Brock, "An Introduction to Syriac Studies", in J.H. Eaton (Ed.,), Horizons in Semitic Studies (1980) ^ Norris, Mary (26 April 2012).

"The Curse of the Diaeresis" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 18 April 2014 .

^ van Geloven, Sander (2012).

Diakritische tekens in het Nederlands (in Dutch). Utrecht: Hellebaard. Archived from the original on 2013-10-29.

^ Steele, Shawn (2010-01-25).

"Most combining characters in a Unicode glyph/character/whatever" . Microsoft.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-16 . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

External links [ edit ] Context of Diacritics | A research project Archived 2014-10-12 at the Wayback Machine Diacritics Project Unicode Orthographic diacritics and multilingual computing, by J. C. Wells Notes on the use of the diacritics, by Markus Lång Entering International Characters (in Linux, KDE) Standard Character Set for Macintosh PDF at Adobe v t e Diacritics In Latin, Cyrillic and Greek ◌́ ◌̋ acute and Roman apex , double acute ◌̆ ◌̑ breve , inverted breve ◌̌ caron, háček ◌̧ cedilla ◌̂ circumflex ◌̈ diaeresis , umlaut , other ◌̇ ◌̣ dot ◌̀ ◌̏ grave , double grave ◌̉ hook above ◌̡ ◌̢ palatal hook , retroflex hook ◌̛ horn ◌ͅ iota subscript ◌̄ macron ◌̨ ogonek , nosinė ◌̊ ◌̥ overring , underring ◌͂ perispomene ◌͗ sicilicus ◌̃ tilde ◌᷃ Vietnamese tilde ◌῾ ◌᾿ rough breathing , smooth breathing In Early Cyrillic ◌҄ palatalization mark ◌҇ pokrytie ◌҃ titlo In Indic ं ং ଂ ം anusvara ऽ ঽ ଽ ఽ ഽ ྅ avagraha ँ ఁ ྃ chandrabindu ़ nuqta ् ് ్ ್ ් ် virama ः ঃ ଃ ஃ visarga In other scripts Arabic diacritics Greek diacritics Gurmukhī diacritics Hebrew diacritics diacritics in IPA Japanese kana diacritics ◌゙ ◌゚ dakuten, handakuten Khmer diacritics Syriac diacritics Thai diacritics Marks used as diacritics ’ apostrophe / bar : colon , comma .

full stop/period ˗ hyphen ′ prime Non-diacritic uses ^ caret (computing) ° degree symbol ~ tilde § Mathematics In Unicode ◌ dotted circle (placeholder glyph character) combining character § Unicode ranges See also: English terms with diacritical marks Metal umlaut Punctuation marks Category: Diacritics v t e Typography Page Canons of page construction Column Even working Margin Page numbering Paper size Pagination Pull quote Recto and verso Intentionally blank page Paragraph Alignment Leading Line length River Runaround Widows and orphans runt Character Typeface anatomy Counter Diacritics Dingbat Glyph Ink trap Ligature Rotation Subscript and superscript Swash Text figures Tittle Capitalization All caps Camel case Initial Letter case Small caps Snake case Title case Visual distinction Blackboard bold Bold Color printing Italics Oblique Underline Whitespace Horizontal aspects Figure space Kerning Letter spacing Pitch Sentence spacing Thin space Word spacing Vertical aspects Ascender Baseline Body height Cap height Descender Mean line Overshoot x-height Typeface classifications Roman type Serif Antiqua Didone slab serif Sans-serif Blackletter type Fraktur Rotunda Schwabacher Gaelic type Insular Uncial Specialist Record type Display typeface script fat face reverse-contrast Punctuation ( List ) Bullet Dash Hanging punctuation Hyphen minus sign Interpunct Space Vertical bar Typesetting Etaoin shrdlu Font computer monospaced Font catalog For position only Letterpress Lorem ipsum Microprinting Microtypography Movable type Pangram Phototypesetting Punchcutting Reversing type Sort Type color Type design Typeface list Typographic units Agate Cicero Em En Metric units Pica Point traditional point-size names Twip Digital typography Character encoding Hinting Text shaping Rasterization Typographic features Web typography Bézier curves Desktop publishing Typography in other writing systems Arabic Cyrillic PT Fonts East Asian Thai National Fonts Related articles Penmanship Handwriting Handwriting script Calligraphy Style guide Type design Type foundry History of Western typography Intellectual property protection of typefaces Technical lettering Vox-ATypI classification Related template Punctuation and other typographic symbols Category v t e Latin script History Spread Romanization Roman numerals Ligatures Alphabets ( list ) Classical Latin alphabet ISO basic Latin alphabet Phonetic alphabets International Phonetic Alphabet X-SAMPA Spelling alphabet Letters ( list ) Letters of the ISO basic Latin alphabet Aa Bb Cc Dd Ee Ff Gg Hh Ii Jj Kk Ll Mm Nn Oo Pp Qq Rr Ss Tt Uu Vv Ww Xx Yy Zz Additional Latin letters Æ æ Ɑ ɑ Ʌ ʌ Ꞵ ꞵ Ð ð Ɛ ɛ Ə ə Ǝ ə Ɣ ɣ Ƣ ƣ Ɩ ɩ Ɥ ɥ Ꟛ ꟛ Ŋ ŋ Œ œ Ɔ ɔ Ɤ ɤ Kʼ ĸ Ʀ ʀ ẞ ß Ʃ ʃ Ɯ ɯ Ʊ ʊ Ꞷ ꞷ Ʋ ʋ Ƿ ƿ Ȝ ȝ ϴ θ Ʒ ʒ Ƹ ƹ Þ þ Ȣ ȣ Ꭓ ꭓ Ɂ ʔ ɂ ʕ ǀ ǁ ǂ ǃ ʘ ʻ ˀ ʼ Ꞌ ꞌ ᴬ ᴮ ꟲ ᴰ ᴱ ꟳ ᴳ ᴴ ᴵ ᴶ ᴷ ᴸ ᴹ ᵃ ᵉ ᵋ ʰ ⁱ ᶤ ⁿ ᵒ ᵓ ᵘ ᶶ ᵛ ʷ ʸ ᶻ ᶿ Ꜣ ꜣ Ꜥ ꜥ 3 Ꜫ ꜫ Ꜭ ꜭ 7 ⁷ Multigraphs Digraphs Ch Dz Dž Gh IJ Lj Ll Ly Nh Nj Ny Sh Sz Th Trigraphs dzs eau Tetragraphs ough Pentagraphs tzsch Keyboard layouts ( list ) QWERTY QWERTZ AZERTY Dvorak Colemak BÉPO Neo Historical standards ISO/IEC 646 Western Latin character sets Current standards Unicode DIN 91379: Unicode subset for Europe Lists Precomposed Latin characters in Unicode Letters used in mathematics, science, and engineering List of typographical symbols and punctuation marks Diacritics Palaeography NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8t9b5
Cached time: 20250817211942
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.295 seconds
Real time usage: 2.535 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 51709/1000000
Revision size: 107481/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 744616/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 82999/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 218824/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.049/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16388095/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2034.330      1 -total
 46.21%  940.101    224 Template:Diacritics_in_Unicode/row
 24.85%  505.549    224 Template:Ubli
  9.34%  190.073      4 Template:Navbox
  8.77%  178.438      1 Template:Navbox_diacritical_marks
  8.00%  162.683    242 Template:Hex2dec
  7.35%  149.502    458 Template:Mono
  7.03%  143.041      2 Template:Reflist
  6.99%  142.260    226 Template:Anchor
  6.92%  140.862    104 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8439:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817211942 and revision id 1305209299. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diacritic&oldid=1305209299 " Categories : Diacritics Orthography Punctuation Typography Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with plain IPA Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Hindi-language text Articles containing Manx-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2024 Pages with German IPA Articles containing Standard Tibetan-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Bengali-language text Articles containing Odia-language text Articles containing Malayalam-language text Articles containing Telugu-language text Articles containing Tigrinya-language text Articles containing Kannada-language text Articles containing Sinhala-language text Articles containing Burmese-language text Articles containing Tamil-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 18:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diacritic 73 languages Add topic

