Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Effect of water on volcanoes 2 Research 3 Seamounts 4 Identifying types of eruptions by sounds 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Submarine volcano 42 languages العربية Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Underwater vents or fissures in the Earth's surface from which magma can erupt Not to be confused with Subaqueous volcano , a more general category of volcano, formed in either a submarine, subglacial or lacustrine environment.

For mountains rising from the ocean seafloor, see Seamount . For related geological features, see Mid-ocean ridge and Hotspot (geology) .

Scheme of a submarine eruption.

Water vapor cloud Water Stratum Lava flow Magma conduit Magma chamber Dike Pillow lava Pillow lava formed by a submarine volcano NOAA exploration video showing remnants of underwater tar volcanoes.

Circular plumes from a submarine eruption near Tonga Submarine volcanoes are underwater vents or fissures in the Earth 's surface from which magma can erupt. Many submarine volcanoes are located near areas of tectonic plate formation , known as mid-ocean ridges . The volcanoes at mid-ocean ridges alone are estimated to account for 75% of the magma output on Earth.

[ 1 ] Although most submarine volcanoes are located in the depths of seas and oceans , some also exist in shallow water, and these can discharge material into the atmosphere during an eruption . The total number of submarine volcanoes is estimated to be over one million (most are now extinct) of which some 75,000 rise more than 1 kilometre (0.62 miles) above the seabed .

[ 1 ] Only 119 submarine volcanoes in Earth's oceans and seas are known to have erupted during the last 11,700 years.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Hydrothermal vents , sites of abundant biological activity, are commonly found near submarine volcanoes.

Effect of water on volcanoes [ edit ] The presence of water can greatly alter the characteristics of a volcanic eruption and the explosions of underwater volcanoes in comparison to those on land.

For instance, water causes magma to cool and solidify much more quickly than in a terrestrial eruption, often turning it into volcanic glass . The shapes and textures of lava formed by submarine volcanoes are different from lava erupted on land. Upon contact with water, a solid crust forms around the lava. Advancing lava flows into this crust, forming what is known as pillow lava .

Below ocean depths of about 2,200 metres (7,200 ft) where the pressure exceeds the critical pressure of water (22.06 MPa or about 218 atmospheres for pure water), it can no longer boil; it becomes a supercritical fluid . Without boiling sounds, deep-sea volcanoes can be difficult to detect at great distances using hydrophones .

[ citation needed ] The critical temperature and pressure increase in solutions of salts, which are normally present in the seawater. The composition of aqueous solution in the vicinity of hot basalt, and circulating within the conduits of hot rocks, is expected to differ from that of bulk water (i.e., of sea water away from the hot surfaces). One estimation is that the critical point is 407 °C (765 °F) and 29.9 MPa, while the solution composition corresponds to that of approximately 3.2% of NaCl.

[ 4 ] Research [ edit ] Scientists still have much to learn about the location and activity of underwater volcanoes. In the first two decades of this century, NOAA's Office of Ocean Exploration has funded exploration of submarine volcanoes, with the Ring of Fire missions to the Mariana Arc in the Pacific Ocean being particularly noteworthy. Using Remote Operated Vehicles (ROV), scientists studied underwater eruptions, ponds of molten sulfur , black smoker chimneys and even marine life adapted to this deep, hot environment.

Research from the ROV KAIKO off the coast of Hawaii has suggested that pahoehoe lava flows occur underwater, and the degree of the submarine terrain slope and rate of lava supply determine the shape of the resulting lobes.

[ 5 ] In August 2019, news media reported a large pumice raft floating in the South Pacific between Fiji and Tonga.

[ 6 ] Subsequent scientific investigations revealed the pumice raft originated from the eruption of a nearby submarine volcano, which was directly observed as a volcanic plume in satellite images.

[ 7 ] This discovery will help scientists better predict for the precursors of a submarine eruption, such as low-frequency earthquakes or hydrophone data, using machine learning .

[ 7 ] Seamounts [ edit ] Many submarine volcanoes are seamounts , typically extinct volcanoes that rise abruptly from a seafloor of 1,000 metres (3,300 ft) - 4,000 metres (13,000 ft) depth. They are defined by oceanographers as independent features that rise to at least  1,000 metres (3,300 ft) above the seafloor. The peaks are often found hundreds to thousands of meters below the surface, and are therefore considered to be within the deep sea .

[ 8 ] An estimated 30,000 seamounts occur across the globe, with only a few having been studied.

[ citation needed ] However, some seamounts are also unusual. For example, while the summits of seamounts are normally hundreds of meters below sea level, the Bowie Seamount in Canada's Pacific waters rises from a depth of about 3,000 metres (9,800 ft) to within 24 metres (79 ft) of the sea surface.

[ citation needed ] Identifying types of eruptions by sounds [ edit ] Deepest ever filmed submarine volcano, West Mata , May 2009.

[ 9 ] There are two types of sound generated by submarine eruptions: One created by the slow release and bursting of large lava bubbles, while quick explosions of gas bubbles create the other one. Using this method to be able to distinguish the two can help measure the related affects on marine animals and ecosystems, the volume and composition of the lava flow can also be estimated and built into a model to extrapolate potential effects.

Scientists have connected sounds to sights in both types of eruptions. In 2009, a video camera and a hydrophone were floating 1,200 metres (3,900 ft) below sea level in the Pacific Ocean near Samoa, watching and listening as the West Mata Volcano erupted in several ways. Putting video and audio together let researchers learn the sounds made by slow lava bursting and the different noises made by hundreds of gas bubbles.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] List of submarine volcanoes References [ edit ] ^ a b Martin R. Speight, Peter A. Henderson, "Marine Ecology: Concepts and Applications", John Wiley & Sons, 2013.

ISBN 978-1-4051-2699-1 .

^ Venzke, E., ed. (2013).

"Holocene Volcano List" .

Global Volcanism Program Volcanoes of the World (version 4.9.1) .

Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Venzke, E., ed. (2013).

"How many active volcanoes are there?" .

Global Volcanism Program Volcanoes of the World (version 4.9.1) .

Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Michael E. Q. Pilson, "An Introduction to the Chemistry of the Sea", 2nd edition. Cambridge University Press, 2013.

^ Umino, Susumu; Lipman, Peter W.; Obata, Sumie (2000-06-01).

"Subaqueous lava flow lobes, observed on ROV KAIKO dives off Hawaii" .

Geology .

28 (6): 503– 506.

Bibcode : 2000Geo....28..503U .

doi : 10.1130/0091-7613(2000)28<503:SLFLOO>2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0091-7613 .

^ Guardian Staff (2019-08-25).

"Massive pumice 'raft' spotted in the Pacific could help replenish Great Barrier Reef" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 2021-03-19 .

^ a b "Satellite Sleuthing Detects Underwater Eruptions" .

Eos . 31 March 2020 . Retrieved 2021-03-19 .

^ Nybakken, James W. and Bertness, Mark D., 2005. Marine Biology: An Ecological Approach. Sixth Edition. Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco ^ "Scientists Discover and Image Explosive Deep-Ocean Volcano" .

NOAA . 2009-12-17 . Retrieved 2009-12-19 .

^ Scientificamerican.com 2015-04-22 Undersea Volcano Explodes as Scientists Watch ^ Dziak, R. P.; Bohnenstiehl, D. R.; Baker, E. T; Matsumoto, H.; Caplan-Auerbach, J.

; Embley, R. W.; Merle, S. G.; Walker, S. L.; Lau, T.-K.; Chadwick, W. W. (2015).

"Long-term explosive degassing and debris flow activity at West Mata submarine volcano" (PDF) .

Geophysical Research Letters .

42 (5): 1480– 1487.

Bibcode : 2015GeoRL..42.1480D .

doi : 10.1002/2014GL062603 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Submarine volcanoes .

Volcano Information from the Deep Ocean Exploration Institute , Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Volcano World - now maintained by the Department of Geosciences at Oregon State University Britannica - Submarine Volcanoes United States Geological Survey Ring of Fire Exploration Mission v t e Earth 's landforms List of landforms Mountainous Butte Flat Hill Mountain range Plateau Ridge Tableland Valley Continental plain Ice sheet Plain Steppe Tundra Fluvial Alluvial fan Beach Canyon Cave Channel Cliff Floodplain Lake island Levee Meander Oasis Pond Rapids River delta mouth Strait Swamp Valley Waterfall Glacial Arête Cirque Esker Fjord Glacier Ice field Tunnel valley Oceanic and coastal landforms Atoll Bay Cape Channel Coast Continental shelf Coral reef Estuary Island Isthmus Lagoon Mid-ocean ridge Oceanic trench Peninsula Seamount Volcanic island Volcanic Caldera Geyser Guyot Lava dome Lava field Submarine volcano Volcanic crater Volcanic crater lake Volcanic dam Volcanic island Volcanic plateau Volcanic plug Volcano Wall rock Aeolian Desert Dry lake Dune Sandhill Tundra Artificial Artificial island Artificial reef Bridge Building Canal Dam Ditch Land reclamation Levee Polder Quarry Reservoir Road Tunnel See also: Geographical feature v t e Volcanoes Types Caldera Cinder cone Complex volcano Cryovolcano Cryptovolcanic structure Fissure vent Lava cone Lava dome Maar Mud volcano Parasitic cone Pyroclastic cone Pyroclastic shield Rootless cone Shield volcano Somma volcano Stratovolcano Subglacial volcano Submarine volcano Supervolcano Tossol Volcanic cone Harmonic tremor Volcanic rocks Agglomerate Andesite Basalt Basaltic andesite Benmoreite Blairmorite Cinder Dacite Felsite Ignimbrite Komatiite Lapilli Latite Leucitite Nephelinite Obsidian Phonolite Phonotephrite Pumice Rhyodacite Rhyolite Tephra Tephriphonolite Trachyandesite Trachybasalt Trachyte Tuff Pyroclastic fall Pyroclastic flow Lists and groups Hotspot Lists of volcanoes Eruptions by death toll Decade Volcanoes Volcanic arc Volcanic belt Volcanic field monogenetic polygenetic Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Submarine_volcano&oldid=1292112495 " Categories : Submarine volcanoes Submarine topography Volcanoes Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 07:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Submarine volcano 42 languages Add topic

