Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and terminology 2 Meaning 3 Data sources 4 Data documents Toggle Data documents subsection 4.1 Data collection 5 Data longevity and accessibility 6 In other fields 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Data 101 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego گیلکی 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Li Niha Magyar Македонски मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල سنڌي Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Data (information) ) Units of information "Scientific data" redirects here. For the journal, see Scientific Data (journal) .

For data in computer science, see Data (computer science) . For other uses, see Data (disambiguation) and Datum (disambiguation) .

These are some of the different types of data: Geographical, Cultural, Scientific, Financial, Statistical, Meteorological, Natural, Transport Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Data ( / ˈ d eɪ t ə / DAY -tə , US also / ˈ d æ t ə / DAT -ə ) are a collection of discrete or continuous values that convey information , describing the quantity , quality , fact , statistics , other basic units of meaning, or simply sequences of symbols that may be further interpreted formally .  A datum is an individual value in a collection of data. Data are usually organized into structures such as tables that provide additional context and meaning, and may themselves be used as data in larger structures. Data may be used as variables in a computational process .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Data may represent abstract ideas or concrete measurements.

[ 3 ] Data are commonly used in scientific research , economics , and virtually every other form of human organizational activity.  Examples of data sets include price indices (such as the consumer price index ), unemployment rates , literacy rates, and census data. In this context, data represent the raw facts and figures from which useful information can be extracted.

Data are collected using techniques such as measurement , observation , query , or analysis , and are typically represented as numbers or characters that may be further processed .

Field data are data that are collected in an uncontrolled, in-situ environment.

Experimental data are data that are generated in the course of a controlled scientific experiment.  Data are analyzed using techniques such as calculation , reasoning , discussion, presentation , visualization , or other forms of post-analysis. Prior to analysis, raw data (or unprocessed data) is typically cleaned: Outliers are removed, and obvious instrument or data entry errors are corrected.

Data can be seen as the smallest units of factual information that can be used as a basis for calculation, reasoning, or discussion. Data can range from abstract ideas to concrete measurements, including, but not limited to, statistics . Thematically connected data presented in some relevant context can be viewed as information . Contextually connected pieces of information can then be described as data insights or intelligence . The stock of insights and intelligence that accumulate over time resulting from the synthesis of data into information, can then be described as knowledge . Data has been described as "the new oil of the digital economy ".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Data, as a general concept, refers to the fact that some existing information or knowledge is represented or coded in some form suitable for better usage or processing .

Advances in computing technologies have led to the advent of big data , which usually refers to very large quantities of data, usually at the petabyte scale. Using traditional data analysis methods and computing, working with such large (and growing) datasets is difficult, even impossible. (Theoretically speaking, infinite data would yield infinite information, which would render extracting insights or intelligence impossible.) In response, the relatively new field of data science uses machine learning (and other artificial intelligence ) methods that allow for efficient applications of analytic methods to big data.

Etymology and terminology [ edit ] Further information: Data (word) The Latin word data is the plural of datum , "(thing) given," and the neuter past participle of dare , "to give".

[ 6 ] The first English use of the word "data" is from the 1640s. The word "data" was first used to mean "transmissible and storable computer information" in 1946. The expression "data processing" was first used in 1954.

[ 6 ] When "data" is used more generally as a synonym for "information", it is treated as a mass noun in singular form.  This usage is common in everyday language and in technical and scientific fields such as software development and computer science . One example of this usage is the term " big data ". When used more specifically to refer to the processing and analysis of sets of data, the term retains its plural form. This usage is common in the natural sciences, life sciences, social sciences, software development and computer science, and grew in popularity in the 20th and 21st centuries.  Some style guides do not recognize the different meanings of the term and simply recommend the form that best suits the target audience of the guide.  For example, APA style as of the 7th edition requires "data" to be treated as a plural form.

[ 7 ] Meaning [ edit ] Adrien Auzout 's "A TABLE of the Apertures of Object-Glasses" from a 1665 article in Philosophical Transactions See also: DIKW pyramid Data, information , knowledge , and wisdom are closely related concepts, but each has its role concerning the other, and each term has its meaning. According to a common view, data is collected and analyzed; data only becomes information suitable for making decisions once it has been analyzed in some fashion.

[ 8 ] One can say that the extent to which a set of data is informative to someone depends on the extent to which it is unexpected by that person. The amount of information contained in a data stream may be characterized by its Shannon entropy .

Knowledge is the awareness of its environment that some entity possesses, whereas data merely communicates that knowledge. For example, the entry in a database specifying the height of Mount Everest is a datum that communicates a precisely measured value. This measurement may be included in a book along with other data on Mount Everest to describe the mountain in a manner useful for those who wish to decide on the best method to climb it. Awareness of the characteristics represented by this data is knowledge.

Data are often assumed to be the least abstract concept, information the next least, and knowledge the most abstract.

[ 9 ] In this view, data becomes information by interpretation; e.g., the height of Mount Everest is generally considered "data", a book on Mount Everest geological characteristics may be considered "information", and a climber's guidebook containing practical information on the best way to reach Mount Everest's peak may be considered "knowledge". "Information" bears a diversity of meanings that range from everyday usage to technical use. This view, however, has also been argued to reverse how data emerges from information, and information from knowledge.

[ 10 ] Generally speaking, the concept of information is closely related to notions of constraint, communication, control, data, form, instruction, knowledge, meaning, mental stimulus, pattern , perception, and representation. Beynon-Davies uses the concept of a sign to differentiate between data and information; data is a series of symbols, while information occurs when the symbols are used to refer to something.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Before the development of computing devices and machines, people had to manually collect data and impose patterns on it. With the development of computing devices and machines, these devices can also collect data. In the 2010s, computers were widely used in many fields to collect data and sort or process it, in disciplines ranging from marketing , analysis of social service usage by citizens to scientific research. These patterns in the data are seen as information that can be used to enhance knowledge. These patterns may be interpreted as " truth " (though "truth" can be a subjective concept) and may be authorized as aesthetic and ethical criteria in some disciplines or cultures. Events that leave behind perceivable physical or virtual remains can be traced back through data. Marks are no longer considered data once the link between the mark and observation is broken.

[ 13 ] Mechanical computing devices are classified according to how they represent data. An analog computer represents a datum as a voltage, distance, position, or other physical quantity. A digital computer represents a piece of data as a sequence of symbols drawn from a fixed alphabet . The most common digital computers use a binary alphabet, that is, an alphabet of two characters typically denoted "0" and "1". More familiar representations, such as numbers or letters, are then constructed from the binary alphabet. Some special forms of data are distinguished. A computer program is a collection of data, that can be interpreted as instructions. Most computer languages make a distinction between programs and the other data on which programs operate, but in some languages, notably Lisp and similar languages, programs are essentially indistinguishable from other data. It is also useful to distinguish metadata , that is, a description of other data. A similar yet earlier term for metadata is "ancillary data."  The prototypical example of metadata is the library catalog, which is a description of the contents of books.

Data sources [ edit ] With respect to ownership of data collected in the course of marketing or other corporate collection, data has been characterized according to "party" depending on how close the data is to the source or if it has been generated through additional processing. "Zero-party data" refers to data that customers "intentionally and proactively shares".

[ 14 ] This kind of data can come from a variety of sources, including: subscriptions, preference centers, quizzes, surveys, pop-up forms, and interactive digital experiences.

[ 15 ] "First-party data" may be collected by a company directly from its customers.

[ 16 ] The secure exchange of first-party data among companies can be done using data clean rooms .

[ 17 ] "Second-party data" refers to data obtained from other organizations or partners, through purchase or other means and has been described as "another organization's first-party data".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] "Third-party data" is data collected by other organizations and subsequently aggregated from different sources, websites, and platforms.

[ 18 ] Summary of data sources [ 18 ] Data source Owned by Accuracy Use case Privacy risk First-party The business High Personalization, retargeting Low Second-party Partner Moderate Partnership campaigns Moderate Third-party External entity Low Broad targeting High "No-party" data can sometimes refer to synthetic data that is generated based on patterns from original data.

[ 17 ] Data documents [ edit ] Part of a series on Library and information science Outline Glossary Histories Libraries - Information Focus Archives management - Collections management ( Preservation ) - Data management - Information management ( cataloguing ) - Knowledge management - Library management Curation Data - Metadata - Information - Documents - Artefacts - Knowledge Interdisciplinary fields Archival science - Communication studies - Computer science - Data science - Documentation science - Epistemology - Library science - Information science - Science and technology studies Areas Academic - Archival - Legal - Health - Private - Public - School - Special WikiProject Category v t e Whenever data needs to be registered, data exists in the form of a data document . Kinds of data documents include: data repository data study data set software data paper database data handbook data journal Some of these data documents (data repositories, data studies, data sets, and software) are indexed in Data Citation Indexes , while data papers are indexed in traditional bibliographic databases, e.g., Science Citation Index .

Data collection [ edit ] Gathering data can be accomplished through a primary source (the researcher is the first person to obtain the data) or a secondary source (the researcher obtains the data that has already been collected by other sources, such as data disseminated in a scientific journal). Data analysis methodologies vary and include data triangulation and data percolation.

[ 20 ] The latter offers an articulate method of collecting, classifying, and analyzing data using five possible angles of analysis (at least three) to maximize the research's objectivity and permit an understanding of the phenomena under investigation as complete as possible: qualitative and quantitative methods, literature reviews (including scholarly articles), interviews with experts, and computer simulation. The data is thereafter "percolated" using a series of pre-determined steps so as to extract the most relevant information.

Data longevity and accessibility [ edit ] An important field in computer science , technology , and library science is the longevity of data.

Scientific research generates huge amounts of data, especially in genomics and astronomy , but also in the medical sciences , e.g. in medical imaging . In the past, scientific data has been published in papers and books, stored in libraries, but more recently practically all data is stored on hard drives or optical discs . However, in contrast to paper, these storage devices may become unreadable after a few decades. Scientific publishers and libraries have been struggling with this problem for a few decades, and there is still no satisfactory solution for the long-term storage of data over centuries or even for eternity.

Data accessibility . Another problem is that much scientific data is never published or deposited in data repositories such as databases . In a recent survey, data was requested from 516 studies that were published between 2 and 22 years earlier, but less than one out of five of these studies were able or willing to provide the requested data. Overall, the likelihood of retrieving data dropped by 17% each year after publication.

[ 21 ] Similarly, a survey of 100 datasets in Dryad found that more than half lacked the details to reproduce the research results from these studies.

[ 22 ] This shows the dire situation of access to scientific data that is not published or does not have enough details to be reproduced.

A solution to the problem of reproducibility is the attempt to require FAIR data , that is, data that is Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable. Data that fulfills these requirements can be used in subsequent research and thus advances science and technology.

[ 23 ] In other fields [ edit ] Although data is also increasingly used in other fields, it has been suggested that their highly interpretive nature might be at odds with the ethos of data as "given".

Peter Checkland introduced the term capta (from the Latin capere , "to take") to distinguish between an immense number of possible data and a sub-set of them, to which attention is oriented.

[ 24 ] Johanna Drucker has argued that since the humanities affirm knowledge production as "situated, partial, and constitutive," using data may introduce assumptions that are counterproductive, for example, that phenomena are discrete or are observer-independent.

[ 25 ] The term capta , which emphasizes the act of observation as constitutive, is offered as an alternative to data for visual representations in the humanities.

The term data-driven is a neologism applied to an activity which is primarily compelled by data over all other factors.

[ citation needed ] Data-driven applications include data-driven programming and data-driven journalism .

See also [ edit ] Biological data Computer data processing Computer memory Dark data Data (computer science) Data acquisition Data analysis Data bank Data cable Data curation Data domain Data element Data farming Data governance Data integrity Data maintenance Data management Data mining Data modeling Data point Data preservation Data protection Data publication Data remanence Data science Data set Data structure Data visualization Data warehouse Database Datasheet Data-driven programming Data-driven journalism Data-driven testing Data-driven learning Data-driven science Data-driven control system Data-driven marketing Digital privacy Environmental data rescue Fieldwork Information engineering Machine learning Open data Scientific data archiving Secondary Data Statistics Digital data Data aggregation References [ edit ] ^ OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms . OECD. 2008. p. 119.

ISBN 978-92-64-025561 .

^ "Statistical Language - What are Data?" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . 2013-07-13.

Archived from the original on 2019-04-19 . Retrieved 2020-03-09 .

^ "Data vs Information - Difference and Comparison | Diffen" .

www.diffen.com . Retrieved 2018-12-11 .

^ Toonders, Joris (July 23, 2014).

"Data Is the New Oil of the Digital Economy" .

Wired . Archived from the original on Jun 27, 2024.

^ "Data is the new oil" .

Spotless Data . Archived from the original on 2018-07-16.

^ a b "data | Origin and meaning of data" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ American Psychological Association (2020). "6.11".

Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association: the official guide to APA style . American Psychological Association.

ISBN 9781433832161 .

^ "Joint Publication 2-0, Joint Intelligence" (PDF) .

Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joint Doctrine Publications . Department of Defense. 23 October 2013. pp. I-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2018 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 .

^ Akash Mitra (2011).

"Classifying data for successful modeling" . Archived from the original on 2017-11-07 . Retrieved 2017-11-05 .

^ Tuomi, Ilkka (2000). "Data is more than knowledge".

Journal of Management Information Systems .

6 (3): 103– 117.

doi : 10.1080/07421222.1999.11518258 .

^ P. Beynon-Davies (2002).

Information Systems: An introduction to informatics in organisations . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 0-333-96390-3 .

^ P. Beynon-Davies (2009).

Business information systems . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave.

ISBN 978-0-230-20368-6 .

^ Sharon Daniel.

The Database: An Aesthetics of Dignity .

^ Liu, Stephanie (2020-07-30).

"Straight From The Source: Collecting Zero-Party Data From Customers" .

Forrester . Retrieved 2025-01-14 .

^ Greenstein, Danielle (2019-08-19).

"What is First-Party vs Third-Party Data: Definitions & Strategies" .

Lotame . Retrieved 2025-01-14 .

^ Studio, AdExchanger Content (2025-01-02).

"The Dawn Of First-Party Data: Navigating The New Advertising Landscape" .

AdExchanger . Retrieved 2025-01-14 .

^ a b Bridgwater, Adrian.

"Third-Party Data Is Now First-Class" .

Forbes . Retrieved 2025-01-14 .

^ a b c Fallows, Carley (2025-01-13).

"Which Data Source Can You Trust for Better Marketing ROI?" .

Littlegate Publishing .

Archived from the original on 2025-03-05 . Retrieved 2025-01-14 .

^ Greenstein, Danielle (2024-03-15).

"What is Second Party Data and How Can you Use it?" .

Lotame . Retrieved 2025-01-14 .

^ Mesly, Olivier (2015), Creating Models in Psychological Research , Springer Psychology : 126 pages.

ISBN 978-3-319-15752-8 ^ Vines, Timothy H.; Albert, Arianne Y. K.; Andrew, Rose L.; Débarre, Florence; Bock, Dan G.; Franklin, Michelle T.; Gilbert, Kimberly J.; Moore, Jean-Sébastien; Renaut, Sébastien; Rennison, Diana J. (2014-01-06).

"The availability of research data declines rapidly with article age" .

Current Biology .

24 (1): 94– 97.

arXiv : 1312.5670 .

Bibcode : 2014CBio...24...94V .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.014 .

ISSN 1879-0445 .

PMID 24361065 .

S2CID 7799662 .

^ Roche, Dominique G.; Kruuk, Loeske E. B.; Lanfear, Robert; Binning, Sandra A. (2015).

"Public Data Archiving in Ecology and Evolution: How Well Are We Doing?" .

PLOS Biology .

13 (11): e1002295.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002295 .

ISSN 1545-7885 .

PMC 4640582 .

PMID 26556502 .

^ Eisenstein, Michael (April 2022).

"In pursuit of data immortality" .

Nature .

604 (7904): 207– 208.

Bibcode : 2022Natur.604..207E .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-022-00929-3 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 35379989 .

S2CID 247954952 .

^ P. Checkland and S. Holwell (1998).

Information, Systems, and Information Systems: Making Sense of the Field . Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons. pp.

86– 89.

ISBN 0-471-95820-4 .

^ Johanna Drucker (2011).

"Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display" .

Digital Humanities Quarterly .

005 (1).

External links [ edit ] Look up data in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Data .

Scholia has a topic profile for Data .

Data is a singular noun (a detailed assessment) v t e Data Acquisition Augmentation Analysis Anonymization Archaeology Big Cleansing Collection Compression Corruption Curation Deduplication Degradation De-identification Ecosystem Editing Engineering Erasure ETL / ELT Extract Transform Load Ethics Exhaust Exploration Farming Format management Fusion Governance Cooperatives Infrastructure Integration Integrity Library Lineage Loss Management Meta Migration Mining Philanthropy Pre-processing Preservation Processing Protection (privacy) Publishing Open data Recovery Reduction Redundancy Re-identification Remanence Rescue Retention Quality Science Scraping Scrubbing Security Sharing Stewardship Storage Structure Synchronization Topological data analysis Type Validation Warehouse Wrangling/munging v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Artists MusicBrainz Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐br9p2
Cached time: 20250814215707
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.909 seconds
Real time usage: 1.116 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3760/1000000
Revision size: 24819/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 242670/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2981/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 141068/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.526/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19921230/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  891.014      1 -total
 30.91%  275.383      1 Template:Reflist
 12.53%  111.684      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.58%  103.149      6 Template:Cite_book
 11.15%   99.334      1 Template:Epistemology_sidebar
 11.01%   98.072      3 Template:Lang
  9.18%   81.810     12 Template:Navbox
  7.91%   70.467     12 Template:Cite_web
  7.53%   67.061      1 Template:Statistics
  7.24%   64.511      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18985040:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215707 and revision id 1305910564. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Data&oldid=1305910564 " Categories : Data Statistical data Data management Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Data 101 languages Add topic

