Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Genera 2 Description 3 Biogeography 4 Systematics Toggle Systematics subsection 4.1 Foundational Taxonomic and Systematics Research (18th-19th century) 4.2 Modern Systematics Research (20th-21st century) 4.3 Consensus and Debates Today 5 Economic significance 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Magnoliaceae 63 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Коми Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Перем коми Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Family of flowering plants Magnoliaceae Temporal range: Cenomanian - recent [ 1 ] PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Magnolia virginiana Liriodendron tulipifera Scientific classification Kingdom: Plantae Clade : Tracheophytes Clade : Angiosperms Clade : Magnoliids Order: Magnoliales Family: Magnoliaceae Juss.

[ 2 ] Genera Magnolia (> 200 species) Liriodendron (2 species) The Magnoliaceae ( / m æ ɡ ˌ n oʊ l i ˈ eɪ s i i / ) are a flowering plant family, the magnolia family ,  in the order Magnoliales . It consists of two genera : Magnolia and Liriodendron (tulip trees).

Unlike most angiosperms , whose flower parts are in whorls (rings), the Magnoliaceae have their stamens and pistils in spirals on a conical receptacle .

[ 3 ] This arrangement is found in some fossil plants and is believed to be a basal or early condition for angiosperms. The flowers also have parts not distinctly differentiated into sepals and petals , while angiosperms that evolved later tend to have distinctly differentiated sepals and petals. The poorly differentiated perianth parts that occupy both positions are known as tepals .

The family has about 219 species and ranges across subtropical eastern North America , Mexico and Central America , the West Indies , tropical South America , southern and eastern India , Sri Lanka , Indochina , Malesia , China , Japan , and Korea .

Genera [ edit ] The number of genera in Magnoliaceae is a subject of debate. Up to 17 have been recognized, including Alcimandra , Lirianthe , Manglietia , Michelia , Pachylarnax , Parakmeria , Talauma and Yulania .

[ 4 ] However, many recent studies have opted to merge all genera within subfamily Magnolioideae into the genus Magnolia .

[ 5 ] Thus, Magnoliaceae would include only two extant genera, Magnolia and Liriodendron .

[ citation needed ] Description [ edit ] Flowers In magnolias, the tepals are arranged in whorls, and the other flower parts are arranged spirally, not in whorls .

The monophyly of Magnoliaceae is supported by a number of shared morphological characters among the various genera in the family.  Most have bisexual flowers (with the exception of Kmeria and some species of Magnolia section Gynopodium ), showy, fragrant, radial, and with an elongated receptacle.
Leaves are alternate, simple, and sometimes lobed. The inflorescence is a solitary, showy flower with indistinguishable petals and sepals.

Sepals range from six to many; stamens are numerous and feature short filaments which are poorly differentiated from the anthers .

Carpels are usually numerous, distinct, and on an elongated receptacle or torus.

[ 3 ] The fruit is an aggregate fruit (etaerio) of follicles which usually become closely appressed as they mature and open along the abaxial surface. Seeds have a fleshy coat, aril , and color that ranges from red to orange (except Liriodendron ). Magnoliaceae flowers are beetle pollinated, except for Liriodendron , which is bee pollinated. The carpels of Magnolia flowers are especially thick to avoid damage by beetles that land, crawl, and feast on them. The seeds of Magnolioideae are bird-dispersed, while the seeds of Liriodendron are wind-dispersed.

[ citation needed ] Biogeography [ edit ] Due to its great age, the geographical distribution of the Magnoliaceae has become disjunct or fragmented as a result of major geologic events such as ice ages , continental drift , and mountain formation . This distribution pattern has isolated some species, while keeping others in close contact.
Extant species of the Magnoliaceae are widely distributed in temperate and tropical Asia from the Himalayas to Japan and southwest through Malaysia and New Guinea . Asia is home to about two-thirds of the species in Magnoliaceae, with the remainder of the family spread across the Americas with temperate species extending into southern Canada and tropical elements extending into Brazil and the West Indies.

[ citation needed ] Systematics [ edit ] Foundational Taxonomic and Systematics Research (18th-19th century) [ edit ] The earliest botanical description of the Magnoliaceae as a family is in Antonii Laurentii de Jussieu's Genera Plantarum , which describes eight genera included within the family ( Euryandra , Drymis , Illicium, Michelia , Magnolia , Talauma, Liriodendrum , and Mayna ) as well as four genera closely related to the family ( Dillenia , Curatella , Ochna , and Quassia ).

[ 6 ] Bentham and Hooker's Genera Plantarum , almost a century later, sorts the family's genera into three tribes: the Wintereae, including the genera Drimys and Illicium , the Magnolieae, including the genera Talauma, Magnolia, Manglieta, Michelia , and Liriodendron , and the Schizandreae, including the genera Schizandra and Kadsura .

[ 7 ] In his following work Adansonia , Baillon recognizes Bentham and Hooker's changes and additions but proposes an alternative taxonomy where he sets aside the Tulipier genus and include all remaining genera under one Magnolieae tribe.

[ 8 ] From this basic separation, scholars have continued to debate the systematics of the family.

Modern Systematics Research (20th-21st century) [ edit ] Dandy's taxonomic proposal in 1927 sets aside the genus Liriodendron as a part of the subfamily Liriodendreae and includes Bentham and Hooker's four genera in addition to four more ( Kmeria, Pachylarnax, Alcimandra , and Elmerrillia ) within the Magnolieae tribe.

[ 9 ] Dandy's model with eleven genera was widely accepted until molecular evidence brought it into question (Figlar, 2019).

[ 10 ] Qiu et al. analyzed molecular data in 1995 to investigate the divergences within and between East Asian and East North American species of Magnolia , presenting molecular evidence which shows that Dandy's section Rytidospermum is not monophyletic.

[ 11 ] Azuma et al. employ both molecular phylogeny and parsimonious mapping of the chemistry of floral scents in 1999 to propose a phylogenetic tree where, unlike Dandy's taxonomy, they include Michelia species within the Magnolia genus as a sister group to the subgenus Yulania and also find that the section Rytidospermum is not monophyletic, placing some of its members in a clade with the section Oyama .

[ 12 ] The most recent research on the family continues the debate over the genera of the family. Wang et al.'s study analyzes complete chloroplast genome sequences of 86 species in the Magnoliaceae and supports a phylogeny with fifteen major clades, two subfamilies, two genera, and fifteen sections, maintaining Magnolia' s classification as one monophyletic genus.

[ 13 ] Dong et al. also place Magnolia as the sole genus of the subfamily Magnolioideae made up of fifteen sections.

[ 14 ] However, Yang et al. and Zhao et al. work with phylogenies of the Magnoliaceae that recognize several genera in the Magnolioideae.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Consensus and Debates Today [ edit ] Although phylogenetic trees of the Magnoliaceae still include anywhere from 2 to 17 genera, the broad generic concept (where one genus, Magnolia , is in the Magnolioideae) is largely accepted as a practical construction upheld by molecular and morphological evidence.

[ 13 ] Even as debates over rank persist, monophyletic groups are largely established with opportunities for further research into endangered and extinct species. The family's place as early angiosperms means that research into its taxonomy and evolutionary history contributes to our broader understanding of the evolution of plant life.

[ citation needed ] The development of DNA sequencing at the end of the 20th century had a profound impact on the research of phylogenetic relationships within the family. The employment of ndh F and cpDNA sequences has refuted many of the traditionally accepted phylogenetic relationships within the Magnoliaceae. For example, the genera Magnolia and Michelia were shown to be paraphyletic when the remaining four genera of the Magnolioideae are split out. In fact, even many of the subgenera ( Magnolia subg.

Magnolia , Magnolia subg.

Talauma ) have been found to be paraphyletic. Although no completely resolved phylogeny for the family has yet been determined, these technological advances have allowed systematists to broadly circumscribe major lineages.

[ 17 ] Economic significance [ edit ] As a whole, the Magnoliaceae are not an economically significant family. With the exception of ornamental cultivation, the economic significance of magnolias is generally confined to the use of wood from certain timber species and the use of bark and flowers from several species believed to possess medicinal qualities.  The wood of the American tuliptree, Liriodendron tulipifera and the wood of the cucumbertree magnolia, Magnolia acuminata , and, to a lesser degree, that of the Frasier magnolia, Magnolia fraseri , are harvested and marketed collectively as "yellow poplar." This is a lightweight and exceptionally fine-grained wood, lending itself to precision woodworking for purposes such as pipe organ building.

[ citation needed ] Magnolias have a rich cultural tradition in China, where references to their healing qualities go back thousands of years. The Chinese have long used the bark of Magnolia officinalis , a magnolia native to the mountains of China with large leaves and fragrant white flowers, as a remedy for cramps, abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea, and indigestion. Certain magnolia flowers, such as the buds of Magnolia liliiflora , have been used to treat chronic respiratory and sinus infections and lung congestion. Recently, magnolia bark has become incorporated into alternative medicine in the west, where tablets made from the bark of M. officinalis have been marketed as an aid for anxiety, allergies, asthma, and weight loss. Compounds found in magnolia bark might have antibacterial and antifungal properties, but no large-scale study on the health effects of magnolia bark or flowers has yet been conducted.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ "Magnoliales" .

www.mobot.org . Retrieved 2023-06-18 .

^ Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (2009).

"An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering plants: APG III" .

Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society .

161 (2): 105– 121.

doi : 10.1111/j.1095-8339.2009.00996.x .

hdl : 10654/18083 .

^ a b Zomlefer, Wndy B. (1994).

Guide to Flowering Plant Families . The University of North Carolina Press. pp.

430 .

ISBN 978-0-8078-4470-0 .

^ "Magnoliaceae in Flora of China @ efloras.org" .

www.efloras.org . Retrieved 2018-02-23 .

^ Figlar, Richard B. (June 2012).

"Magnolia Classification Information" .

www.magnoliasociety.org . Retrieved 2018-02-23 .

^ Jussieu, Antoine Laurent de (1789).

Antonii Laurentii de Jussieu Genera plantarum :secundum ordines naturales disposita, juxta methodum in Horto regio parisiensi exaratam, anno M.DCC.LXXIV . Parisiis: apud viduam Herissant et Theophilum Barrois.

doi : 10.5962/bhl.title.284 .

^ Bentham, George; Hooker, Joseph Dalton (1862).

Genera plantarum :ad exemplaria imprimis in Herberiis Kewensibus servata definita . Londini: A. Black.

doi : 10.5962/bhl.title.747 .

^ Baillon, H (1866).

Adansonia; recueil d'observations botaniques . Paris, France: H. Baillon and F. Savy.

^ Dandy, J. E. (1927).

"The Genera of Magnolieae" .

Bulletin of Miscellaneous Information (Royal Gardens, Kew) .

1927 (7): 257– 264.

doi : 10.2307/4107601 .

ISSN 0366-4457 .

JSTOR 4107601 .

^ "Magnolia Classification Information" .

www.magnoliasociety.org . Retrieved 2024-01-04 .

^ Qiu, Yin-Long; Parks, Clifford R.; Chase, Mark W. (December 1995).

"Molecular divergence in the eastern Asia– eastern North America disjunct section Rytidospermum of Magnolia (Magnoliaceae)" .

American Journal of Botany .

82 (12): 1589– 1598.

doi : 10.1002/j.1537-2197.1995.tb13862.x .

ISSN 0002-9122 .

^ Azuma, Hiroshi; Thien, Leonard B; Kawano, Shoichi (September 1999).

"Molecular Phylogeny of Magnolia (Magnoliaceae) Inferred from cpDNA Sequences and Evolutionary Divergence of the Floral Scents" .

Journal of Plant Research .

112 (3): 291– 306.

Bibcode : 1999JPlR..112..291A .

doi : 10.1007/pl00013885 .

ISSN 0918-9440 .

S2CID 206862607 .

^ a b Wang, Yu-Bing; Liu, Bin-Bin; Nie, Ze-Long; Chen, Hong-Feng; Chen, Fa-Ju; Figlar, Richard B.; Wen, Jun (2020-05-25).

"Major clades and a revised classification of Magnolia and Magnoliaceae based on whole plastid genome sequences via genome skimming" .

Journal of Systematics and Evolution .

58 (5): 673– 695.

doi : 10.1111/jse.12588 .

ISSN 1674-4918 .

^ Dong, Shan-Shan; Wang, Ya-Ling; Xia, Nian-He; Liu, Yang; Liu, Min; Lian, Lian; Li, Na; Li, Ling-Fei; Lang, Xiao-An; Gong, Yi-Qing; Chen, Lu; Wu, Ernest; Zhang, Shou-Zhou (2021-04-08).

"Plastid and nuclear phylogenomic incongruences and biogeographic implications of Magnolia s.l. (Magnoliaceae)" .

Journal of Systematics and Evolution .

60 (1): 1– 15.

doi : 10.1111/jse.12727 .

ISSN 1674-4918 .

S2CID 234277919 .

^ Yang, Lin; Tian, Jinhong; Xu, Liu; Zhao, Xueli; Song, Yuyang; Wang, Dawei (2022-08-28).

"Comparative Chloroplast Genomes of Six Magnoliaceae Species Provide New Insights into Intergeneric Relationships and Phylogeny" .

Biology .

11 (9): 1279.

doi : 10.3390/biology11091279 .

ISSN 2079-7737 .

PMC 9495354 .

PMID 36138758 .

^ Zhao, Jianyun; Chen, Hu; Li, Gaiping; Jumaturti, Maimaiti Aisha; Yao, Xiaomin; Hu, Ying (2023-11-16).

"Phylogenetics Study to Compare Chloroplast Genomes in Four Magnoliaceae Species" .

Current Issues in Molecular Biology .

45 (11): 9234– 9251.

doi : 10.3390/cimb45110578 .

ISSN 1467-3045 .

PMC 10670740 .

PMID 37998755 .

^ Azuma, H., García-Franco, J. G., Rico-Gray, V., and Thien, L. B. (2001). "Molecular phylogeny of the Magnoliaceae: the biogeography of tropical and temperate disjunctions".

American Journal of Botany .

88 (12): 2275– 2285.

doi : 10.2307/3558389 .

JSTOR 3558389 .

PMID 21669660 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Hunt, D. (ed). 1998.

Magnolias and their allies . International Dendrology Society & Magnolia Society.

ISBN 0-9517234-8-0 Further reading [ edit ] Cicuzza, D., Newton, A. and Oldfield, S. 2007.

The Red List of Magnoliaceae Flora & Fauna International (FFI) and Botanic Gardens Conservation International (BGCI) report.

ISBN 978-1-903703-23-6 F. Xu, P. J. Rudall. Comparative floral anatomy and ontogeny in Magnoliaceae. Plant Systematics and Evolution April 2006, Volume 258, Issue 1-2, pp 1-15 v t e Families of flowering plants ( APG IV ) Supergroup Plant : Rhodophyta Chlorophyta Marchantiophyta Bryophyta Anthocerotophyta Polypodiophyta Acrogymnospermae Angiospermae Basal angio sperms Amborellales Amborellaceae Nymphaeales Hydatellaceae Cabombaceae Nymphaeaceae Austrobaileyales Austrobaileyaceae Trimeniaceae Schisandraceae Mesangiospermae Magnoliidae Canellales Canellaceae Winteraceae Piperales Aristolochiaceae Saururaceae Piperaceae Magnoliales Myristicaceae Magnoliaceae Degeneriaceae Himantandraceae Eupomatiaceae Annonaceae Laurales Calycanthaceae Siparunaceae Gomortegaceae Atherospermataceae Hernandiaceae Monimiaceae Lauraceae Chloranthidae Chloranthales Chloranthaceae Lilidae ( Monocots ) Acorales Acoraceae Alismatales Araceae Tofieldiaceae Alismataceae Butomaceae Hydrocharitaceae Scheuchzeriaceae Aponogetonaceae Juncaginaceae Maundiaceae Zosteraceae Potamogetonaceae Posidoniaceae Ruppiaceae Cymodoceaceae Petrosaviales Petrosaviaceae Dioscoreales Nartheciaceae Burmanniaceae Dioscoreaceae Pandanales Triuridaceae Velloziaceae Stemonaceae Cyclanthaceae Pandanaceae Liliales Campynemataceae Corsiaceae Melanthiaceae Petermanniaceae Alstroemeriaceae Colchicaceae Philesiaceae Ripogonaceae Smilacaceae Liliaceae Asparagales Orchidaceae Boryaceae Blandfordiaceae Asteliaceae Lanariaceae Hypoxidaceae Doryanthaceae Ixioliriaceae Tecophilaeaceae Iridaceae Xeronemataceae Asphodelaceae Amaryllidaceae Asparagaceae Arecales Dasypogonaceae Arecaceae Commelinales Hanguanaceae Commelinaceae Philydraceae Pontederiaceae Haemodoraceae Zingiberales Strelitziaceae Lowiaceae Heliconiaceae Musaceae Cannaceae Marantaceae Costaceae Zingiberaceae Poales Typhaceae Bromeliaceae Rapateaceae Xyridaceae Eriocaulaceae Mayacaceae Thurniaceae Juncaceae Cyperaceae Restionaceae Flagellariaceae Joinvilleaceae Ecdeiocoleaceae Poaceae Ceratophyllidae Ceratophyllales Ceratophyllaceae Eudicots Buxales Buxaceae Proteales Sabiaceae Nelumbonaceae Platanaceae Proteaceae Ranunculales Eupteleaceae Papaveraceae Circaeasteraceae Lardizabalaceae Menispermaceae Berberidaceae Ranunculaceae Trochodendrales Trochodendraceae Dilleniales Dilleniaceae Gunnerales Myrothamnaceae Gunneraceae Superrosids Saxifragales Peridiscaceae Paeoniaceae Altingiaceae Hamamelidaceae Cercidiphyllaceae Daphniphyllaceae Iteaceae Grossulariaceae Saxifragaceae Crassulaceae Aphanopetalaceae Tetracarpaeaceae Penthoraceae Haloragaceae Cynomoriaceae Rosids Vitales Vitaceae Fabids Cucurbitales Apodanthaceae Anisophylleaceae Corynocarpaceae Coriariaceae Cucurbitaceae Tetramelaceae Datiscaceae Begoniaceae Fabales Quillajaceae Fabaceae Surianaceae Polygalaceae Fagales Nothofagaceae Fagaceae Myricaceae Juglandaceae Casuarinaceae Ticodendraceae Betulaceae Rosales Rosaceae Barbeyaceae Dirachmaceae Elaeagnaceae Rhamnaceae Ulmaceae Cannabaceae Moraceae Urticaceae Zygophyllales Krameriaceae Zygophyllaceae Celastrales Lepidobotryaceae Celastraceae Malpighiales Pandaceae Irvingiaceae Ctenolophonaceae Rhizophoraceae Erythroxylaceae Ochnaceae Bonnetiaceae Clusiaceae Calophyllaceae Podostemaceae Hypericaceae Caryocaraceae Lophopyxidaceae Putranjivaceae Centroplacaceae Elatinaceae Malpighiaceae Balanopaceae Trigoniaceae Dichapetalaceae Euphroniaceae Chrysobalanaceae Humiriaceae Achariaceae Violaceae Goupiaceae Passifloraceae Lacistemataceae Salicaceae Peraceae Rafflesiaceae Euphorbiaceae Linaceae Ixonanthaceae Picrodendraceae Phyllanthaceae Oxalidales Huaceae Connaraceae Oxalidaceae Cunoniaceae Elaeocarpaceae Cephalotaceae Brunelliaceae Malvids Brassicales Akaniaceae Tropaeolaceae Moringaceae Caricaceae Limnanthaceae Setchellanthaceae Koeberliniaceae Bataceae Salvadoraceae Emblingiaceae Tovariaceae Pentadiplandraceae Gyrostemonaceae Resedaceae Capparaceae Cleomaceae Brassicaceae Crossosomatales Aphloiaceae Geissolomataceae Strasburgeriaceae Staphyleaceae Guamatelaceae Stachyuraceae Crossosomataceae Geraniales Geraniaceae Francoaceae Huerteales Gerrardinaceae Petenaeaceae Tapisciaceae Dipentodontaceae Malvales Cytinaceae Muntingiaceae Neuradaceae Malvaceae Sphaerosepalaceae Thymelaeaceae Bixaceae Cistaceae Sarcolaenaceae Dipterocarpaceae Myrtales Combretaceae Lythraceae Onagraceae Vochysiaceae Myrtaceae Melastomataceae Crypteroniaceae Alzateaceae Penaeaceae Picramniales Picramniaceae Sapindales Biebersteiniaceae Nitrariaceae Kirkiaceae Burseraceae Anacardiaceae Sapindaceae Rutaceae Simaroubaceae Meliaceae Superasterids Berberidopsidales Aextoxicaceae Berberidopsidaceae Caryophyllales Frankeniaceae Tamaricaceae Plumbaginaceae Polygonaceae Droseraceae Nepenthaceae Drosophyllaceae Dioncophyllaceae Ancistrocladaceae Rhabdodendraceae Simmondsiaceae Physenaceae Asteropeiaceae Macarthuriaceae Microteaceae Caryophyllaceae Achatocarpaceae Amaranthaceae Stegnospermataceae Limeaceae Lophiocarpaceae Kewaceae Barbeuiaceae Gisekiaceae Aizoaceae Phytolaccaceae Petiveriaceae Sarcobataceae Nyctaginaceae Molluginaceae Montiaceae Didiereaceae Basellaceae Halophytaceae Talinaceae Portulacaceae Anacampserotaceae Cactaceae Santalales Olacaceae Opiliaceae Balanophoraceae Santalaceae Misodendraceae Schoepfiaceae Loranthaceae Asterids Cornales Nyssaceae Hydrostachyaceae Hydrangeaceae Loasaceae Curtisiaceae Grubbiaceae Cornaceae Ericales Balsaminaceae Marcgraviaceae Tetrameristaceae Fouquieriaceae Polemoniaceae Lecythidaceae Sladeniaceae Pentaphylacaceae Sapotaceae Ebenaceae Primulaceae Theaceae Symplocaceae Diapensiaceae Styracaceae Sarraceniaceae Roridulaceae Actinidiaceae Clethraceae Cyrillaceae Ericaceae Mitrastemonaceae Lamiids Icacinales Oncothecaceae Icacinaceae Metteniusales Metteniusaceae Garryales Eucommiaceae Garryaceae Gentianales Rubiaceae Gentianaceae Loganiaceae Gelsemiaceae Apocynaceae Boraginales Boraginaceae Vahliales Vahliaceae Solanales Convolvulaceae Solanaceae Montiniaceae Sphenocleaceae Hydroleaceae Lamiales Plocospermataceae Carlemanniaceae Oleaceae Tetrachondraceae Calceolariaceae Gesneriaceae Plantaginaceae Scrophulariaceae Stilbaceae Linderniaceae Byblidaceae Martyniaceae Pedaliaceae Acanthaceae Bignoniaceae Lentibulariaceae Schlegeliaceae Thomandersiaceae Verbenaceae Lamiaceae Mazaceae Phrymaceae Paulowniaceae Orobanchaceae Campanulids Apiales Pennantiaceae Torricelliaceae Griseliniaceae Pittosporaceae Araliaceae Myodocarpaceae Apiaceae Aquifoliales Stemonuraceae Cardiopteridaceae Phyllonomaceae Helwingiaceae Aquifoliaceae Asterales Rousseaceae Campanulaceae Pentaphragmataceae Stylidiaceae Alseuosmiaceae Phellinaceae Argophyllaceae Menyanthaceae Goodeniaceae Calyceraceae Asteraceae Bruniales Columelliaceae Bruniaceae Dipsacales Adoxaceae Caprifoliaceae Escalloniales Escalloniaceae Paracryphiales Paracryphiaceae Category Taxon identifiers Magnoliaceae Wikidata : Q120228 Wikispecies : Magnoliaceae APNI : 120666 BioLib: 3182 CoL : CC9 EoL : 4194 EPPO : 1MAGF FNA : 10530 FoC : 10530 GBIF : 4690 GRIN : 682 iNaturalist : 53581 IPNI : 30000710-2 IRMNG : 112970 ITIS : 18068 NBN : NBNSYS0000160373 NCBI : 3401 NZOR: 5700ea0a-e0ac-494c-abd9-03334505bc28 Open Tree of Life : 288464 Paleobiology Database : 54615 POWO : urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:30000710-2 Tropicos : 42000005 VASCAN: 162 Watson & Dallwitz: magnolia WFO : wfo-7000000357 Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Magnoliaceae&oldid=1292009355 " Categories : Magnoliaceae Magnoliid families Extant Berriasian first appearances Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Taxonbars with 20–24 taxon IDs This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 18:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Magnoliaceae 63 languages Add topic

