Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Functions Toggle Functions subsection 2.1 Legislation 2.2 Appointment confirmations 2.3 Treaty ratification 2.4 Impeachment trials 2.5 Election of the vice president 3 Membership Toggle Membership subsection 3.1 Qualifications 3.2 Elections and term 3.2.1 Elections 3.2.2 Vacancies 3.2.3 Term 3.3 Oath 3.4 Salary and benefits 3.5 Seniority 3.6 Titles 3.7 Expulsion and other disciplinary actions 4 Majority and minority parties Toggle Majority and minority parties subsection 4.1 Seating 5 Officers Toggle Officers subsection 5.1 Presiding officer 5.2 Party leaders 5.3 Non-member officers 6 Procedure Toggle Procedure subsection 6.1 Daily sessions 6.1.1 Debate 6.1.2 Filibuster and cloture 6.1.3 Voting 6.1.4 Closed session 6.2 Committees 7 Senate office buildings 8 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 8.1 Counter-arguments 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 12.1 Official Senate histories 13 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Senate 95 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°53′26″N 77°0′32″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.89056°N 77.00889°W ﻿ / 38.89056; -77.00889 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Upper house of the U.S. Congress United States Senate 119th United States Congress Seal of the U.S. Senate Flag of the U.S. Senate Type Type Upper house of the United States Congress Term limits None History New session started January 3, 2025 ( 2025-01-03 ) Leadership President JD Vance ( R ) since January 20, 2025 President pro tempore Chuck Grassley ( R ) since January 3, 2025 Majority Leader John Thune ( R ) since January 3, 2025 Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D ) since January 3, 2025 Majority Whip John Barrasso ( R ) since January 3, 2025 Minority Whip Dick Durbin ( D ) since January 3, 2025 Structure Seats 100 Political groups Majority (53) Republican (53) Minority (47) Democratic (45) Independent (2) [ a ] Length of term 6 years Elections Voting system Plurality voting in 46 states [ b ] Varies in 4 states Alaska & Maine : Instant-runoff voting Georgia & Louisiana : [ c ] Two-round system Last election November 5, 2024 (34 seats) Next election November 3, 2026 (35 seats) Meeting place Senate Chamber United States Capitol Washington, D.C.

United States Website senate .gov Constitution United States Constitution Rules Standing Rules of the United States Senate The United States Senate is a chamber of the bicameral United States Congress ; it is the upper house , with the U.S. House of Representatives being the lower house . Together, the Senate and House have the authority under Article One of the U.S. Constitution to pass or defeat federal legislation.

The Senate also has exclusive power to confirm U.S. presidential appointments, to approve or reject treaties, and to convict or exonerate impeachment cases brought by the House. The Senate and the House provide a check and balance on the powers of the executive and judicial branches of government. The composition and powers of the Senate are established in Article One of the U.S. Constitution, which has been in continuous effect since March 4, 1789.

[ 2 ] Each of the 50 states is represented by two senators who serve staggered six-year terms . In total, the Senate consists of 100 members.

[ 3 ] From its inception in 1789 until 1913, senators were appointed by the state legislature of their respective states. Since 1913, following ratification of the Seventeenth Amendment , however, senators have been elected through a statewide popular vote .

[ 4 ] The Senate has several powers of advice and consent . These include the approval of treaties , as well as the confirmation of Cabinet secretaries , federal judges (including justices of the Supreme Court ), flag officers , regulatory officials, ambassadors , other federal executive officials , and federal uniformed officers . If no candidate receives a majority of electors for vice president , the duty falls to the Senate to elect one of the top two recipients of electors for that office. The Senate conducts trials of officials who have been impeached by the House. The Senate has typically been considered both a more deliberative [ 5 ] and prestigious [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] body than the House of Representatives due to its longer terms, smaller size, and statewide constituencies, which historically led to a more collegial and less partisan atmosphere.

[ 9 ] The Senate chamber is located in the north wing of the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C.

, the nation's capital. Despite not being a senator, the vice president of the United States serves as presiding officer and president of the Senate by virtue of that office ; the vice president may vote only if the Senate is equally divided. In the vice president's absence, the president pro tempore , who is traditionally the most senior member of the Senate's majority party, presides over the Senate, and more often by rule allows a junior senator to take the chair, guided by the parliamentarian . In the early 1920s, the practice of majority and minority parties electing their floor leaders began. The Senate's legislative and executive business is managed and scheduled by the Senate's majority leader, who, on occasion, negotiates some matters with the Senate's minority leader. A prominent practice in the Senate is the filibuster on some matters and its remedy the vote on cloture .

History Main article: History of the United States Senate The drafters of the Constitution debated more about how to award representation in the Senate than about any other part of the Constitution.

[ 10 ] While bicameralism and the idea of a proportional [ d ] "people's house" were widely popular, discussions about Senate representation proved contentious. In the end, some small states—unwilling to give up their equal power with larger states under the Articles of Confederation —threatened to secede [ 11 ] in 1787, and won the day by a vote of 5–4 in what became known as the Connecticut Compromise . The Connecticut Compromise provided, among other things, that each state—regardless of population—would be represented by two senators.

[ 12 ] First convened in 1789, the Senate of the United States was formed on the example of the ancient Roman Senate . The name is derived from the senatus , Latin for council of elders , derived from senex , meaning old man in Latin.

[ 13 ] Article Five of the Constitution stipulates that no constitutional amendment may be created to deprive a state of its equal suffrage in the Senate without that state's consent. The United States has had 50 states since 1959, [ 14 ] thus the Senate has had 100 senators since 1959.

[ 15 ] Graph showing historical party control of the U.S. Senate, U.S. House of Representatives , and the Presidency since 1855 Before the adoption of the Seventeenth Amendment in 1913, senators were elected by the individual state legislatures .

[ 16 ] Problems with repeated vacant seats due to the inability of a legislature to elect senators, intrastate political struggles, bribery and intimidation gradually led to a growing movement to amend the Constitution to allow for the direct election of senators.

[ 17 ] In contrast to House of Representatives, the Senate has historically had stronger norms of conduct for its members.

[ 18 ] Functions The U.S. Senate chamber , c.

1873 ; two or three spittoons are visible by desks.

Senate approval is required to pass any federal legislation. The Constitution provides several unique functions for the Senate that form its ability to "checks and balances" the powers of other elements of the federal government . These include the requirement that the Senate may advise and must consent to some of the president's government appointments; also the Senate must consent to all treaties with foreign governments; it tries all impeachments, and it elects the vice president in the event no person gets a majority of the electoral votes.

Legislation Further information: Act of Congress Bills may be introduced in either chamber of Congress. However, the Constitution's Origination Clause provides that "All bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives".

[ 19 ] As a result, the Senate does not have the power to initiate bills imposing taxes. Furthermore, the House of Representatives holds that the Senate does not have the power to originate appropriation bills , or bills authorizing the expenditure of federal funds.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Historically, the Senate has disputed the interpretation advocated by the House. However, when the Senate originates an appropriations bill, the House simply refuses to consider it, thereby settling the dispute in practice. The constitutional provision barring the Senate from introducing revenue bills is based on the practice of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , in which money bills approved by Parliament have originated in the House of Commons per constitutional convention .

[ 24 ] Although the Constitution gave the House the power to initiate revenue bills, in practice the Senate is equal to the House in the respect of spending. As Woodrow Wilson wrote: The Senate's right to amend general appropriation bills has been allowed the widest possible scope. The upper house may add to them what it pleases; may go altogether outside of their original provisions and tack to them entirely new features of legislation, altering not only the amounts but even the objects of expenditure, and making out of the materials sent them by the popular chamber measures of an almost totally new character.

[ 25 ] The approval of both houses is required for any bill, including a revenue bill, to become law. Both Houses must pass the same version of the bill; if there are differences, they may be resolved by sending amendments back and forth or by a conference committee , which includes members of both bodies.

Appointment confirmations The president can make certain appointments only with the advice and consent of the Senate. Officials whose appointments require the Senate's approval include members of the Cabinet, heads of most federal executive agencies, ambassadors , justices of the Supreme Court , and other federal judges. Under Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution, a large number of government appointments are subject to potential confirmation; however, Congress has passed legislation to authorize the appointment of many officials without the Senate's consent (usually, confirmation requirements are reserved for those officials with the most significant final decision-making authority). Typically, a nominee is the first subject to a hearing before a Senate committee . Thereafter, the nomination is considered by the full Senate. The majority of nominees are confirmed; however, in a small number of cases each year, Senate committees purposely fail to act on a nomination to block it. In addition, the president sometimes withdraws nominations when they appear unlikely to be confirmed. Because of this, outright rejections of nominees on the Senate floor are infrequent (there have been only nine Cabinet nominees rejected outright in United States history).

[ 26 ] The powers of the Senate concerning nominations are, however, subject to some constraints. For instance, the Constitution provides that the president may make an appointment during a congressional recess without the Senate's advice and consent. The recess appointment remains valid only temporarily; the office becomes vacant again at the end of the next congressional session. Nevertheless, presidents have frequently used recess appointments to circumvent the possibility that the Senate may reject the nominee. Furthermore, as the Supreme Court held in Myers v. United States , although the Senate's advice and consent are required for the appointment of certain executive branch officials, it is not necessary for their removal.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Recess appointments have faced a significant amount of resistance and in 1960, the U.S. Senate passed a legally non-binding resolution against recess appointments to the Supreme Court.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Treaty ratification The Senate also has a role in ratifying treaties. The Constitution provides that the president may only "make Treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present concur" in order to benefit from the Senate's advice and consent and give each state an equal vote in the process. However, not all international agreements are considered treaties under U.S. domestic law, even if they are considered treaties under international law. Congress has passed laws authorizing the president to conclude executive agreements without action by the Senate. Similarly, the president may make congressional-executive agreements with the approval of a simple majority in each House of Congress, rather than a two-thirds majority in the Senate. Neither executive agreements nor congressional-executive agreements are mentioned in the Constitution, leading some scholars such as Laurence Tribe and John Yoo [ 31 ] to suggest that they unconstitutionally circumvent the treaty-ratification process. However, courts have upheld the validity of such agreements.

[ 32 ] Impeachment trials The Constitution empowers the House of Representatives to impeach federal officials for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" and empowers the Senate to try such impeachments. If the sitting president of the United States is being tried, the chief justice of the United States presides over the trial. During an impeachment trial, senators are constitutionally required to sit on oath or affirmation. Conviction requires a two-thirds majority of the senators present. A convicted official is automatically removed from office; in addition, the Senate may stipulate that the defendant be banned from holding office. No further punishment is permitted during the impeachment proceedings; however, the party may face criminal penalties in a normal court of law.

The House of Representatives has impeached sixteen officials, of whom seven were convicted (one resigned before the Senate could complete the trial).

[ 33 ] Only three presidents have been impeached: Andrew Johnson in 1868, Bill Clinton in 1998, and Donald Trump in 2019 and 2021. The trials of Johnson, Clinton and both Trump trials ended in acquittal; in Johnson's case, the Senate fell one vote short of the two-thirds majority required for conviction.

Election of the vice president Under the Twelfth Amendment , the Senate has the power to elect the vice president if no vice-presidential candidate receives a majority of votes in the Electoral College . The Twelfth Amendment requires the Senate to choose from the two candidates with the highest numbers of electoral votes. Electoral College deadlocks are rare. The Senate has only broken a deadlock once; in 1837, it elected Richard Mentor Johnson . The House elects the president if the Electoral College deadlocks on that choice.

Membership See also: List of current United States senators Members of the United States Senate by class from the staggered term system for the 119th United States Congress Qualifications This article is part of a series on the United States Senate Great Seal of the United States Senate History of the United States Senate Members Current members ( by seniority by class ) Former members Hill committees ( DSCC NRSC ) Women in the Senate President of the Senate ( list ) President pro tempore ( list ) Presiding officer Party leaders Party leadership of the United States Senate Democratic Caucus Republican Conference Politics and procedure Advice and consent Blue slip Closed session ( list ) Cloture Committees ( list ) Executive session Morning business Filibuster Journal Nuclear option Recess appointment Quorum Quorum call Salaries Saxbe fix Seal Holds Senatorial courtesy Standing Rules Traditions Unanimous consent Vice presidential tie-breaking votes Places United States Capitol Senate chamber Old Senate Chamber Senate Reception Room Senate office buildings ( Dirksen Hart Russell ) v t e Article I, Section 3, of the Constitution , sets three qualifications for senators: (1) they must be at least 30 years old; (2) they must have been citizens of the United States for at least nine years; and (3) they must be inhabitants of the states they seek to represent at the time of their election.

[ 3 ] The age and citizenship qualifications for senators are more stringent than those for representatives. In Federalist No. 62 , James Madison justified this arrangement by arguing that the "senatorial trust" called for a "greater extent of information and stability of character": A senator must be thirty years of age at least; as a representative must be twenty-five. And the former must have been a citizen nine years; as seven years are required for the latter. The propriety of these distinctions is explained by the nature of the senatorial trust, which, requiring greater extent of information and stability of character, requires at the same time that the senator should have reached a period of life most likely to supply these advantages; and which, participating immediately in transactions with foreign nations, ought to be exercised by none who are not thoroughly weaned from the prepossessions and habits incident to foreign birth and education. The term of nine years appears to be a prudent mediocrity between a total exclusion of adopted citizens, whose merits and talents may claim a share in the public confidence, and an indiscriminate and hasty admission of them, which might create a channel for foreign influence on the national councils.

[ 34 ] The Senate (not the judiciary) is the sole judge of a senator's qualifications. During its early years, however, the Senate did not closely scrutinize the qualifications of its members. As a result, four senators who failed to meet the age requirement were nevertheless admitted to the Senate: Henry Clay (aged 29 in 1806), John Jordan Crittenden (aged 29 in 1817), Armistead Thomson Mason (aged 28 in 1816), and John Eaton (aged 28 in 1818). Such an occurrence, however, has not been repeated since.

[ 35 ] In 1934, Rush D. Holt Sr.

was elected to the Senate at the age of 29; he waited until he turned 30 (on the next June 19) to take the oath of office. On November 7, 1972, Joe Biden was elected to the Senate at the age of 29, which was only 13 days prior to his 30th birthday on November 20, 1972. Therefore, he reached his 30th birthday before the swearing-in ceremony for incoming senators in January 1973.

The Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution disqualifies as senators any federal or state officers who had taken the requisite oath to support the Constitution but who later engaged in rebellion or aided the enemies of the United States. This provision, which came into force soon after the end of the Civil War, was intended to prevent those who had sided with the Confederacy from serving. That Amendment, however, also provides a method to remove that disqualification: a two-thirds vote of both chambers of Congress.

[ 36 ] Elections and term Originally, senators were selected by the state legislatures , not by popular elections . By the early years of the 20th century, the legislatures of as many as 29 states had provided for popular election of senators by referendums.

[ 17 ] Popular election to the Senate was standardized nationally in 1913 by the ratification of the Seventeenth Amendment .

Elections Further information: List of United States Senate elections Elections to the Senate are held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in even-numbered years, Election Day , and occur simultaneously with elections for the House of Representatives .

[ 37 ] Senators are elected by their state as a whole. The Elections Clause of the United States Constitution grants each state (and Congress, if it so desires to implement a uniform law) the power to legislate a method by which senators are elected.

Ballot access rules for independent and minor party candidates also vary from state to state.

In 45 states, a primary election is held first for the Republican and Democratic parties (and a select few third parties , depending on the state) with the general election following a few months later. In most of these states, the nominee may receive only a plurality, while in some states, a runoff is required if no majority was achieved. In the general election, the winner is the candidate who receives a plurality of the popular vote.

However, in five states, different methods are used. In Georgia , a runoff between the top two candidates occurs if the plurality winner in the general election does not also win a majority. In California , Washington , and Louisiana , a nonpartisan blanket primary (also known as a "jungle primary" or "top-two primary") is held in which all candidates participate in a single primary regardless of party affiliation and the top two candidates in terms of votes received at the primary election advance to the general election, where the winner is the candidate with the greater number of votes. In Louisiana, the blanket primary is considered the general election and candidates receiving a majority of the votes is declared the winner, skipping a run-off. In Maine and Alaska , ranked-choice voting is used to nominate and elect candidates for federal offices, including the Senate.

[ 38 ] Vacancies The Seventeenth Amendment requires that vacancies in the Senate be filled by special election. Whenever a senator must be appointed or elected, the secretary of the Senate mails one of three forms to the state's governor to inform them of the proper wording to certify the appointment of a new senator.

[ 39 ] If a special election for one seat happens to coincide with a general election for the state's other seat, each seat is contested separately. A senator elected in a special election takes office as soon as possible after the election and serves until the original six-year term expires (i.e. not for a full-term).

The Seventeenth Amendment permits state legislatures to empower their governors to make temporary appointments until the required special election takes place.

The manner by which the Seventeenth Amendment is enacted varies among the states. A 2018 report breaks this down into the following three broad categories (specific procedures vary among the states): [ 40 ] Four states – North Dakota , Oregon , Rhode Island , and Wisconsin – do not empower their governors to make temporary appointments, relying exclusively on the required special election provision in the Seventeenth Amendment.

[ 40 ] : 7–8 Eight states – Alaska , Connecticut , Louisiana , Massachusetts , Mississippi , Texas , Vermont , and Washington – provide for gubernatorial appointments, but also require a special election on an accelerated schedule.

[ 40 ] : 10–11 The remaining thirty-eight states provide for gubernatorial appointments, "with the appointed senator serving the balance of the term or until the next statewide general election".

[ 40 ] : 8–9 In ten states within the final category above – Arizona , Hawaii , Kentucky , [ 41 ] Maryland , Montana , North Carolina , Oklahoma , Utah , West Virginia , and Wyoming – the governor must appoint someone of the same political party as the previous incumbent.

[ 40 ] : 9 [ 42 ] In September 2009, Massachusetts changed its law to enable the governor to appoint a temporary replacement for the late senator Edward Kennedy until the special election in January 2010.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] In 2004, Alaska enacted legislation and a separate ballot referendum that took effect on the same day, but that conflicted with each other. The effect of the ballot-approved law is to withhold from the governor authority to appoint a senator.

[ 45 ] Because the 17th Amendment vests the power to grant that authority to the legislature – not the people or the state generally – it is unclear whether the ballot measure supplants the legislature's statute granting that authority.

[ 45 ] As a result, it is uncertain whether an Alaska governor may appoint an interim senator to serve until a special election is held to fill the vacancy.

In May 2021, Oklahoma permitted its governor again to appoint a successor who is of the same party as the previous senator for at least the preceding five years when the vacancy arises in an even-numbered year, only after the appointee has taken an oath not to run in either a regular or special Senate election.

[ 42 ] Term Senators serve terms of six years each; the terms are staggered so that approximately one-third of the seats are up for election every two years. This was achieved by dividing the senators of the 1st Congress into thirds (called classes ), where the terms of one-third expired after two years, the terms of another third expired after four, and the terms of the last third expired after six years. This arrangement was also followed after the admission of new states into the union. The staggering of terms has been arranged such that both seats from a given state are not contested in the same general election, except when a vacancy is being filled.

Class II comprises Senators whose six-year terms are set to expire on January 3, 2027. There is no constitutional limit to the number of terms a senator may serve.

The Constitution set the date for Congress to convene — Article 1, Section 4, Clause 2, originally set that date for the third day of December. The Twentieth Amendment , however, changed the opening date for sessions to noon on the third day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day. The Twentieth Amendment also states that the Congress shall assemble at least once every year, and allows the Congress to determine its convening and adjournment dates and other dates and schedules as it desires. Article 1, Section 3, provides that the president has the power to convene Congress on extraordinary occasions at his discretion.

[ 46 ] A member who has been elected, but not yet seated, is called a senator-elect ; a member who has been appointed to a seat, but not yet seated, is called a senator-designate .

Oath The Constitution requires that senators take an oath or affirmation to support the Constitution.

[ 47 ] Congress has prescribed the following oath for all federal officials (except the President), including senators: I, ___ ___, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter. So help me God.

[ 48 ] Salary and benefits Main article: United States Congress § Privileges U.S. Senate salaries, 1992–2022 The annual salary of each senator, since 2009, is $174,000; [ 49 ] the president pro tempore and party leaders receive $193,400.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] In 2003, at least 40 senators were millionaires; [ 51 ] by 2018, over 50 senators were millionaires, partly due to inflation.

[ 52 ] Along with earning salaries, senators receive retirement and health benefits that are identical to other federal employees, and are fully vested after five years of service. Senators are covered by the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS) or Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS). FERS has been the Senate's retirement system since January 1, 1987, while CSRS applies only for those senators who were in the Senate from December 31, 1986, and prior. As it is for federal employees, congressional retirement is funded through taxes and the participants' contributions. Under FERS, senators contribute 1.3% of their salary into the FERS retirement plan and pay 6.2% of their salary in Social Security taxes. The amount of a senator's pension depends on the years of service and the average of the highest three years of their salary. The starting amount of a senator's retirement annuity may not exceed 80% of their final salary. In 2006, the average annual pension for retired senators and representatives under CSRS was $60,972, while those who retired under FERS, or in combination with CSRS, was $35,952.

[ 50 ] Seniority Main article: Seniority in the United States Senate By tradition, seniority is a factor in the selection of physical offices and in party caucuses' assignment of committees. When senators have been in office for the same length of time, a number of tiebreakers are used, including comparing their former government service and then their respective state population.

[ 53 ] The senator in each state with the longer time in office is known as the senior senator , while the other is the junior senator . For example, minority leader Chuck Schumer is the senior senator from New York, having served in the senate since 1999, while Kirsten Gillibrand is New York's junior senator, having served since 2009.

Titles Like members of the House of Representatives, Senators use the prefix " The Honorable " before their names.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Senators are usually identified in the media and other sources by party and state; for example, Democratic majority leader Chuck Schumer , who represents New York, may be identified as "D–New York" or (D-NY). And sometimes they are identified as to whether they are the junior or senior senator in their state ( see above ). Unless in the context of elections, they are rarely identified by which one of the three classes of senators they are in.

Expulsion and other disciplinary actions The Senate may expel a senator by a two-thirds vote. Fifteen senators have been expelled in the Senate's history: William Blount , for treason, in 1797, and fourteen in 1861 and 1862 for supporting the Confederate secession . Although no senator has been expelled since 1862, many senators have chosen to resign when faced with expulsion proceedings – for example, Bob Packwood in 1995. The Senate has also censured and condemned senators; censure requires only a simple majority and does not remove a senator from office. Some senators have opted to withdraw from their re-election races rather than face certain censure or expulsion, such as Robert Torricelli in 2002.

Majority and minority parties The "majority party" is the political party that either has a majority of seats or can form a coalition or caucus with a majority of seats; if two or more parties are tied, the vice president's affiliation determines which party is the majority party. The next-largest party is known as the minority party. The president pro tempore, committee chairs, and some other officials are generally from the majority party; they have counterparts (for instance, the "ranking members" of committees) in the minority party. Independents and members of third parties (so long as they do not caucus support either of the larger parties) are not considered in determining which is the majority party.

Seating A typical Senate desk on the floor of the United States Senate One hundred desks are arranged in the chamber in a semicircular pattern and are divided by a wide central aisle. The Democratic Party traditionally sits to the presiding officer's right, and the Republican Party traditionally sits to the presiding officer's left, regardless of which party has a majority of seats.

[ 56 ] Each senator chooses a desk based on seniority within the party. By custom, the leader of each party sits in the front row along the center aisle. Forty-eight of the desks date back to 1819, when the Senate chamber was reconstructed after the original contents were destroyed in the 1812 Burning of Washington . Further desks of similar design were added as new states entered the Union.

[ 57 ] It is a tradition that each senator who uses a desk inscribes their name on the inside of the desk's drawer with a pen.

[ 58 ] Officers The Senate side of the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C.

Except for the president of the Senate (who is the vice president), the Senate elects its own officers, [ 2 ] who maintain order and decorum, manage and schedule the legislative and executive business of the Senate, and interpret the Senate's rules, practices and precedents. Many non-member officers are also hired to run various day-to-day functions of the Senate.

Presiding officer Main article: Presiding Officer of the United States Senate Under the Constitution, the vice president serves as president of the Senate. They may vote in the Senate ( ex officio , for they are not an elected member of the Senate) in the case of a tie, but are not required to.

[ 59 ] For much of the nation's history the task of presiding over Senate sessions was one of the vice president's principal duties (the other being to receive from the states the tally of electoral ballots cast for president and vice president and to open the certificates "in the Presence of the Senate and House of Representatives", so that the total votes could be counted). Since the 1950s, vice presidents have presided over few Senate debates. Instead, they have usually presided only on ceremonial occasions, such as swearing in new senators, joint sessions, or at times to announce the result of significant legislation or nomination, or when a tie vote on an important issue is anticipated.

The Constitution authorizes the Senate to elect a president pro tempore ( Latin for "president for a time"), who presides over the chamber in the vice president's absence and is, by custom, the senator of the majority party with the longest record of continuous service.

[ 60 ] Like the vice president, the president pro tempore does not normally preside over the Senate, but typically delegates the responsibility of presiding to a majority-party senator who presides over the Senate, usually in blocks of one hour on a rotating basis. Frequently, freshmen senators (newly elected members) are asked to preside so that they may become accustomed to the rules and procedures of the body. It is said that, "in practice they are usually mere mouthpieces for the Senate's parliamentarian , who whispers what they should do".

[ 61 ] The presiding officer sits in a chair in the front of the Senate chamber. The powers of the presiding officer of the Senate are far less extensive than those of the speaker of the House . The presiding officer calls on senators to speak (by the rules of the Senate, the first senator who rises is recognized); ruling on points of order (objections by senators that a rule has been breached, subject to appeal to the whole chamber); and announcing the results of votes.

Party leaders Main article: Party leaders of the United States Senate Each party elects Senate party leaders . Floor leaders act as the party chief spokesmen. The Senate majority leader is responsible for controlling the agenda of the chamber by scheduling debates and votes. Each party elects an assistant leader (whip) , who works to ensure that his party's senators vote as the party leadership desires.

Non-member officers In addition to the vice president, the Senate has several officers who are not members. The Senate's chief administrative officer is the secretary of the Senate , who maintains public records, disburses salaries, monitors the acquisition of stationery and supplies, and oversees clerks. The assistant secretary of the Senate aids the secretary's work. Another official is the sergeant at arms who, as the Senate's chief law enforcement officer, maintains order and security on the Senate premises. The Capitol Police handle routine police work, with the sergeant at arms primarily responsible for general oversight. Other employees include the chaplain , who is elected by the Senate, and pages , who are appointed.

Procedure Daily sessions The Senate uses Standing Rules for operation. Like the House of Representatives , the Senate meets in the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C. At one end of the chamber of the Senate is a dais from which the presiding officer presides. The lower tier of the dais is used by clerks and other officials. Sessions of the Senate are opened with a special prayer or invocation and typically convene on weekdays. Sessions of the Senate are generally open to the public and are broadcast live on television, usually by C-SPAN 2 .

Senate procedure depends not only on the rules, but also on a variety of customs and traditions. The Senate commonly waives some of its stricter rules by unanimous consent . Unanimous consent agreements are typically negotiated beforehand by party leaders. A senator may block such an agreement, but in practice, objections are rare. The presiding officer enforces the rules of the Senate, and may warn members who deviate from them. The presiding officer sometimes uses the gavel of the Senate to maintain order.

A " hold " is placed when the leader's office is notified that a senator intends to object to a request for unanimous consent from the Senate to consider or pass a measure. A hold may be placed for any reason and can be lifted by the senator who placed it at any time. A senator may place a hold simply to review a bill, to negotiate changes to the bill, or to kill the bill. A bill can be held for as long as the senator who objects to the bill wishes to block its consideration.

Holds can be overcome, but require time-consuming procedures such as filing cloture. Holds are considered private communications between a senator and the leader, and are sometimes referred to as "secret holds". A senator may disclose the placement of a hold.

The Constitution provides that a majority of the Senate constitutes a quorum to do business. Under the rules and customs of the Senate, a quorum is always assumed as present unless a quorum call explicitly demonstrates otherwise. A senator may request a quorum call by "suggesting the absence of a quorum"; a clerk then calls the roll and notes which members are present. In practice, senators rarely request quorum calls to establish the quorum as present; instead, quorum calls are generally used to temporarily delay proceedings. Usually, such delays are used while waiting for a senator to reach the floor to speak or to give leaders time to negotiate. Once the need for a delay has ended, a senator may request unanimous consent to rescind the quorum call.

Journalist George Packer has argued that the Senate's arcane rules have rendered it obsolete and ineffective.

[ 62 ] Debate Debate, like most other matters governing the internal functioning of the Senate, is governed by internal rules adopted by the Senate. During a debate, senators may only speak if called upon by the presiding officer, but the presiding officer is required to recognize the first senator who rises to speak. Thus, the presiding officer has little control over the course of the debate. Customarily, the majority leader and minority leader are accorded priority during debates even if another senator rises first. All speeches must be addressed to the presiding officer, who is addressed as "Mr. President" or "Madam President", and not to another member; other Members must be referred to in the third person. In most cases, senators do not refer to each other by name, but by state or position, using forms such as "the senior senator from Virginia", "the gentleman from California", or "my distinguished friend the chairman of the Judiciary Committee". Senators address the Senate standing next to their desks.

[ 63 ] Apart from rules governing civility, there are few restrictions on the content of speeches; there is no requirement that speeches pertain to the matter before the Senate.

The rules of the Senate provide that no senator may make more than two speeches on a motion or bill on the same legislative day. A legislative day begins when the Senate convenes and ends with adjournment; hence, it does not necessarily coincide with the calendar day . The length of these speeches is not limited by the rules; thus, in most cases, senators may speak for as long as they please. Often, the Senate adopts unanimous consent agreements imposing time limits. In other cases (for example, for the budget process), limits are imposed by statute. However, the right to unlimited debate is generally preserved.

Within the United States, the Senate is sometimes referred to as "world's greatest deliberative body".

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] Filibuster and cloture Main articles: Filibuster in the United States Senate and Reconciliation (United States Congress) See also: Clay pigeon floor procedure The filibuster is a tactic used to defeat bills and motions by prolonging debate indefinitely. A filibuster may entail long speeches, dilatory motions, and an extensive series of proposed amendments. The Senate may end a filibuster by invoking cloture . In most cases, cloture requires the support of three-fifths of the Senate; however, if the matter before the Senate involves changing the rules of the body – this includes amending provisions regarding the filibuster – a two-thirds majority is required. In practice, the threat of filibuster is more important than its use; almost any motion that does not have the support of three-fifths of the Senate effectively fails. This means that 41 senators can make a filibuster happen.

The history of filibusters began in 1805 when Aaron Burr suggested getting rid of procedural tools that were not in use, one of which was the motion to call "the previous question". Following this, in 1841, Senator John Calhoun rallied a number of Southern senators to take the floor, one after another for days, in opposition of the national bank. The national bank bill did pass, but Calhoun, and other Southern senators, continued using this tactic. Filibuster efforts continued until 1917, when in response to a filibuster during World War I, President Woodrow Wilson demanded there be an ability to force a Senate vote. From this comes Senate rule XXIII, which provides the procedure of cloture. In the 1970s, the vote requirement for cloture was lowered and a new process of scheduling Senate business was instituted, in turn ending the "talking filibuster".

[ 67 ] Historically, cloture has rarely been invoked because bipartisan support is usually necessary to obtain the required supermajority , so a bill that already has bipartisan support is rarely subject to threats of filibuster. However, motions for cloture have increased significantly in recent [ vague ] years. If the Senate invokes cloture, the debate does not necessarily end immediately; instead, it is limited to up to 30 additional hours unless increased by another three-fifths vote.

The longest filibuster speech in the Senate's history was delivered by Strom Thurmond (D-SC), who spoke for over 24 hours in an unsuccessful attempt to block the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1957 . The longest individual speech (though not technically a filibuster as there was no bill being blocked) in the Senate's history was delivered by Cory Booker (D-NJ) in 2025. Senator Booker spoke for 25 hours and five minutes, starting at 7 PM on the night of March 31 and ending April 1. Senator Booker's speech was intended to address actions of the Trump administration.

[ 68 ] Under certain circumstances, the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 provides for a process called " reconciliation " by which Congress can pass bills related to the budget without those bills being subject to a filibuster. This is accomplished by limiting all Senate floor debate to 20 hours.

[ 69 ] The Senate filibuster is frequently debated as the Constitution specifies a simple majority threshold to pass legislation, and some critics feel the de facto three-fifths threshold for general legislation prevents beneficial laws from passing. Steven Wirls argues that the filibuster, elevated in importance in 1917, was prominently and persistently wielded in defense of white supremacy.

[ 10 ] [ dubious – discuss ] The nuclear option was exercised by both major parties in the 2010s to weaken the filibuster for confirmations. There is a desire within Congress to adjust the filibuster to lessen the amount of filibusters. Ways to reform the filibuster mainly include restoring a talking filibuster or adjusting the numbers of votes needed in varying ways.

[ 70 ] Supporters generally consider the filibuster to be an important protection for the minority views and a check against the unfettered single-party rule when the same party holds the Presidency and a majority in both the House and Senate.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Voting When the debate concludes, the motion in question is put to a vote. The Senate often votes by voice vote. The presiding officer puts the question, and members respond either "Yea/Aye" (in favor of the motion) or "Nay" (against the motion). The presiding officer then announces the result of the voice vote. A senator, however, may challenge the presiding officer's assessment and request a recorded vote. The request may be granted only if it is seconded by one-fifth of the senators present. In practice, however, senators second requests for recorded votes as a matter of courtesy. When a recorded vote is held, the clerk calls the roll of the Senate in alphabetical order; senators respond when their name is called. Senators who were not in the chamber when their name was called may still cast a vote so long as the voting remains open. The vote is closed at the discretion of the presiding officer, but must remain open for a minimum of 15 minutes. A majority of those voting determines whether the motion carries.

[ 73 ] If the vote is tied, the vice president, if present, is entitled to cast a tie-breaking vote . If the vice president is not present, the motion fails.

[ 74 ] Filibustered bills require a three-fifths majority to overcome the cloture vote (which usually means 60 votes). To pass a bill, a simple majority (usually 51 votes) is needed. Some news media have confused the 60 votes needed to overcome a filibuster with the 51 votes needed to approve a bill with for example USA Today erroneously stating "The vote was 58–39 in favor of the provision establishing concealed carry permit reciprocity in the 48 states that have concealed weapons laws. That fell two votes short of the 60 needed to approve the measure".

[ 73 ] Closed session Main article: Closed sessions of the United States Senate On occasion, the Senate may go into what is called a secret or closed session. During a closed session, the chamber doors are closed, cameras are turned off, and the galleries are completely cleared of anyone not sworn to secrecy, not instructed in the rules of the closed session, or not essential to the session. Closed sessions are rare and usually held only when the Senate is discussing sensitive subject matter such as information critical to national security, private communications from the president, or deliberations during impeachment trials. A senator may call for and force a closed session if the motion is seconded by at least one other member, but an agreement usually occurs beforehand.

[ 75 ] If the Senate does not approve the release of a secret transcript, the transcript is stored in the Office of Senate Security and ultimately sent to the national archives. The proceedings remain sealed indefinitely until the Senate votes to remove the injunction of secrecy.

[ 76 ] In 1973, the House adopted a rule that all committee sessions should be open unless a majority on the committee voted for a closed session.

Committees Main article: United States congressional committee Committee Room 226 in the Dirksen Senate Office Building , used for hearings by the Senate Judiciary Committee The Senate uses committees (and their subcommittees) for a variety of purposes, including the review of bills and the oversight of the executive branch. Formally, the whole Senate appoints committee members. In practice, however, the choice of members is made by the political parties. Generally, each party honors the preferences of individual senators, giving priority based on seniority. Each party is allocated seats on committees in proportion to its overall strength. Due to the bipartisan nature of committees, senators are occasionally able to find similarities across the aisle that are beyond their committee interest, which may aid them in getting bills passed in the future.

[ 77 ] Most committee work is performed by 16 standing committees, each of which has jurisdiction over a field such as finance or foreign relations . Each standing committee may consider, amend, and report bills that fall under its jurisdiction. Furthermore, each standing committee considers presidential nominations to offices related to its jurisdiction. (For instance, the Judiciary Committee considers nominees for judgeships, and the Foreign Relations Committee considers nominees for positions in the Department of State .) Committees may block nominees and impede bills from reaching the floor of the Senate. Standing committees also oversee the departments and agencies of the executive branch. In discharging their duties, standing committees have the power to hold hearings and to subpoena witnesses and evidence.

Each Senate committee and subcommittee is led by a chair (usually a member of the majority party). Formerly, committee chairs were determined purely by seniority; as a result, several elderly senators continued to serve as chair despite severe physical infirmity or even senility .

[ 78 ] Committee chairs are elected, but, in practice, seniority is rarely bypassed. The chairs hold extensive powers: they control the committee's agenda, and so decide how much, if any, time to devote to the consideration of a bill; they act with the power of the committee in disapproving or delaying a bill or a nomination by the president; they manage on the floor of the full Senate the consideration of those bills the committee reports. This last role was particularly important in mid-century, when floor amendments were thought not to be collegial. They also have considerable influence: senators who cooperate with their committee chairs are likely to accomplish more good for their states than those who do not. The Senate rules and customs were reformed in the twentieth century, largely in the 1970s. Committee chairmen have less power and are generally more moderate and collegial in exercising it, than they were before reform.

[ 79 ] The second-highest member, the spokesperson on the committee for the minority party, is known in most cases as the ranking member.

[ 80 ] Senate office buildings External videos Senate Building, Washington DC, HD from 35mm There are presently three Senate office buildings located along Constitution Avenue, north of the Capitol. They are the Russell Senate Office Building , the Dirksen Senate Office Building , and the Hart Senate Office Building .

Criticism See also: Democratic backsliding in the United States , Universal suffrage , and United States Congress § Outside income and gifts The Senate has been characterized as a uniquely counter-majoritarian institution in relation to legislatures in other countries. Political scientist Robert Dahl wrote of the Senate, "the degree of unequal representation in the U.S. Senate is by far the most extreme [and a] profound violation of the democratic idea of political equality among citizens." [ 81 ] The countermajoritarianism is rooted in two features. First, the Senate's apportionment scheme, which apportions seats based on states rather than population, resulting in a small-state advantage. Second, the filibuster enables a minority of the chamber to block action in the chamber.

[ 81 ] The Senate's structure gives states with smaller populations the same number of senators (two) as states with larger populations. Historian Daniel Wirls contends that this structure makes the Senate "non-democratic", [ 10 ] and Levitsky and Ziblatt argue that the Senate is America's most minoritarian (undemocratic) institution.

[ 82 ] The disparity in population between the most and least populous states has grown over time. In 1790, Virginia had 10 times the population of Rhode Island, while California had 70 times the population of Wyoming in 2020.

[ 83 ] U.S. citizens in the District of Columbia and in U.S. territories have never been represented in the Senate.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] One analysis of democracies by Harvard professors Daniel Ziblatt and Steven Levitsky found that only Argentina and Brazil's upper chambers deviate further from the one person, one vote principle than the U.S. Senate does.

[ 86 ] This disparity in representation between large and small states has increasingly favored Republicans since the 1960s, [ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] with David Wasserman estimating in 2018 that Democrats would need to keep winning the popular vote by more than 6% to maintain control of the Senate.

[ 90 ] Elizabeth Rusch and Daniel Lazare argue that the Senate's structure gives voters from small states disproportionate influence and allows them to benefit from disproportionate amounts of federal funding when compared to voters from larger states.

[ 83 ] [ 91 ] Ian Millhiser argues that the points made in favor of the status quo do not hold up since some states vote the same as large states, and that the current system was just a political compromise to unite 13 sovereign nations after the Revolutionary War. He also documents 21st century examples of how this malaportionment has led to the party receiving the most votes losing control of the Senate (and as a result, the Judiciary) and predicts the trend looks set to continue and possibly increase.

[ 92 ] By the beginning of the 21st century, two-thirds of legislatures globally had become unicameral, with the remaining upper houses tending to become more representative or less powerful; in contrast, the U.S. Senate remained an outlier by not following what Ziblatt and Levitsky refer to as a democratizing trend.

[ 93 ] Counter-arguments See also: Federalism , Pluralism (political theory) , and Tyranny of the majority James Madison emphasized that the Senate serves as a check against the potential tyranny of the majority, ensuring that the interests of smaller states are not drowned out by the more populous ones. This was despite Madison being initially opposed to equal suffrage before coming around to support it.

[ 94 ] In Federalist No. 62 Madison writes about this tradeoff: It must be acknowledged that this complicated check on legislation may in some instances be injurious as well as beneficial; and that the peculiar defense which it involves in favor of the smaller States, would be more rational, if any interests common to them, and distinct from those of the other States, would otherwise be exposed to peculiar danger. But as the larger States will always be able, by their power over the supplies, to defeat unreasonable exertions of this prerogative of the lesser States...

Today, while a populous state like Texas has the same Senate representation as smaller states, its delegation in the House of Representatives is several times larger than those of many smaller states combined.

Political scientist William F. Connelly Jr., in his book James Madison Rules America: The Constitutional Origins of Congressional Partisanship , argues that this structure "provides stability and continuity, balancing the rapidly changing political winds of the House of Representatives".

[ 95 ] Yale legal scholar Akhil Reed Amar , in his book America's Constitution: A Biography , explains that the Senate's structure is integral to the federal system, ensuring that smaller states have a voice in the democratic process.

[ 96 ] Stanford political theorist Bruce E. Cain writes that equal representation in the Senate "fosters a more inclusive and representative democracy, where diverse regional interests are considered in the legislative process" ensuring that legislation must account for a wide array of perspectives, promoting broader national cohesion.

[ 97 ] On the one hand, some claim the U.S. Senate has a bias against Republicans. However, since 1920, Democrats have controlled the Senate for about 58 years. During most of that period Senate Democrats earned a larger share of Senate seats than their share of the national House vote. Since filibuster rules were revised in 1975, the Democratic Party earned filibuster-proof supermajorities three times after the 1974 , 1976 and 2008 Senate elections. The last time Republicans earned the same was in the 1920s. Equal representation for smaller states was pivotal for the legislative accomplishments of the Clinton presidency, like the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 , and the Obama presidency, like the Affordable Care Act , at a time when Democrats earned more seats in lower population states like North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, West Virginia, Nebraska, and Iowa.

[ 98 ] Other nations have adopted comparable structures that provide for equal representation of sub-national regions, regardless of population.  These include Australia , where the Senate allocates twelve senators to each of the six original states (and two to each territory) and Switzerland , where each canton receives two seats (and each half-canton receives one seat) in the Council of States (Ständerat), regardless of population size.

[ 99 ] In South Africa , a unitary state , each of the nine provinces is accorded an equal delegation of ten representatives, irrespective of population size, in the National Council of Provinces (the upper house of Parliament).

[ 100 ] See also Divided government in the United States Edward M. Kennedy Institute for the United States Senate Elections in the United States Minoritarianism Notes ^ Independent Sens.

Angus King of Maine and Bernie Sanders of Vermont , caucus with the Democratic Party.

[ 1 ] ^ Alaska (for its primary elections only), California , and Washington additionally utilize a nonpartisan blanket primary , and Mississippi uses the two-round system , for their respective primary elections .

^ Louisiana uses a Louisiana primary .

^ Not to be confused with proportional representation , an electoral system that typically elects multiple members of a party to a legislature based on that party's percentage of a popular vote.

References ^ "Maine Independent Angus King To Caucus With Senate Democrats" .

Politico . November 14, 2012.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved November 28, 2020 .

Angus King of Maine, who cruised to victory last week running as an independent, said Wednesday that he will caucus with Senate Democrats. [...] The Senate's other independent, Bernie Sanders of Vermont, also caucuses with the Democrats.

^ a b "Constitution of the United States" . Senate.gov.

Archived from the original on November 27, 2022 . Retrieved January 8, 2023 .

^ a b "Article 1, Section 3, Clause 1" .

Constitution of the United States .

^ "Seventeenth Amendment" .

Constitution of the United States .

^ Amar, Vik D. (January 1, 1988). "The Senate and the Constitution".

The Yale Law Journal .

97 (6): 1111– 1130.

doi : 10.2307/796343 .

ISSN 0044-0094 .

JSTOR 796343 .

S2CID 53702587 .

^ Stewart, Charles; Reynolds, Mark (January 1, 1990). "Television Markets and U.S. Senate Elections".

Legislative Studies Quarterly .

15 (4): 495– 523.

JSTOR 439894 .

^ "When the House and the Senate Are Controlled by Different Parties, Who Wins?" .

The New York Times . July 11, 2018.

Archived from the original on November 21, 2023 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 .

^ Joseph S. Friedman, undergraduate student (March 30, 2009).

"The Rapid Sequence of Events Forcing the Senate's Hand: A Reappraisal of the Seventeenth Amendment, 1890–1913" .

Curej – College Undergraduate Research Electronic Journal (93).

Archived from the original on July 24, 2019.

^ Lee, Frances E. (June 16, 2006). "Agreeing to Disagree: Agenda Content and Senate Partisanship, 198".

Legislative Studies Quarterly .

33 (2): 199– 222.

doi : 10.3162/036298008784311000 .

^ a b c Wirls, Daniel (2021).

The Senate: from white supremacy to governmental gridlock . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. p. 40.

ISBN 978-0-8139-4691-7 .

OCLC 1248598962 .

^ Litt, David (2020).

Democracy in One Book or Less: How It Works, Why It Doesn't, and Why Fixing It Is Easier Than You Think . Ecco. pp.

153– 154.

^ Wirls, Daniel (2004).

The Invention of the United States Senate . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 0-8018-7438-6 .

OCLC 51878651 .

^ "Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary: senate " .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2012 . Retrieved January 8, 2023 .

^ "Hawaii becomes 50th state" .

History.com . November 24, 2009.

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved March 22, 2011 .

^ "U.S. Constitution: Article 1, Section 1 " .

Archived from the original on August 30, 2010 . Retrieved January 8, 2023 .

^ Article I, Section 3: "The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two senators from each state, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years; each Senator shall have one vote." ^ a b "Direct Election of Senators" . U.S. Senate official website.

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved April 23, 2019 .

^ Matthews, Donald R. (1959).

"The Folkways of the United States Senate: Conformity to Group Norms and Legislative Effectiveness" .

American Political Science Review .

53 (4): 1064– 1089.

doi : 10.2307/1952075 .

ISSN 1537-5943 .

JSTOR 1952075 .

S2CID 143733406 .

^ "Constitution of the United States" . Senate.gov.

Archived from the original on February 10, 2014 . Retrieved January 1, 2012 .

^ This article incorporates public domain material from James V. Saturno.

The Origination Clause of the U.S. Constitution: Interpretation and Enforcement (PDF) .

Congressional Research Service .

^ Wirls, Daniel and Wirls, Stephen.

The Invention of the United States Senate (Taylor & Francis 2004). p. 188 ^ Woodrow Wilson wrote that the Senate has extremely broad amendment authority with regard to appropriations bills, as distinguished from bills that levy taxes. See Wilson, Woodrow.

Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics Archived February 12, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , pp. 155–156 (Transaction Publishers 2002).

^ According to the Library of Congress , the Constitution provides the origination requirement for revenue bills, whereas tradition provides the origination requirement for appropriation bills. See Sullivan, John. " How Our Laws Are Made Archived October 16, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ", Library of Congress (accessed August 26, 2013).

^ Sargent, Noel. " Bills for Raising Revenue Under the Federal and State Constitutions Archived January 7, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ", Minnesota Law Review , Vol. 4, p. 330 (1919).

^ Wilson Congressional Government , Chapter III: "Revenue and Supply". Text common to all printings or "editions"; in Papers of Woodrow Wilson it is Vol.4 (1968), p.91; for unchanged text, see p. 13, ibid.

^ King, Elizabeth (February 3, 2017).

"This Is What Happened Last Time a Cabinet Nomination Was Rejected" .

Time . Time USA, LLC.

Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved April 11, 2020 .

^ "Recess Appointments FAQ" (PDF) . US Senate, Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 29, 2017 . Retrieved November 20, 2007 .

^ Ritchie, Congress p. 178.

^ Pyser, Steven M. (January 2006).

"Recess Appointments To The Federal Judiciary: An Unconstitutional Transformation Of Senate Advice And Consent" .

Journal of Constitutional Law .

8 (1): 61– 114 . Retrieved March 14, 2022 – via Penn Law Legal Scholarship Repository.

^ Wermiel, Stephen (February 15, 2013).

"SCOTUS for law students (sponsored by Bloomberg Law): Recess appointments and the Court" .

SCOTUSblog.com .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2024 . Retrieved March 14, 2022 .

^ Bolton, John R. (January 5, 2009).

"Restore the Senate's Treaty Power" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved February 20, 2017 .

^ For an example, and a discussion of the literature, see Laurence Tribe , " Taking Text and Structure Seriously: Reflections on Free-Form Method in Constitutional Interpretation Archived January 8, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ", Harvard Law Review , Vol. 108, No. 6. (April 1995), pp. 1221–1303.

^ "Complete list of impeachment trials" .

United States Senate . Archived from the original on December 2, 2010 . Retrieved November 20, 2007 .

^ Federalist Papers, No. 62 Archived November 23, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Library of Congress.

^ "1801–1850, November 16, 1818: Youngest Senator" .

United States Senate .

Archived from the original on December 26, 2002 . Retrieved November 17, 2007 .

^ "Fourteenth Amendment" .

Constitution of the United States .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2023 . Retrieved December 24, 2023 .

^ 2 U.S.C.

§ 1 ^ Brooks, James (December 14, 2020).

"Election audit confirms win for Ballot Measure 2 and Alaska's new ranked-choice voting system" .

Anchorage Daily News .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2021 . Retrieved January 10, 2021 .

^ "The Term of A Senator – When Does It Begin and End? – Senate 98-29" (PDF) .

United States Senate . United States Printing Office. pp.

14– 15.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 13, 2015 .

^ a b c d e Neale, Thomas H. (April 12, 2018).

"U.S. Senate Vacancies: Contemporary Developments and Perspectives" (PDF) .

fas.org . Congressional Research Service.

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 5, 2018 . Retrieved October 13, 2018 .

NOTE: wherever present, references to page numbers in superscripts refer to the electronic (.pdf) pagination, not as found printed on the bottom margin of displayed pages.

^ Morgan Watkins.

"Kentucky lawmakers override veto of Mitch McConnell-backed Senate vacancy plan" . Louisville Courier Journal.

Archived from the original on September 11, 2024 . Retrieved September 2, 2023 .

^ a b "House approves appointment process for U.S. Senate vacancies" .

OCPA . Oklahoma Council of Public Affairs. May 27, 2021.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved December 21, 2022 .

^ DeLeo, Robert A. (September 17, 2009).

"Temporary Appointment of US Senator" . Massachusetts Great and General Court.

Archived from the original on August 29, 2019 . Retrieved September 28, 2009 .

^ DeLeo, Robert A. (September 17, 2009).

"Temporary Appointment of US Senator Shall not be a candidate in special election" .

Massachusetts General Court .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2021 . Retrieved July 19, 2015 .

^ a b "Stevens could keep seat in Senate" .

Anchorage Daily News . October 28, 2009. Archived from the original on May 28, 2009.

^ "Dates of Sessions of the Congress" .

United States Senate .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ United States Constitution, Article VI ^ See: 5 U.S.C.

§ 3331 ; see also: "U.S. Senate Oath of Office" .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2018 . Retrieved January 8, 2023 .

^ a b "Salaries" .

United States Senate . Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 2, 2013 .

^ a b "US Congress Salaries and Benefits" . Dotdash Meredith.

Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 2, 2013 .

^ Sean Loughlin and Robert Yoon (June 13, 2003).

"Millionaires populate U.S. Senate" . CNN.

Archived from the original on December 23, 2020 . Retrieved June 19, 2006 .

^ "Wealth of Congress" .

Roll Call .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2019 . Retrieved November 8, 2018 .

^ Baker, Richard A.

"Traditions of the United States Senate" (PDF) .

United States Senate . p. 4.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 11, 2018 . Retrieved February 16, 2018 .

^ Hickey, Robert (May 18, 2020).

"Use of the Honorable for U.S. Elected Officials" .

formsofaddress.info .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved August 3, 2022 .

^ Mewborn, Mary K.

"Too Many Honorables?" .

Washington Life . Archived from the original on January 1, 2016.

^ "Seating Arrangement" . Senate Chamber Desks.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2012 . Retrieved July 11, 2012 .

^ "Senate Chamber Desks – Overview" .

United States Senate .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 2, 2017 .

^ "Senate Chamber Desks – Desk Occupants" .

United States Senate .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2022 . Retrieved January 21, 2022 .

^ "Glossary Term: vice president" . United States Senate. Archived from the original on November 30, 2016 . Retrieved November 10, 2016 .

^ "Glossary Term: president pro tempore" . United States Senate. Archived from the original on December 5, 2016 . Retrieved November 10, 2016 .

^ Mershon, Erin (August 2011).

"Presiding Loses Its Prestige in Senate" .

Roll Call . Archived from the original on February 8, 2017 . Retrieved February 8, 2017 .

^ Packer, George (January 7, 2009).

"Filibusters and arcane obstructions in the Senate" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on July 1, 2014 . Retrieved October 4, 2010 .

^ Martin B. Gold, Senate Procedure and Practice , p.39 Archived March 23, 2019, at the Wayback Machine : Every member, when he speaks, shall address the chair, standing in his place, and when he has finished, shall sit down.

^ "The World's Greatest Deliberative Body" .

Time . July 5, 1993. Archived from the original on August 11, 2009.

^ "World's greatest deliberative body watch" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2010 .

^ "Senate reform: Lazing on a Senate afternoon" .

The Economist .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2010 . Retrieved October 4, 2010 .

^ Overcoming Trumpery: How to Restore Ethics, the Rule of Law, and Democracy . Brookings Institution Press. 2022.

ISBN 978-0-8157-3967-8 .

JSTOR 10.7864/j.ctv1x7k3j2 .

^ "Cory Booker's Long Speech: By the Numbers | U.S. Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey" .

www.booker.senate.gov . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ Reconciliation, 2 U.S.C.

§ 641(e) (Procedure in the Senate).

^ Brookings Institution Press 2022 , pp. 297–325 ^ "Defend the Filibuster" .

City Journal . Retrieved April 14, 2025 .

^ "Why ending the filibuster would be a bad idea" .

Orrin G. Hatch Foundation . May 15, 2023 . Retrieved April 14, 2025 .

^ a b "How majority rule works in the U.S. Senate" . Nieman Watchdog. July 31, 2009.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved March 4, 2013 .

^ "Yea or Nay? Voting in the Senate" . Senate.gov.

Archived from the original on May 11, 2011 . Retrieved April 11, 2011 .

^ Amer, Mildred (March 27, 2008).

"Secret Sessions of Congress: A Brief Historical Overview" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 6, 2009.

^ Amer, Mildred (March 27, 2008).

"Secret Sessions of the House and Senate" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on August 6, 2009.

^ "Key to Getting Things Done in a Closely Held Congress: The Committee System" .

Brennan Center for Justice . April 8, 2025 . Retrieved May 4, 2025 .

^ See, for examples, American Dictionary of National Biography on John Sherman and Carter Glass ; in general, Ritchie, Congress , p. 209 ^ Ritchie, Congress , p. 44. Zelizer, On Capitol Hill describes this process; one of the reforms is that seniority within the majority party can now be bypassed, so that chairs do run the risk of being deposed by their colleagues. See in particular p. 17, for the unreformed Congress, and pp.188–9, for the Stevenson reforms of 1977.

^ Ritchie, Congress , pp .44, 175, 209 ^ a b Evans, C. Lawrence (2024).

"Senate Countermajoritarianism" .

American Political Science Review .

119 (2): 585– 602.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055424000510 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

^ Levitsky, Steven ; Ziblatt, Daniel (2023). "Chapter 6".

Tyranny of the Minority: why American democracy reached the breaking point . New York: Crown.

ISBN 978-0-593-44307-1 .

^ a b Rusch, Elizabeth (2020).

You call this democracy?: how to fix our government and deliver power to the people . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-0-358-17692-3 .

OCLC 1124772479 .

^ "Non-voting members of Congress" .

OpenCongress . Archived from the original on November 23, 2010 . Retrieved March 22, 2011 .

^ Greve, Joan E. (May 3, 2021).

" 'Our moment is now': can Washington DC statehood finally become a reality?" .

the Guardian .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved January 31, 2023 .

^ Ziblatt, Daniel ; Levitsky, Steven (September 5, 2023).

"How American Democracy Fell So Far Behind" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2023 . Retrieved September 20, 2023 .

^ Drutman, Lee (July 29, 2020).

"The Senate Has Always Favored Smaller States. It Just Didn't Help Republicans Until Now" .

FiveThirtyEight .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2023 .

^ Jentleson, Adam (April 12, 2021).

"How to Stop the Minority-Rule Doom Loop" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2023 . Retrieved February 6, 2023 .

^ Yglesias, Matthew (December 17, 2019).

"American democracy's Senate problem, explained" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2023 . Retrieved February 6, 2023 .

^ "America's electoral system gives the Republicans advantages over Democrats" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2023 . Retrieved February 6, 2023 .

^ Lazare, Daniel (December 2, 2014).

"Abolish the Senate" .

Jacobin .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2022 . Retrieved December 24, 2022 .

^ Millhiser, Ian (January 30, 2020).

"America's democracy is failing. Here's why" .

Vox . Retrieved June 13, 2024 .

^ Levitsky, Steven; Ziblatt, Daniel (2023).

Tyranny of the Minority: why American democracy reached the breaking point . New York: Crown. pp. 4, 206– 209.

ISBN 978-0-593-44307-1 .

^ Farrand, Max (1911).

The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787 . Yale University Press.

^ Connelly Jr., William F. (2010).

James Madison Rules America: The Constitutional Origins of Congressional Partisanship . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers (published June 16, 2010).

ISBN 978-0-7425-9965-9 .

^ Amar, Akhil Reed (2005).

America's Constitution: A Biography . Random House.

ISBN 978-1-4000-6262-1 .

^ Cain, Bruce (2014).

Democracy More or Less: America's Political Reform Quandary (Cambridge Studies in Election Law and Democracy) . Cambridge University Press (published December 8, 2014).

ISBN 978-1-107-61226-6 .

^ Showah, Robert (July 5, 2022).

"How Democrats Lost Their Majorities" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2024 . Retrieved July 11, 2024 .

^ "How are the members of upper houses chosen around the world?" .

Electoral Reform Society . Retrieved January 15, 2025 .

^ "The National Council of Provinces (NCOP)" (PDF) .

Parliament of South Africa . Retrieved January 15, 2025 .

Bibliography Further information: U.S. senator bibliography (congressional memoirs) Baker, Richard A.

The Senate of the United States: A Bicentennial History Krieger, 1988.

Baker, Richard A., ed., First Among Equals: Outstanding Senate Leaders of the Twentieth Century Congressional Quarterly, 1991.

Barone, Michael, and Grant Ujifusa, The Almanac of American Politics 1976: The Senators, the Representatives and the Governors: Their Records and Election Results, Their States and Districts (1975); new edition every two years David W. Brady and Mathew D. McCubbins.

Party, Process, and Political Change in Congress: New Perspectives on the History of Congress (2002) Caro, Robert A.

The Years of Lyndon Johnson. Vol. 3: Master of the Senate .

Knopf, 2002.

Comiskey, Michael.

Seeking Justices: The Judging of Supreme Court Nominees U. Press of Kansas, 2004.

Congressional Quarterly Congress and the Nation XII: 2005–2008: Politics and Policy in the 109th and 110th Congresses (2010); massive, highly detailed summary of Congressional activity, as well as major executive and judicial decisions; based on Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report and the annual CQ almanac. The Congress and the Nation 2009–2012 vol XIII has been announced for September 2014 publication.

Congressional Quarterly Congress and the Nation: 2001–2004 (2005); Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1997–2001 (2002) Congressional Quarterly.

Congress and the Nation: 1993–1996 (1998) Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1989–1992 (1993) Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1985–1988 (1989) Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1981–1984 (1985) Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1977–1980 (1981) Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1973–1976 (1977) Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1969–1972 (1973) Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1965–1968 (1969) Congressional Quarterly, Congress and the Nation: 1945–1964 (1965), the first of the series Cooper, John Milton Jr.

Breaking the Heart of the World: Woodrow Wilson and the Fight for the League of Nations.

Cambridge U. Press, 2001.

Davidson, Roger H., and Walter J. Oleszek, eds. (1998).

Congress and Its Members , 6th ed. Washington DC: Congressional Quarterly.

(Legislative procedure, informal practices, and member information) Gould, Lewis L.

The Most Exclusive Club: A History Of The Modern United States Senate (2005) Hernon, Joseph Martin.

Profiles in Character: Hubris and Heroism in the U.S. Senate, 1789–1990 Sharpe, 1997.

Hoebeke, C. H.

The Road to Mass Democracy: Original Intent and the Seventeenth Amendment . Transaction Books, 1995. (Popular elections of senators) Lee, Frances E. and Oppenheimer, Bruce I.

Sizing Up the Senate: The Unequal Consequences of Equal Representation . U. of Chicago Press 1999. 304 pp.

MacNeil, Neil and Richard A. Baker.

The American Senate: An Insider's History.

Oxford University Press, 2013. 455 pp.

McFarland, Ernest W.

The Ernest W. McFarland Papers: The United States Senate Years, 1940–1952 . Prescott, Ariz.: Sharlot Hall Museum, 1995 (Democratic majority leader 1950–52) Malsberger, John W.

From Obstruction to Moderation: The Transformation of Senate Conservatism, 1938–1952 . Susquehanna U. Press 2000 Mann, Robert.

The Walls of Jericho: Lyndon Johnson, Hubert Humphrey, Richard Russell and the Struggle for Civil Rights . Harcourt Brace, 1996 Ritchie, Donald A.

(1991).

Press Gallery: Congress and the Washington Correspondents . Harvard University Press.

Ritchie, Donald A.

(2001).

The Congress of the United States: A Student Companion (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press.

Ritchie, Donald A.

(2010).

The U.S. Congress: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press.

Rothman, David.

Politics and Power the United States Senate 1869–1901 (1966) Swift, Elaine K.

The Making of an American Senate: Reconstitutive Change in Congress, 1787–1841 . U. of Michigan Press, 1996 Valeo, Frank.

Mike Mansfield, Majority Leader: A Different Kind of Senate, 1961–1976 Sharpe, 1999 (Senate Democratic leader) VanBeek, Stephen D.

Post-Passage Politics: Bicameral Resolution in Congress . U. of Pittsburgh Press 1995 Weller, Cecil Edward Jr.

Joe T. Robinson: Always a Loyal Democrat.

U. of Arkansas Press, 1998. (Arkansas Democrat who was Majority leader in 1930s) Wilson, Woodrow .

Congressional Government . New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1885; also 15th ed. 1900, repr. by photoreprint, Transaction books, 2002.

Zelizer, Julian E.

On Capitol Hill : The Struggle to Reform Congress and its Consequences, 1948–2000 (2006) Zelizer, Julian E., ed.

The American Congress: The Building of Democracy (2004) (overview) Official Senate histories Biographical Directory of the United States Congress , 1774–1989 The following are published by the Senate Historical Office .

Robert Byrd .

The Senate, 1789–1989 . Four volumes.

Vol. I, a chronological series of addresses on the history of the Senate Vol. II, a topical series of addresses on various aspects of the Senate's operation and powers Vol. III, Classic Speeches, 1830–1993 Vol. IV, Historical Statistics, 1789–1992 Dole, Bob .

Historical Almanac of the United States Senate Hatfield, Mark O.

, with the Senate Historical Office.

Vice Presidents of the United States, 1789–1993 ( essays reprinted online ) Frumin, Alan S.

Riddick's Senate Procedure . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office , 1992.

External links Listen to this article ( 29 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 4 August 2006 ( 2006-08-04 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) 38°53′26″N 77°0′32″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.89056°N 77.00889°W ﻿ / 38.89056; -77.00889 Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Senate .

The United States Senate Official Website Sortable contact data Senate Chamber Map Standing Rules of the Senate Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774 to Present United States Senate Calendars and Schedules Senate Manual via GovInfo (U.S. Government Publishing Office) Works by United States Senate at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Chart of all U.S. Senate seat-holders, by state, 1978–present , via Texas Tech University Works by or about United States Senate at the Internet Archive Congressional Chronicle: Senate by C-SPAN v t e United States Congress House of Representatives Senate Joint session ( 118th → 119th → 120th ) Lists of the United States Congress Members and leaders Membership Members By length of service By shortness of service Youngest members Non-voting members Unseated members Senate Members seniority Dean Former Expelled or censured Classes Born outside the U.S.

Resigned Appointed Switched parties House Members seniority Dean Former Expelled, censured, and reprimanded Served a single term Lost re-election in a primary Switched parties Elected but did not serve New members 90th (1967) 91st (1969) 92nd (1971) 93rd (1973) 94th (1975) 95th (1977) 96th (1979) 97th (1981) 98th (1983) 99th (1985) 100th (1987) 101st (1989) 102nd (1991) 103rd (1993) 104th (1995) 105th (1997) 106th (1999) 107th (2001) 108th (2003) 109th (2005) 110th (2007) 111th (2009) 112th (2011) 113th (2013) 114th (2015) 115th (2017) 116th (2019) 117th (2021) 118th (2023) 119th (2025) Leaders Senate President list President pro tempore list Leaders Democratic Caucus Chair Secretary Policy Committee Chair Republican Conference Chair Vice-Chair Policy Committee Chair House Speaker list Leaders Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group Democratic Caucus Republican Conference Districts List Apportionment Gerrymandering Groups Congressional caucus Caucuses of the United States Congress Ethnic and racial African-American members Senate House Black Caucus Arab and Middle Eastern members Asian Pacific American members Asian Pacific American Caucus Hispanic and Latino members list Hispanic Caucus Hispanic Conference Jewish members Jewish Caucus Native American members Gender and sexual identity LGBTQ members Equality Caucus Women Senate House Issues Caucus current House Occupation Physicians Religion Buddhist members Hindu members Jewish members Mormon (LDS) members Muslim members Quaker members Sikh members Related By length of service historically Current members by wealth From multiple states Died in office 1790–1899 1900–1949 1950–1999 2000–present Killed or wounded in office Party switchers Slave owners Powers, privileges, procedure, committees, history, media Powers Article I Copyright Commerce (Dormant) Contempt of Congress Declaration of war Impeachment Inquiries Trial Naturalization "Necessary and Proper" Power of enforcement Taxing/spending Privileges Salaries Franking Immunity Procedure Act of Congress list Appropriation bill Bill Budget process Censure Closed sessions House Senate Cloture Concurrent resolution Continuing resolution Dear Colleague letter Discharge petition Enrolled bill Expulsion Joint resolution Joint session list Lame-duck session Magic minute Majority of the majority (Hastert Rule) Multiple referral House procedures Quorum call Reconciliation Rider Saxbe fix Sponsorship Suspension of the rules Unanimous consent Veto Line-item veto Pocket veto Senate-specific Advice and consent Blue slip (U.S. Senate) Classes Executive communication Executive session Filibuster Jefferson's Manual Senate Journal Morning business Nuclear option Presiding Officer Recess appointment Reconciliation Riddick's Senate Procedure Senate hold Senatorial courtesy Seniority Standing Rules Tie-breaking votes Traditions Treaty Clause Committees Chairman and ranking member Of the Whole Conference Discharge petition Hearings Markup Oversight List (Joint) List (House) List (Senate) Select and special Standing Subcommittees Items Gavels Mace of the House Seal of the Senate History House history memoirs speaker elections Senate history election disputes memoirs Continental Congress Federal Hall (1789–1790) Congress Hall (1790–1800) Old Brick Capitol (1815–1819) Biographical Directory Divided government Party divisions Media C-SPAN Congressional Quarterly The Hill Politico Roll Call Capitol Complex ( Capitol Hill ) Legislative offices Congressional staff Gov. Accountability Office (GAO) Comptroller General Architect of the Capitol Cap. Police Board Cap. Guide Service Congr. Budget Office (CBO) Congr. Workplace Rights (OCWR) Library of Congress Gov. Publishing Office (GPO) Technology Assessment Offices Senate Curator Historical Library House Congr. Ethics Emergency Planning, Preparedness, and Operations Interparliamentary Affairs Law Revision Counsel Legislative Counsel Library Employees Senate Secretary Chaplain Curator Historian Librarian Pages Parliamentarian Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper House Chaplain Chief Administrative Officer Clerk Doorkeeper Floor Operations Floor Services Chief Historian Pages Board Parliamentarian Postmaster Reading Clerk Sergeant at Arms Library of Congress Congressional Research Service reports Copyright Office Register of Copyrights Law Library Poet Laureate THOMAS Adams Building Jefferson Building Madison Building Gov.

Publishing Office Public Printer Congressional Pictorial Directory Congressional Record Official Congressional Directory U.S. Gov. Manual Serial Set Statutes at Large United States Code Capitol Building List of artwork at the United States Capitol complex List of portraits in the United States House of Representatives collection (A-J) Brumidi Corridors Congressional Prayer Room Crypt Dome Statue of Freedom Rotunda Hall of Columns Statuary Hall Visitor Center The Apotheosis of Washington Statue of Freedom Declaration of Independence painting Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States Apotheosis of Democracy Progress of Civilization Pediment First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln Surrender of General Burgoyne Surrender of Lord Cornwallis George Washington and the Revolutionary War Door Revolutionary War Door Columbus Doors Washington at Princeton Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way VP's Room VP Bust Collection Office buildings Senate Dirksen Hart Mountains and Clouds Russell House Building Commission office lottery Cannon Ford Longworth O'Neill Rayburn Other facilities Botanic Garden Health and Fitness Facility House Recording Studio Senate chamber Old Senate Chamber Old Supreme Court Chamber Power Plant Webster Page Residence Subway Related Capitol Hill United States Capitol cornerstone laying v t e Current United States senators President : ▌ JD Vance (R) ‧ President pro tempore : ▌ Chuck Grassley (R) AL : ▌ Tuberville (R) ⎣ ▌ Britt (R) AK : ▌ Murkowski (R) ⎣ ▌ Sullivan (R) AZ : ▌ Kelly (D) ⎣ ▌ Gallego (D) AR : ▌ Boozman (R) ⎣ ▌ Cotton (R) CA : ▌ Padilla (D) ⎣ ▌ Schiff (D) CO : ▌ Bennet (D) ⎣ ▌ Hickenlooper (D) CT : ▌ Blumenthal (D) ⎣ ▌ Murphy (D) DE : ▌ Coons (D) ⎣ ▌ Blunt Rochester (D) FL : ▌ R. Scott (R) ⎣ ▌ Moody (R) GA : ▌ Ossoff (D) ⎣ ▌ Warnock (D) HI : ▌ Schatz (D) ⎣ ▌ Hirono (D) ID : ▌ Crapo (R) ⎣ ▌ Risch (R) IL : ▌ Durbin (D) ⎣ ▌ Duckworth (D) IN : ▌ Young (R) ⎣ ▌ Banks (R) IA : ▌ Grassley (R) ⎣ ▌ Ernst (R) KS : ▌ Moran (R) ⎣ ▌ Marshall (R) KY : ▌ McConnell (R) ⎣ ▌ Paul (R) LA : ▌ Cassidy (R) ⎣ ▌ Kennedy (R) ME : ▌ Collins (R) ⎣ ▌ King (I) MD : ▌ Van Hollen (D) ⎣ ▌ Alsobrooks (D) MA : ▌ Warren (D) ⎣ ▌ Markey (D) MI : ▌ Peters (D) ⎣ ▌ Slotkin (D) MN : ▌ Klobuchar (D) ⎣ ▌ Smith (D) MS : ▌ Wicker (R) ⎣ ▌ Hyde-Smith (R) MO : ▌ Hawley (R) ⎣ ▌ Schmitt (R) MT : ▌ Daines (R) ⎣ ▌ Sheehy (R) NE : ▌ Fischer (R) ⎣ ▌ Ricketts (R) NV : ▌ Cortez Masto (D) ⎣ ▌ Rosen (D) NH : ▌ Shaheen (D) ⎣ ▌ Hassan (D) NJ : ▌ Booker (D) ⎣ ▌ Kim (D) NM : ▌ Heinrich (D) ⎣ ▌ Luján (D) NY : ▌ Schumer (D) ⎣ ▌ Gillibrand (D) NC : ▌ Tillis (R) ⎣ ▌ Budd (R) ND : ▌ Hoeven (R) ⎣ ▌ Cramer (R) OH : ▌ Moreno (R) ⎣ ▌ Husted (R) OK : ▌ Lankford (R) ⎣ ▌ Mullin (R) OR : ▌ Wyden (D) ⎣ ▌ Merkley (D) PA : ▌ Fetterman (D) ⎣ ▌ McCormick (R) RI : ▌ Reed (D) ⎣ ▌ Whitehouse (D) SC : ▌ Graham (R) ⎣ ▌ T. Scott (R) SD : ▌ Thune (R) ⎣ ▌ Rounds (R) TN : ▌ Blackburn (R) ⎣ ▌ Hagerty (R) TX : ▌ Cornyn (R) ⎣ ▌ Cruz (R) UT : ▌ Lee (R) ⎣ ▌ Curtis (R) VT : ▌ Sanders (I) ⎣ ▌ Welch (D) VA : ▌ Warner (D) ⎣ ▌ Kaine (D) WA : ▌ Murray (D) ⎣ ▌ Cantwell (D) WV : ▌ Capito (R) ⎣ ▌ Justice (R) WI : ▌ Johnson (R) ⎣ ▌ Baldwin (D) WY : ▌ Barrasso (R) ⎣ ▌ Lummis (R) ▌ Republican : 53 ▌ Democratic : 45 ▌ Independent : 2 v t e Legislatures of the United States United States Congress United States House of Representatives United States Senate State legislatures Alabama ( H , S ) Alaska ( H , S ) Arizona ( H , S ) Arkansas ( H , S ) California ( A , S ) Colorado ( H , S ) Connecticut ( H , S ) Delaware ( H , S ) Florida ( H , S ) Georgia ( H , S ) Hawaii ( H , S ) Idaho ( H , S ) Illinois ( H , S ) Indiana ( H , S ) Iowa ( H , S ) Kansas ( H , S ) Kentucky ( H , S ) Louisiana ( H , S ) Maine ( H , S ) Maryland ( H , S ) Massachusetts ( H , S ) Michigan ( H , S ) Minnesota ( H , S ) Mississippi ( H , S ) Missouri ( H , S ) Montana ( H , S ) Nebraska Nevada ( A , S ) New Hampshire ( H , S ) New Jersey ( GA , S ) New Mexico ( H , S ) New York ( A , S ) North Carolina ( H , S ) North Dakota ( H , S ) Ohio ( H , S ) Oklahoma ( H , S ) Oregon ( H , S ) Pennsylvania ( H , S ) Rhode Island ( H , S ) South Carolina ( H , S ) South Dakota ( H , S ) Tennessee ( H , S ) Texas ( H , S ) Utah ( H , S ) Vermont ( H , S ) Virginia ( H , S ) Washington ( H , S ) West Virginia ( H , S ) Wisconsin ( A , S ) Wyoming ( H , S ) Other legislatures District of Columbia American Samoa ( H , S ) Guam Northern Mariana Islands ( H , S ) Puerto Rico ( H , S ) U.S. Virgin Islands Legislative elections 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 List of U.S. state legislators Lists of past U.S. state legislatures v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e Upper houses of national legislatures Federal Argentina Australia Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Canada Ethiopia Germany India Malaysia Mexico Nepal Nigeria Pakistan Russia Somalia South Sudan Sudan Switzerland United States Unitary Algeria Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Bahrain Barbados Belarus Belize Bhutan Bolivia Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Chad Chile Colombia Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Czech Republic Dominican Republic Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eswatini France Gabon Grenada Haiti Indonesia Ireland Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan (post-1947) Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Lesotho Liberia Madagascar Morocco Myanmar Namibia Nepal Netherlands Oman Palau Paraguay Philippines Poland Romania Rwanda Saint Lucia Slovenia South Africa Spain Tajikistan Thailand Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia United Kingdom Uruguay Uzbekistan Yemen Zimbabwe Dependent and other territories American Samoa Bermuda Isle of Man Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Non-UN states Somaliland Defunct Afghanistan Austria British Guiana British Raj Burkina Faso Burma Ceylon China Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Czechoslovakia Denmark Dominican Republic East Germany Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia Fiji Greece Hungary Iran Iraq Kingdom of Ireland Irish Free State Japan (pre-1947) Libya Maldives Malta Mauritania New Zealand Nicaragua Northern Ireland Peru Portugal Prussia Rhodesia Russian Empire Senegal Serbia South Africa South Korea Soviet Union Sweden Turkey Venezuela Weimar Germany Related Bicameralism Unicameralism Tricameralism Multicameralism List of abolished upper houses List of legislatures by country National bicameral legislatures National unicameral legislatures National lower houses Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Portugal Norway Latvia Croatia Argentina Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4j6g9
Cached time: 20250817182756
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.000 seconds
Real time usage: 2.374 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13859/1000000
Revision size: 107589/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 644419/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25490/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 38/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 413891/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.183/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 29131393/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1893.414      1 -total
 37.49%  709.831      2 Template:Reflist
 13.42%  254.124     48 Template:Cite_web
  8.28%  156.853      1 Template:Current_U.S._senators
  6.85%  129.625     50 Template:Current_U.S._senators/row
  6.46%  122.395      2 Template:Infobox
  6.31%  119.460      1 Template:Infobox_legislature
  6.22%  117.742    105 Template:Party_stripe
  6.20%  117.413     10 Template:Cite_news
  5.52%  104.551      1 Template:United_States_Senate Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24909346:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817182756 and revision id 1305452892. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Senate&oldid=1305452892 " Categories : United States Senate 1789 establishments in the United States Legislative branch of the United States government National upper houses Federal chambers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Congressional Research Service Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2024 Infobox legislature with background color Articles containing Latin-language text All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2025 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from September 2023 Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Coordinates not on Wikidata Commons link from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 04:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Senate 95 languages Add topic

