Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Pelte shield 1.2 Weapons 2 Development 3 Anatolian 4 In the Persian army 5 In the Antigonid army 6 Deployment & Role 7 Tactics 8 Medieval Byzantine 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Peltast 33 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of Thracian light infantry "Pelta" redirects here. For the suffix "-pelta", see List of commonly used taxonomic affixes . For Peltæ, see Peltae .

Agrianian peltas . This peltast holds three javelins, one in his throwing hand and two in his pelte (shield) hand as additional ammunition.

A peltast ( Ancient Greek : πελταστής , peltastēs ) was a type of light infantry originating in Thrace and Paeonia and named after the kind of shield they carried.

[ 1 ] Thucydides mentions the Thracian peltasts, while Xenophon in the Anabasis distinguishes the Thracian and Greek peltast troops.

[ 2 ] The peltast often served as a skirmisher in Hellenistic armies. In the Middle Ages , the same term was used for a type of Byzantine infantryman.

Description [ edit ] Pelte shield [ edit ] "Pelte" redirects here. For other uses, see Pelte (disambiguation) .

Peltasts carried a crescent-shaped wicker shield called a " pelte " ( Ancient Greek πέλτη , peltē ; Latin: pelta [ N 1 ] ) as their main protection, hence their name. According to Aristotle , the pelte was rimless and covered in goat- or sheepskin. Some literary sources imply that the shield could be round, but in art it is usually shown as crescent-shaped. It also appears in Scythian art and may have been a common type in Central Europe. The shield could be carried with a central strap and a handgrip near the rim [ citation needed ] or with just a central hand-grip. It may also have had a carrying strap (or guige ), as Thracian peltasts slung their shields on their backs when evading the enemy.

Weapons [ edit ] Peltasts weapons consisted of several javelins , which may have had straps to allow more force to be applied to a throw.

The size of these javelins could differ greatly from a modern olympic-style javelin.

Xenophon mentions in his Anabasis an encounter with hostile Carduchians , fighting with longbows, wherein the Greeks reused carduchian arrows as javelins.

They were, moreover, excellent archers, using bows nearly three cubits long and arrows more than two cubits (86 cm -112 cm). When discharging the arrow, they draw the string by getting a purchase with the left foot planted forward on the lower end of the bow. The arrows pierced through shield and cuirass, and the Hellenes, when they got hold of them, used them as javelins, fitting them to their thongs.

[ 4 ] Development [ edit ] A peltast with the whole of his panoply (on a red-figure kylix ) In Archaic Greece , the Greek martial tradition had been focused almost exclusively on the heavy infantry, or hoplites .

The style of fighting used by peltasts originated in Thrace , and the first Greek peltasts were recruited from the Greek cities of the Thracian coast.

[ 1 ] They are generally depicted on vases and in other images as wearing the typical Thracian costume, which includes the distinctive Phrygian cap made of fox-skin and with ear flaps. They also usually wore patterned tunics, fawnskin boots and long cloaks, called zeiras , decorated with a bright, geometric, pattern. However, many mercenary peltasts were probably recruited in Greece. Some vases have also been found showing hoplites (men wearing Corinthian helmets , greaves and cuirasses , holding hoplite spears) carrying peltes . Often, the mythical Amazons (women warriors) are shown with peltast equipment.

Peltasts gradually became more important in Greek warfare, in particular during the Peloponnesian War .

Xenophon , in the Anabasis , describes peltasts in action against Achaemenid cavalry at the Battle of Cunaxa in 401 BC, where they were serving as part of the mercenary force of Cyrus the Younger .

Tissaphernes had not fled at the first charge (by the Greek troops), but had instead charged along the river through the Greek peltasts . However he did not kill a single man as he passed through. The Greeks opened their ranks (to allow the Persian cavalry through) and proceeded to deal blows (with swords) and throw javelins at them as they went through.

[ 4 ] Xenophon's description makes it clear that these peltasts were armed with swords, as well as javelins, but not with spears. When faced with a charge from the Persian cavalry, they opened their ranks and allowed the cavalry through while striking them with swords and hurling javelins at them.

[ 4 ] Peltasts on the Tomb of Payava Peltasts on the Tomb of Payava ( c.

360 BC), around the time of Iphicrates . They are equipped with the exomis , the pilos with crest and cheekpiece, and the round pelte shield, thrusting overarm with a spear.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Peltasts became the main type of Greek mercenary infantry in the 4th century BC. Their equipment was less expensive than that of traditional hoplites and would have been more readily available to poorer members of society. The Athenian general Iphicrates destroyed a Spartan phalanx in the Battle of Lechaeum in 390 BC, using mostly peltasts . In the account of Diodorus Siculus , Iphicrates is credited with re-arming his men with long spears, perhaps in around 374 BC. This reform may have produced a type of " peltast " armed with a small shield, a sword, and a spear instead of javelins.

Some authorities, such as J.G.P. Best , state that these later " peltasts " were not truly peltasts in the traditional sense, but lightly armored hoplites carrying the pelte shield in conjunction with longer spears—a combination that has been interpreted as a direct ancestor to the Macedonian phalanx .

[ 7 ] However, thrusting spears are included in some illustrations of peltasts before the time of Iphicrates and some peltasts may have carried them as well as javelins rather than as a replacement for them. As no battle accounts describe peltasts using thrusting spears, it may be that they were sometimes carried by individuals by choice (rather than as part of a policy or reform). The Lykian sarcophagus of Payava from about 400 BC depicts a soldier carrying a round pelte , but using a thrusting spear overarm. He wears a pilos helmet with cheekpieces, but no armour. His equipment therefore resembles Iphicrates's supposed new troops. Fourth-century BC peltasts also seem to have sometimes worn both helmets and linen armour .

Alexander the Great employed peltasts drawn from the Thracian tribes to the north of Macedonia, particularly the Agrianoi . In the 3rd century BC, peltasts were gradually replaced with thureophoroi infantrymen. Later references to peltasts may not in fact refer to their style of equipment as the word peltast became a synonym for mercenary .

Anatolian [ edit ] Athenian peltast An Athenian mercenary peltast (left) supporting an Achaemenid knight of Hellespontine Phrygia (center) attacking a Greek psilos (right), Altıkulaç Sarcophagus , early 4th century BC. The Athenian peltast is equipped with a machaira sword, a small round shield with a single grip, with javelins wedged in the grip, making him an effective fighter in close quarters against a disorganized enemy.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] A tradition of fighting with javelins, light shield and sometimes a spear existed in Anatolia and several contingents armed like this appeared in Xerxes I 's army that invaded Greece in 480 BC. For example, the Paphlagonians and Phrygians wore wicker helmets and native boots reaching halfway to the knee. They carried small shields, short spears, javelins and daggers.

[ 10 ] In the Persian army [ edit ] From the mid-5th century BC onwards, peltast soldiers began to appear in Greek depictions of Persian troops.

[ 11 ] They were equipped like Greek and Thracian peltasts , but were dressed in typically Persian army uniforms. They often carried light axes, known as sagaris , as sidearms. It has been suggested that these troops were known in Persian as takabara and their shields as taka .

[ 12 ] The Persians may have been influenced by Greek and Thracian peltasts . Another alternative source of influence would have been the Anatolian hill tribes, such as the Corduene , Mysians or Pisidians .

[ 13 ] In Greek sources, these troops were either called peltasts or peltophoroi (bearers of pelte ).

In the Antigonid army [ edit ] In the Hellenistic period , the Antigonid kings of Macedon had an elite corps of native Macedonian peltasts . However, this force should not be confused with the skirmishing peltasts discussed earlier. The peltasts were probably, according to F.W. Walbank, about 3,000 in number, although by the Third Macedonian War , this went up to 5,000 (most likely to accommodate the elite agema , which was a sub-unit in the peltast corps). The fact that they are always mentioned as being in their thousands suggests that, in terms of organization, the peltasts were organized into chiliarchies . This elite corps was most likely of the same status, of similar equipment and role as Alexander the Great's hypaspists . Within this corps of peltasts was its elite formation, the Agema . These troops were used on forced marches by Philip V of Macedon , which suggests that they were lightly equipped and mobile. However, at the battle of Pydna in 168 BC, Livy remarks on how the Macedonian peltasts defeated the Paeligni and of how this shows the dangers of going directly at the front of a phalanx. Though it may seem strange for a unit that would fight in phalanx formation to be called peltasts , pelte would not be an inappropriate name for a Macedonian shield. They may have been similarly equipped with the Iphicratean hoplites or peltasts , as described by Diodorus.

[ 7 ] Deployment & Role [ edit ] A peltast fighting a panther (from an Attic white-ground mug, 5th century BC) Peltasts were usually deployed on the flanks of the phalanx , providing a link with any cavalry, or in rough or broken ground. For example, in the Hellenica , Xenophon writes 'When Dercylidas learned this (that a Persian army was nearby), he ordered his officers to form their men in line, eight ranks deep (the hoplite phalanx), as quickly as possible, and to station the peltasts on either wing along with the cavalry.

[ 14 ] They could also operate in support of other light troops, such as archers and slingers. In the absence of a large enough cavalry force, or when otherwise deemed appropriate, peltasts would also pursue retreating enemies at the end of a battle, in order to capture or kill men who had thrown away their weapons or been isolated from their formation during the rout.

[ 4 ] Peltasts (and other light troops, as ancient sources tend to group all types of light troops together) had a number of essential tasks on the march, away from the battlefield that were difficult to perform for the heavy infantry. They were often used to occupy mountain passes and defensible hills which the army would have to pass, to deny enemy forces a superior attacking position.

[ 15 ] They would also lay ambushes in wooded or otherwise difficult terrain, defend the rear of the marching army against enemy pursuers, and detachments of light troops would also frequently be used to scout ahead when knowledge of the area and presence of enemies was not well established.

[ 4 ] Tactics [ edit ] When faced with hoplites, peltasts operated by throwing javelins at short range. If the hoplites charged, the peltasts would retreat. As they carried considerably lighter equipment than the hoplites, they were usually able to evade successfully, especially in difficult terrain. They would then return to the attack once the pursuit ended, if possible, taking advantage of any disorder created in the hoplites' ranks. At the Battle of Sphacteria , the Athenian forces included 800 archers and at least 800 peltasts .

Thucydides , in the History of the Peloponnesian War , writes They (the Spartan hoplites) themselves were held up by the weapons shot at them from both flanks by the light troops. Though they (the hoplites) drove back the light troops at any point in which they ran in and approached too closely, they (the light troops) still fought back even in retreat, since they had no heavy equipment and could easily outdistance their pursuers over ground where, since the place had been uninhabited until then, the going was rough and difficult.

[ 16 ] When fighting other types of light troops, peltasts were able to close more aggressively in hand-to-hand combat , as they had the advantage of possessing shields, swords, and helmets.

Medieval Byzantine [ edit ] A type of infantryman called a peltast ( peltastēs ) is described in the Strategikon , a 6th-century AD military treatise associated with the early Byzantine emperor Maurice .

[ 17 ] Peltasts were especially prominent in the Byzantine army of the Komnenian period in the late 11th and 12th centuries. Although the peltasts of Antiquity were light skirmish infantry armed with javelins, it is not safe to assume that the troops given this name in the Byzantine period were identical in function. Byzantine peltasts were sometimes described as "assault troops".

[ 18 ] Byzantine peltasts appear to have been relatively lightly equipped soldiers capable of great battlefield mobility, who could skirmish but who were equally capable of close combat.

[ 19 ] Their arms may have included a shorter version of the kontarion spear employed by contemporary Byzantine heavy infantry.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Ancient Macedonian army Toxotai Velites Takabara References [ edit ] ^ The diminutives peltarion (Greek) and peltarium (Latin, both "little shield") are used in biology to describe unrelated structures and organisms, [ 3 ] but published historians do not appear to have used the terms for the actual shields.

The specific names and epithets peltatus , peltata and peltatum ("having a pelta ") are also used in taxonomy .

^ a b Williams, Mary Frances. "Philopoemen's special forces: Peltasts and a new kind of greek light-armed warfare (Livy 35.27) ." Historia: Zeitschrift Für Alte Geschichte H. 3 (2004): 257-277.

^ James A. Towle, Commentary on Plato: Protagoras James A. Towle, Ed.

^ EOS . Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales. 1981. p. 231.

el nombre de peltarium (del griego peltarion , diminutivo de pelte , escudo) Cheetham, Alan H. (1963).

Late Eocene Zoogeography of the Eastern Gulf Coast Region . Geological Society of America. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0-8137-1091-4 .

Poropeltarion [...] is derived from the Latin paras , pore, and peltarion , little shield.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b c d e Xenophon.

Anabasis . [1.10.7].

^ Smith, A.H.

A Catalogue of Sculpture in the Department of Greek and Roman Antiquities . British Museum. p.

49 .

^ The Numismatic Chronicle . Royal Numismatic Society. 2005. p. 83.

^ a b Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica, XV.44 ^ Campbell, Brian; Tritle, Lawrence A. (2012).

The Oxford Handbook of Warfare in the Classical World . Oxford University Press. p. 150.

ISBN 9780199719556 .

^ Rose, Charles Brian (2014).

The Archaeology of Greek and Roman Troy . Cambridge University Press. pp.

137– 140.

ISBN 9780521762076 .

^ Herodotus.

Histories [7:70] ^ Head, Duncan (1992), p40 ^ Sekunda, Nicholas V (1988), p69.

^ Sekunda (1992), p. 24 ^ Xenophon.

Hellenica . [3.2.16].

^ Vegetius Renatus, Flavius.

De re Militari .

^ History of the Peloponnesian War [4.33] ^ Birkenmeier, p. 64.

^ Birkenmeier, p. 123.

^ Birkenmeier, p. 241.

^ Dawson, p. 59.

Bibliography [ edit ] Ancient sources Diodorus Siculus . History.

Herodotus .

The Histories Thucydides .

The History of the Peloponnesian War .

Xenophon .

Anabasis .

Xenophon .

Hellenica .

Modern sources Best, J. G. P. (1969).

Thracian Peltasts and their influence on Greek warfare .

Birkenmeier, John W. (2002).

The Development of the Komnenian Army: 1081–1180 . Brill.

ISBN 90-04-11710-5 .

Connolly, Peter (1981).

Greece and Rome at War . Macdonald (Black Cat, 1988).

ISBN 0-7481-0109-8 Dawson, Timothy (2007).

Byzantine Infantryman. Eastern Roman Empire c.900–1204 . Osprey.

ISBN 978-1-84603-105-2 .

Head, Duncan (1982).

Armies of the Macedonian and Punic Wars . WRG.

Head, Duncan (1992).

The Achaemenid Persian Army . Montvert.

ISBN 1-874101-00-0 "Light Infantry", special issue of Ancient Warfare , 2/1 (2008) Sekunda, Nicholas V (1988).

Achaemenid Military Terminology . In Archaeologische Mitteilungen aus Iran. Band 21.

Sekunda, Nicholas (1992).

The Persian army 560-330 BC . Elite Series. London: Osprey.

ISBN 978-1-85532-250-9 .

External links [ edit ] Picture of a peltast v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐ftfw2
Cached time: 20250814222147
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.591 seconds
Real time usage: 0.793 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2381/1000000
Revision size: 20420/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 164650/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2717/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 65881/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.354/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15327797/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  634.666      1 -total
 20.95%  132.969      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
 20.42%  129.619      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 20.00%  126.931      2 Template:Reflist
 19.05%  120.914     10 Template:Cite_book
 16.03%  101.750      2 Template:Langx
 11.57%   73.414      1 Template:Short_description
  8.24%   52.279      2 Template:Redirect
  6.64%   42.166      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.33%   40.206      4 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:866959:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222147 and revision id 1298717091. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peltast&oldid=1298717091 " Categories : Military units and formations of ancient Greece Military units and formations of the Hellenistic world Ancient Greek infantry types Infantry Mercenary units and formations of antiquity Infantry units and formations of Macedon Combat occupations Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 06:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peltast 33 languages Add topic

