Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Works 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles Bossut 14 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Հայերեն Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French mathematician Charles Bossut Born ( 1730-08-11 ) 11 August 1730 Tartaras , Loire , France Died 14 January 1814 (1814-01-14) (aged 83) Paris , France Nationality French Scientific career Fields Mathematics Charles Bossut (11 August 1730 – 14 January 1814) was a French mathematician and confrère of the Encyclopaedists .

Early life and education [ edit ] Bossut was born in 1730 in Tartaras , Loire to Barthélemy Bossut and Jeanne Thonnerine.

[ 1 ] He lost his father early in life and was raised by his uncle.

[ 1 ] He received his education at the Jesuit College of Lyon from age fourteen, under the influence of Père Béraud, who also mentored mathematicians such as Montucla and Jérôme Lalande .

[ 1 ] Career [ edit ] After completing his studies, Bossut followed a path in the Church, becoming known as Abbé Charles Bossut.

[ 1 ] He delved into mathematical research, collaborating with contemporaries such as Jean le Rond d'Alembert , Alexis Clairaut , and Charles Étienne Louis Camus .

[ 1 ] In 1753, he became a correspondant at the French Academy of Sciences.

[ 1 ] By the age of 21, he was appointed professor of mathematics at the École du Génie in Mézières , where he enhanced the course quality and taught future mathematicians, including Jean-Charles de Borda and Charles-Augustin de Coulomb .

[ 1 ] Bossut's research in mechanics and resistance to planetary motion earned recognition from the French Academy of Sciences , resulting in multiple Grand Prix awards.

[ 1 ] He played a pivotal role in guiding Gaspard Monge 's career, who later succeeded him at Mézières.

[ 1 ] In the 1760s, Bossut authored textbooks, notably Traité élémentaire de mécanique (1763) and Cours complet de mathématiques (1765).

[ 1 ] He also served as an examiner at Mézières and later at the École Polytechnique.

[ 1 ] In 1774, Bossut was appointed to a newly established chair of hydrodynamics at the Louvre, a position he held until 1780.

[ 1 ] During this time, he conducted fluid resistance experiments and edited an edition of Pascal's works.

[ 1 ] Bossut's later works include contributing to Diderot's Encyclopédie méthodique and publishing Mécanique en général (1792) and Essai sur l'histoire générale des mathématiques (1802).

[ 1 ] In his later years, Bossut became reclusive and remained unmarried.

[ 1 ] Nonetheless, he received accolades from several scientific academies, including those in Lyon, Toulouse, St Petersburg, Turin, and Bologna, for his contributions to mathematics.

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] Traité élémentaire d'hydrodynamique (1771)  later reworked as Traité théorique et expérimental d'hydrodynamique (1786–87) Traité élémentaire de méchanique statique (1772) Traité élémentaire de mechanique et de dinamique (in Italian). Vol. 1. Pavia: Stamperia del Monastero di S. Salvatore. 1788.

Traité élémentaire de mechanique et de dinamique (in Italian). Vol. 2. Pavia: Stamperia del Monastero di S. Salvatore. 1788.

Cours de mathématiques (1781) Histoire générale des mathématiques (1810) Did write parts of the Encyclopédie on mathematics with Jean le Rond d'Alembert . 
1768 member of Académie des sciences See also [ edit ] History of fluid mechanics References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p "Charles Bossut - Biography" .

MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive .

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Charles Bossut" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Wood, James , ed. (1907).

The Nuttall Encyclopædia . London and New York: Frederick Warne.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Structurae Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX This article about a French mathematician is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_Bossut&oldid=1289693624 " Categories : 1730 births 1814 deaths People from Loire (department) 18th-century French mathematicians 19th-century French mathematicians French textbook writers Members of the French Academy of Sciences Members of the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities French mathematician stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Nuttall Encyclopedia All stub articles This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 07:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles Bossut 14 languages Add topic

