Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 Notes and references 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents -ism 30 languages Afrikaans العربية Bikol Central Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Эрзянь Esperanto فارسی Français 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português کوردی Suomi Svenska Türkçe 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English-language suffix Look up -ism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

-ism ( /- ˌ ɪ z əm / ) is a suffix in many English words , originally derived from the Ancient Greek suffix -ισμός ( -ismós ), and reached English through the Latin -ismus , and the French -isme .

[ 1 ] It is used to create abstract nouns of action, state, condition, or doctrine, and is often used to describe philosophies , theories , religions , social movements , artistic movements , lifestyles , [ 2 ] behaviors , scientific phenomena , [ 3 ] or medical conditions .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The concept of an -ism may resemble that of a grand narrative .

[ 6 ] Skeptics of any given -isms can quote the dictum attributed to Eisenhower : "All -isms are wasms".

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] The first recorded usage of the suffix ism as a separate word in its own right was in 1680. By the nineteenth century it was being used by Thomas Carlyle to signify a pre-packaged ideology . It was later used in this sense by such writers as Julian Huxley and George Bernard Shaw . In the United States of the mid-nineteenth century, the phrase "the isms" was used as a collective derogatory term to lump together the radical social reform movements of the day (such as slavery abolitionism , feminism , alcohol prohibitionism , Fourierism , pacifism , Technoism, early socialism , etc.) and various spiritual or religious movements considered non-mainstream by the standards of the time (such as transcendentalism , spiritualism , Mormonism etc.). Southerners often prided themselves on the American South being free from all of these pernicious "Isms" (except for alcohol temperance campaigning, which was compatible with a traditional Protestant focus on individual morality).  So on September 5 and 9, 1856, the Examiner newspaper of Richmond, Virginia , ran editorials on "Our Enemies, the Isms and their Purposes", while in 1858 Parson Brownlow called for a "Missionary Society of the South, for the Conversion of the Freedom Shriekers, Spiritualists, Free-lovers, Fourierites, and Infidel Reformers of the North" (see The Freedom-of-thought Struggle in the Old South by Clement Eaton ).  In the present day, it appears in the title of a standard survey of political thought, Today's Isms by William Ebenstein, first published in the 1950s, and now in its 11th edition.

In 2004, the Oxford English Dictionary added two new draft definitions of -isms to reference their relationship to words that convey injustice: [ 8 ] "Forming nouns with the sense 'belief in the superiority of one—over another'; as racism , sexism , speciesism , etc." "Forming nouns with the sense ' discrimination or prejudice against on the basis of—'; as ageism , bodyism, heightism , faceism, lookism , sizeism , weightism , etc." In December 2015, Merriam-Webster Dictionary declared -ism to be the Word of the Year.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] For examples of the use of -ism as a suffix: List of philosophies Glossary of philosophy List of political ideologies List of art movements Discrimination § Types Vandalism Notes and references [ edit ] ^ "-ism" .

Oxford English Dictionary online . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2014.

(subscription required) ^ Such as hedonism or consumerism ^ Such as magnetism ^ Such as an embolism , dwarfism , or priapism ^ "ism suffix" .

Oxford English Dictionary online . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2023.

(subscription required) ^ Prettejohn, Elizabeth (15 September 2012). "The Discovery of Greek Sculpture".

The Modernity of Ancient Sculpture: Greek Sculpture and Modern Art from Winckelmann to Picasso . New Directions in Classics Series. Vol. 2. London: I.B.Tauris (published 2012). p. 61.

ISBN 9781848859036 .

[...] another grand narrative, no less compelling than the familiar succession of 'isms' [...] ^ Braund, Susanna Morton (19 July 2005) [2002].

Latin Literature . Classical Foundations. Routledge. p. 65.

ISBN 9781134646777 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 .

As President Eisenhower allegedly said, 'All -isms are wasms'. [...] I hope to avoid the tyranny of the -isms [...].

^ Krieger, Nancy (2020).

"Measures of Racism, Sexism, Heterosexism, and Gender Binarism for Health Equity Research: From Structural Injustice to Embodied Harm – An Ecosocial Analysis" .

Annual Review of Public Health .

41 : 37– 62.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-publhealth-040119-094017 .

PMID 31765272 .

^ "The Word of the Year is: -ism | Merriam-Webster" .

Further reading [ edit ] Today's Isms: Socialism, Capitalism, Fascism, Communism, Libertarianism by Alan Ebenstein, William Ebenstein and Edwin Fogelman (11th ed, Pearson, 1999, ISBN 978-0130257147 ) Isms and Ologies: 453 Difficult Doctrines You've Always Pretended to Understand by Arthur Goldwag (Quercus, 2007, ISBN 978-1847241764 ) ranges from Abolitionism to Zoroastrianism.

Isms: Understanding Art by Stephen Little (A & C Black, 2004, ISBN 978-0713670110 ), one of a series of similar titles including ... Architecture , ... Modern Art , ... Fashion and ... Religions .

The Ism Book: A Field Guide to Philosophy by Peter Saint-Andre.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=-ism&oldid=1295356095 " Categories : English suffixes Belief Suffixes of Greek origin Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 07:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents -ism 30 languages Add topic

