Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early career 2 In the government 3 Presidency Toggle Presidency subsection 3.1 Road to exile 3.1.1 La Barata 3.1.2 Llavaneras 3.1.3 Caldetas 3.1.4 Peralada 3.1.5 Agullana 3.1.6 La Vajol 3.1.7 French frontier 4 Last days 5 Writings 6 Political legacy 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 9.1 Other languages 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Manuel Azaña 56 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish Republican; Prime Minister & President (1880–1940) For the Spanish village called Azaña prior to 1936, see Numancia de la Sagra .

In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname is Azaña and the second or maternal family name is Díaz .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Manuel Azaña" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Manuel Azaña President of Spain In office 7 April 1936 – 3 March 1939 Prime Minister Santiago Casares Quiroga Diego Martínez Barrio José Giral Pereira Francisco Largo Caballero Juan Negrín López Preceded by Niceto Alcalá-Zamora Succeeded by Francisco Franco ( Caudillo of Spain) Prime Minister of Spain In office 19 February 1936 – 10 May 1936 President Niceto Alcalá-Zamora Preceded by Manuel Portela Valladares Succeeded by Santiago Casares Quiroga In office 14 October 1931 – 12 September 1933 President Niceto Alcalá-Zamora Preceded by Juan Bautista Aznar Cabañas Succeeded by Alejandro Lerroux Minister of War In office 14 April 1931 – 12 September 1933 Preceded by Dámaso Berenguer Succeeded by Juan José Rocha García Member of the Congress of Deputies In office 16 March 1936 – 31 March 1939 Constituency Madrid In office 8 December 1933 – 7 January 1936 Constituency Vizcaya In office 14 July 1931 – 9 October 1933 Constituency Valencia Personal details Born Manuel Azaña Díaz ( 1880-01-10 ) 10 January 1880 Alcalá de Henares , Madrid , Kingdom of Spain Died 3 November 1940 (1940-11-03) (aged 60) Montauban , Midi-Pyrénées , Vichy France Resting place Montauban Cemetery, France Political party Republican Left (1934–1940) Other political affiliations Republican Action (1930–1934) Spouse Dolores de Rivas Cherif Occupation Jurist Signature This article is part of a series on Liberalism in Spain Ideologies Conservative Moderantism National Progressivism Radical Secular Social Principles Civil and political rights Equality before the law Free trade Human rights Liberal democracy Secular state Social justice History Spanish Constitution of 1812 Trienio Liberal Carlist Wars Glorious Revolution Republic First Second Spanish Civil War Bando republicano Spanish transition to democracy People Aguilar Argüelles (Agustín) Argüelles (Canga) Alcalá Galiano Álvarez Azaña Bautista Canalejas Castelar Diego Espartero Fernández (de Moratín) Fernández (de San Miguel) García González Gutiérrez Llorente de Madariaga de Martínez Mon Montero Moret Narváez O'Donnell de Olózaga Ortega y Gasset Pavía Pérez Pineda Prim Queipo Quintana Riego Sagasta Serrano Suárez Parties Active Citizens Union, Progress and Democracy Defunct Democratic Convergence of Catalonia Democratic Party Democratic Progressive Party Dynastic Left Federal Democratic Republican Party Liberal Democrats Liberal Party 1880 1976 Liberal Union Moderate Party Monarchist Democratic Party Possibilist Democratic Party Progressive Party Radical Democratic Party Radical Republican Party Radical Socialist Republican Party Republican Left Republican Union 1893 1934 Union of the Democratic Centre Media El Periódico Related topics Anti-clericalism Anti-Francoism Politics of Spain Conservatism Popular Front (factions) Republicanism in Spain Liberalism portal Spain portal v t e Manuel Azaña Díaz ( Spanish pronunciation: [maˈnwel aˈθaɲa] ; 10 January 1880 – 3 November 1940) was a Spanish politician who served as Prime Minister of the Second Spanish Republic (1931–1933 and 1936), organizer of the Popular Front in 1935 and the last President of the Republic (1936–1939). He was the most prominent leader of the Republican cause during the Spanish Civil War of 1936–1939.

A published author in the 1910s, he stood out in the pro-Allies camp during World War I.

[ 1 ] He was sharply critical towards the Generation of '98 , the reimagination of the Spanish Middle Ages, Imperial Spain and the 20th century yearnings for a praetorian refurbishment of the country.

[ clarification needed ] Azaña followed instead the examples of the French Enlightenment and the Third French Republic , and took a political quest for democracy in the 1920s while defending the notion of homeland as the "democratic equality of all citizens towards the law" [ 2 ] that made him embrace republicanism .

After the Proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic in April 1931, Azaña became Minister of War of the Provisional Government and enacted military reform , looking to develop a modern armed forces with fewer army officers. He later became Prime Minister in October 1931.

The Spanish Civil War broke out while he was President of Spain . With the defeat of the Republic in 1939, he fled to France, resigned from office, and died in exile only a year later at age 60.

Early career [ edit ] Family coat of arms of Manuel Azaña.

Birthplace of Manuel Azaña, in Alcalá de Henares .

Born into a wealthy family, Manuel Azaña Díaz was orphaned at a very young age. He studied in the Universidad Complutense , the Cisneros Institute and the Agustinos of El Escorial . He was awarded a Lawyer 's licence by the University of Zaragoza in 1897, and a doctorate by the Universidad Complutense in 1900.

In 1909, he achieved a position at the Main Directorate of the Registries and practised the profession of civil law notary , and travelled to Paris in 1911. He became involved in politics and in 1914 joined the Reformist Republican Party led by Melquíades Álvarez . He collaborated in the production of various newspapers, such as El Imparcial and El Sol . He also joined the Freemasons .

[ 3 ] During World War I, he covered operations on the Western Front for various newspapers.  His treatment was very sympathetic to the French, and he may have been sponsored by French military intelligence. Afterwards he edited the magazines Pluma and España between 1920 and 1924, founding the former with his brother-in-law Cipriano Rivas Cherif . He was secretary of the Ateneo de Madrid (1913–1920), becoming its president in 1930. He was a candidate for the province of Toledo in 1918 and 1923, but lost on both occasions. In 1926 he founded the Acción Republicana (" Republican Action ") party with José Giral .

A strong critic of the dictatorship of Primo de Rivera , Azaña published a stirring manifesto against the dictator and King Alfonso XIII in 1924. In 1930, he was a signatory of the " Pact of San Sebastián ", which united all the republican and regionalist parties in Spain against Primo de Rivera and the King.

On 12 April 1931, republican candidates swept the municipal elections. This was seen as repudiation of Primo de Rivera and the monarchy. Two days later, the Second Spanish Republic was proclaimed and the King forced into exile.

In the government [ edit ] Niceto Alcalá-Zamora , prime minister of the provisional government of the Republic, named Azaña Minister of War on 14 April. Alcalá-Zamora resigned in October, and Azaña replaced him as prime minister. When the new constitution was adopted on 9 December, Azaña continued as prime minister, leading a coalition of left-wing parties, including his own Acción Republicana and the Socialists (PSOE), while Alcalá-Zamora became President of the Republic.

Azaña pursued some of the major reforms anticipated by the republican program. He introduced work accident insurance, [ 4 ] reduced the size of the Spanish Army , and removed some monarchist officers. He also moved to reduce the power and influence of the Roman Catholic Church, abolishing Church-operated schools and charities, and greatly expanding state-operated secular schools.

He defended these measures by saying "Do not tell me that this is contrary to freedom. It is a matter of public health".

[ 5 ] The Spanish legislature, the Cortes , also enacted an agrarian reform program, under which large private landholdings ( latifundia ) were to be confiscated and distributed among the rural poor.  However, Azaña was a "middle-class republican", not a socialist. He and his followers were not enthusiastic about this program.  The agrarian law did not include state-funded collective farms, as the Socialists wanted, and was not enacted until late 1932. It was also clumsily written, and threatened many relatively small landholders more than the latifundists. The Azaña government also did very little to carry it out: only 12,000 families received land in the first two years.

[ 6 ] In addition, Azaña did little to reform the taxation system to shift the burden of government onto the wealthy. Also, the government continued to support the owners of industry against wildcat strikes or attempted takeovers by militant workers, especially the anarcho-syndicalists of the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (National Confederation of Labour or CNT). Confrontation with the CNT erupted in bloody violence at Casas Viejas (now Benalup ) and Alt Llobregat . Violence against protesters also occurred against non CNT-affiliated workers during Castilblanco and Arnedo events .

Meanwhile, Azaña's extreme anti-clerical program alienated many moderates. In local elections held in early 1933, most of the seats went to conservative and centrist parties. Elections to the "Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees" (the Republic's "Supreme Court") followed this pattern.

Thus Azaña came into conflict with both the right and far left. He called a vote of confidence , but two-thirds of the Cortes abstained, and Alcalá-Zamora ordered Azaña's resignation on 8 September 1933. New elections were held on 19 November 1933.

These elections were won by the right-wing Confederación Española de Derechas Autónomas (CEDA) and the centrist Radical Republican Party . Radical leader Alejandro Lerroux became prime minister. Azaña temporarily withdrew from politics and returned to literary activity.

[ 7 ] Azaña's self-imposed political retreat lasted only a short while; in 1934 he founded the Republican Left party, the fusion of Acción Republicana with the Radical Socialist Republican Party , led by Marcelino Domingo , and the Organización Republicana Gallega Autónoma (ORGA) of Santiago Casares Quiroga .

On 5 October 1934, the PSOE and Communists attempted a general left-wing rebellion.  The rebellion had a temporary success in Asturias and Barcelona , but was over in two weeks. Azaña was in Barcelona that day, and the Lerroux-CEDA government tried to implicate him. He was arrested and charged with complicity in the rebellion.

[ 7 ] In fact, Azaña had no connection with the rebellion, and the attempt to convict him on spurious charges soon collapsed, giving him the prestige of a martyr. He was released from prison in January 1935. Azaña then helped organize the Frente Popular ("Popular Front"), a coalition of all the major left-wing parties for the elections of 16 February 1936.

The Front won the election, and Azaña became prime minister again on 19 February. His parliamentary coalition included the PSOE and Communists. This alarmed conservatives, who remembered their attempt to seize power only 17 months earlier. The Azaña government proclaimed an immediate amnesty for all prisoners from the rebellion, which increased conservative concerns. Socialists and Communists were appointed to important positions in the Assault Guard and Civil Guard.

[ 6 ] Also, with the Popular Front victory, radicalized peasants led by the Socialists began seizing land on 25 March. Azaña chose to legitimize these actions rather than challenge them. Radical Socialists vied with Communists in calling for violent revolution and forcible suppression of the Right. Political assassinations by Communists, Socialists, and anarchosyndicalists were frequent, as were retaliations by increasingly radicalized conservatives.

[ 6 ] Azaña insisted that the danger to the Republic was from the Right and on 11 March, the government suppressed the Falange .

Azaña was a man of very strong convictions. Historian Stanley G. Payne tentatively described him as "the last great figure of traditional Castilian arrogance in the history of Spain ." [ 8 ] As a "middle class republican", he was implacably hostile to the monarchy and the Church. The CEDA, which was pro-Catholic, he therefore regarded as illegitimate, and also any and all monarchists, even those who supported parliamentary democracy.

In the view of Paul Preston , nothing indicates more directly the value of the services provided by Azaña to the Republic than the hatred felt towards him by the ideologues and propagandists of the Francoist cause.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Presidency [ edit ] Presidential Standard of Manuel Azaña (1936–1939) Military parade in Alcalá de Henares (November 1937).

When the Cortes met in April, it removed President Alcalá-Zamora from office. On 7 April 1936, Azaña was elected President of the Republic; Quiroga succeeded him as prime minister. Azaña by this time was profoundly depressed by the increasing disorder, but could see no way to counter it.

[ 6 ] Stanley Payne reports that in the Cortes meeting of April 15, Azaña stated "I don't intend to serve as anyone's guardian angel" and told the right-wing deputies "[D]id you not want violence...? Then take to violence. Be prepared for the consequences", despite the fact that CEDA had adhered to the law. He would later regret these remarks and try to backtrack by blaming the violence and unrest on the Spanish national character but this gave the impression the government was disinterested in enforcing the law.

[ 11 ] Azaña repeatedly warned his fellow Republicans that the lack of unity within the government was a serious threat to the Republic's stability. Political violence continued: there were over 200 assassinations in February through early July.

By July, the military conspiracy to overthrow the Republic was well underway, but nothing definite had been planned. Then
on 13 July, José Calvo Sotelo , leader of a small monarchist grouping in the Cortes, was arrested and murdered by a mixed group of Socialist gunmen and Assault Guards. Azaña and Quiroga did not act effectively against the killers.

[ 6 ] On 17 July, right-wing, Falangist, and monarchist elements in the Republican army proclaimed the overthrow of the Republic. The rebellion failed in Madrid, however. Azaña replaced Quiroga as Prime Minister with his ally Diego Martínez Barrio , and the government attempted a compromise with the rebels, which was rejected by General Mola .

[ 6 ] On 13 September, Azaña authorized Minister of Finance Juan Negrín to move the nation's gold reserve to wherever Negrin thought it would be secure. Negrin shipped it to the Soviet Union, which claimed it in payment for arms supplied to the Republic.

[ 6 ] In 1938, Azaña moved to Barcelona with the rest of the Republican government, and was cut off there when the monarchist forces drove to the sea between Barcelona and Valencia .

[ 6 ] Road to exile [ edit ] See also: Trial of Manuel Azaña La Barata [ edit ] From February 1938 Azaña resided in La Barata, an isolated mansion at the outskirts of Matadepera near Terrassa . Built by Lliga politician Francesc Salvans , killed by the Republicans, [ 12 ] between late 1937 and early 1938 it was undergoing preparation works to host the head of state.

[ 13 ] The place was some 30 km away from Barcelona and some 80 km from the French frontier. Already on January 13, 1939 General Juan Hernández Saravia advised the president to leave the place given rapid advance of Nationalist troops, [ 14 ] the suggestion repeated by Negrin on January 17. On January 19 Saravia insisted the president evacuates; Azaña commenced preparations.

[ 15 ] Llavaneras [ edit ] The president, his family and his entourage, including secretaries and military AdCs , left La Barata on January 21 (Nationalist troops would seize the place on January 24). Following a drive of some 50 km east in the afternoon, the column of cars his entourage were travelling in reached the town of Llavaneras (now San Andreu de Llavaneres), north of Mataró , some 30 km from Barcelona and some 100 km from the French frontier. It turned out that the premises, supposed to host Azaña, were unsuitable; they spent the night in a randomly selected and hastily prepared house in a park.

[ 16 ] Caldetas [ edit ] The following day, on January 22, some members of Azaña's family left for France.

[ 17 ] The president proceeded to the coastal town of Caldetas (now Caldes d'Estrac), some 4 km away, where in another makeshift premises he spent the following one or two nights, while remainder of his belongings were being fetched from La Barata.

[ 18 ] During these few days he was almost entirely isolated, with little to no contact either with the government or the military command; at the same time, the evacuation of Barcelona had commenced.

Peralada [ edit ] The presidential column departed north from Caldetas on January 23 or 24 (the city would be seized by the Nationalists on January 28), and following a drive of some 90 km, in the evening they reached the castle in Peralada , [ 19 ] some 120 km from Barcelona, only 15 km from the French frontier; the Pyrenees were clearly visible from their new premises.

[ 20 ] It was in Peralada that contact with the government, representatives of the Cortes, the Republican military and foreign envoys, was re-established.

[ 21 ] Castillo de Peralada remained Azaña's residence for around a week.  During this period Barcelona fell to the Nationalists . On January 30 Negrín visited the president and offered to have an aircraft ready to take Azaña to France, should immediate evacuation be necessary.  The president declined the proposal, fearing that Negrín would rather forcibly take Azana to the central zone, Valencia or Madrid.

[ 22 ] Agullana [ edit ] Some time at the end of January, early February (the exact day is unclear, January 31 at the earliest, February 2 at the latest) the president left Peralada and moved some 20 km north-west, to Agullana . It was a village in the Pyrennees, some 4 km from the French frontier, located by a secondary drive and away from main roads, which were crammed with refugees trying to flee Barcelona and Catalonia. Agullana was at the time was also hosting the staff of general Rojo. The president spent one night there.

[ 23 ] La Vajol [ edit ] The following day, probably either on February 2 or February 3, Azaña left Agullana and drove some 5 km up the road, to the last Spanish settlement some 2 km from the French frontier, the hamlet of La Vajol . It is there he met his last foreign diplomatic representatives. On February 4 Negrín visited Azaña in La Vajol and suggested that, in view of the advance of Nationalist troops, the president cross to France as soon as possible.

French frontier [ edit ] On February 5, at 6 AM, when it was still dark, Azaña, his wife, his entourage and some state officials departed La Vajol (which would be seized by the Nationalists on February 9), fleeing north to France. What should have been a drive of a few minutes turned into a slightly longer journey. The leading police car broke down and blocked the narrow, winding, mountainous road. All the passengers had to leave their cars and proceed on foot, struggling on what proved a slippery, iced surface. The party encountered French gendarmes sometime after dawn.

[ 24 ] Last days [ edit ] Manuel Azaña's grave in Montauban, France.

On 3 March, Manuel Azana resigned as President of the Republic, rather than return to Madrid with the rest of the government. Both Nationalist and Republican commentators have condemned this decision as "desertion".

[ 6 ] Azaña lived in exile in France for more than a year after the war, eventually being trapped by the invasion of France by Germany and institution of the Vichy regime . Even then, his safety was ensured due to the intervention of the Mexican government, which had refused to extend diplomatic recognition to Franco's regime (Mexico would not resume relations with Spain until 1977, two years after Franco's death). To prevent his arrest and extradition, Azaña was vested with Mexican citizenship and named Honorary Ambassador, thus granting him diplomatic immunity. His residence was officially an extension of the Mexican Embassy and therefore under Mexican jurisdiction, and was closely monitored by Mexican military personnel.

Azaña died of natural causes on 3 November 1940, in Montauban , France.

[ 25 ] He received the last rites of Catholicism before his death. The Vichy authorities refused to allow his coffin to be covered with the Spanish Republican flag . The coffin was covered instead with the flag of Mexico .

Writings [ edit ] In his diaries and memoirs, on which he worked meticulously, Azaña vividly describes the various personality and ideological conflicts between himself and various Republican leaders, such as Largo Caballero and Negrín. Azaña's writings during the Civil War have been resources for study by scholars of the workings of the Republican government during the conflict. Along with his extensive memoirs and diaries, Azaña also wrote a number of well-known speeches. His speech on 18 July 1938 is one of the best known in which he implores his fellow Spaniards to seek reconciliation after the fighting ends and emphasizes the need for "Peace, Pity, and Pardon." Azaña wrote a play during the Civil War, La velada en Benicarló ("Vigil in Benicarló"). Having worked on the play during the previous weeks, Azaña dictated the final version while he was trapped in Barcelona during the "Days of May" violence. In the play, Azaña uses various characters to espouse the various ideological, political and social perspectives present within the Republic during the war. He portrayed and explored the rivalries and conflicts that were damaging the political cohesion of the Republic.

Azaña was aware of General Franco and Jose Sanjurjo 's firm determination to overthrow the Republic, which would culminate in the Law of Political Responsibilities (Ley de Responsabilidades Políticas) at the end of the war. Saddened, he reflected: [ 26 ] A policy should never be based on the extermination of the adversary; not only because—and that is a lot to say—it is morally an abomination, but because it is materially unfeasible. And the blood unjustly spilled by the hatred that seeks to exterminate will be reborn, sprouting and giving accursed fruits; a curse that will not be restricted, unfortunately, to those who spilled the blood, but which will be over the very country which—to compound its misfortune—absorbed it.

During the many years of his political activity, Azaña kept diaries. His work Diarios completos: monarquía, república, Guerra Civil was published posthumously in Spanish in 2003.

[ 27 ] Political legacy [ edit ] See also: Military reform of Manuel Azaña Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e According to British historian Piers Brendon, Manuel Azaña was the leading Republican politician. He was a well-educated would-be writer who "plotted to rid Spain of the yoke of church and king". A brilliant speaker, Azaña was graceful in word, but clumsy in action.  "He was a polemical bullfighter but a political bulldozer.".

[ 28 ] Although he preached a lofty form of liberalism, he had a mixed record as prime minister. He wanted to introduce a welfare state with minimum-wage, sickness benefits and paid holidays, but he never attempted to deal with the overwhelming problem of peasant poverty. He was so concerned to balance the budget that he cut back on land redistribution. He worked more effectively to establish a secular state, breaking the Catholic church's hold on education, legalizing civil marriage, seizing Catholic properties, expelling the Jesuit order, and tolerating the burning of church buildings such as convents for nuns. "All the convents in Spain are not worth a single Republican life," he proclaimed.

[ 29 ] As opposition mounted, he censored the press, exiled his enemies to North Africa, and formed a private militia force of Assault Guards. Meanwhile, his allies the anarchists were assassinating priests and nuns, and burning convents.

Azaña tried to reform the army , by replacing outmoded equipment and closing its military academy. In the process he demoted its most promising general—young Francisco Franco. Azaña was defeated in the elections of November 1933, having antagonized extremists and alienated the moderates. He made a comeback in 1936 but could not hold his coalition together in the face of a civil war. In recent decades he has become a hero of the left in Spain.

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Grupo de Acción Republicana Second Spanish Republic Spanish Civil War References [ edit ] ^ Acosta López, Alejandro.

"Aliadófilos y germanófilos en el pensamiento español durante la Primera Guerra Mundial. Balance historiográfico de una Guerra Civil de palabras" .

Studia historica: Historia contemporánea . Salamanca: University of Salamanca : 357.

ISSN 0213-2087 .

^ Jackson, Gabriel (1 July 2009).

"Toda una vida" .

Revista de Libros .

^ Bedoya, Juan G. (2016-03-24).

"Why did General Franco hate the freemasons so much?" .

EL PAÍS English Edition . Retrieved 2022-01-11 .

^ Social Democracy and Welfare Capitalism: A Century of Income Security Policies by Alexander Hicks ^ Lee, Stephen J. (2016).

European Dictatorships 1918-1945 . Taylor & Francis. p. 232.

^ a b c d e f g h i Payne, Stanley (1970).

The Spanish Revolution . New York: W. W. Norton. pp.

97– 99, 181– 184, 191– 196.

^ a b Beevor, Antony (2006).

The Battle for Spain: the Spanish Civil War, 1936–1939 . New York: Penguin Books. pp.

27–30 .

ISBN 0-14-303765-X .

^ Payne (2006) , p. 356 ^ Preston, Paul (2011).

Las tres Españas del 36 . Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial España.

ISBN 9788499891392 .

^ Fernández Viagas, Plácido (2006).

Palabras de guerra: los republicanos contra el franquismo . Servicio de Publicaciones, Centro de Ediciones de la Diputación de Málaga. p. 47.

ISBN 9788477857570 .

^ Payne, Stanley G. The Spanish civil war. Cambridge University Press, 2012, page 43 ^ La Torre Salvans: la casa-refugi del president de la República, Manuel Azaña, durant la Guerra Civil] , [in:] '' Trail Sant Lorenc service 2012 ^ J.M.O., La barraca en què vivia la guàrdia d'Azaña a La Barata , [in:] Nacio 22.04.2015 ^ Santos Juliá, Destierro y muerte de Manuel Azaña , [in:] Claves de Razón Práctica 188 (2008), p. 52 ^ Juliá 2008, p. 52 ^ Juliá 2008, pp. 52-53 ^ Higinio Polo, Los últimos días de la Barcelona republicana [PhD thesis Universitat de Barcelona], Barcelona 1989, p. 642 ^ Polo 1989, p. 642 ^ "siguen viaje hasta el castillo de Perelada, adonde llegan el lunes 24, cerrada la noche", Juliá 2008, p. 52. The date is not entirely clear, as January 24, 1939 was not Monday, but Tuesday; Monday fell on January 23 ^ according to some sources Azaña arrived in Peralada already on January 22, Paul Preston, The Last Days of the Spanish Republic , London 2016, ISBN 9780008163419, p. 36 ^ Juliá 2008, p. 53 ^ Juliá 2008, p. 54 ^ Polo 1989, p. 766 ^ Juliá 2008, pp. 56-57 ^ Beevor, p. 412 ^ Ninguna política se ha de fundar en la decisión de exterminar al adversario; no sólo —y ya es mucho—porque moralmente es una abominación, sino porque, además, es materialmente irrealizable; y la sangre injustamente vertida por el odio, con propósito de exterminio, renace y retoña y fructifica en frutos de maldición; maldición no sobre los que la derramaron, desgraciadamente, sino sobre el propio país que la ha absorbido para colmo de la desventura.

Diario Córdoba – 2 March de 2015; Mas Madera?

^ Azaña, Manuel (2003).

Diarios completos: monarquía, república, Guerra Civil . Barcelona: Crítica.

ISBN 84-8432-142-8 .

^ Piers Brendon, The dark valley: A panorama of the 1930s (2007), quoting pp. 364, 365.

^ Brendon, p 365.

^ Brendon, pp 365–367.

Further reading [ edit ] Azana, Manuel (1981). "Vigil in Benicarlo (Josephine and Paul Stewart, English trans.)". Associated University Press.

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) Ben-Ami, Shlomo .

The origins of the Second Republic in Spain (Oxford UP, 1978).

Rivas Cherif, Cipriano de (1995). "Portrait of an Unknown Man: Manuel Azana and Modern Spain (Paul Stewart, edit. and English trans.)". Fairleigh Dickinson Univ Press.

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) Feeny, Thomas. "Fact and Fiction in Rojas 'Azaña'." Hispanófila 103 (1991): 33–46.

online ; on a fictionalized  life of Azaña.

Payne, Stanley (1970).

The Spanish Revolution . New York: W. W. Norton.

Sedwick, Frank.

The tragedy of Manuel Azaña and the fate of the Spanish Republic (Ohio State Univ Press, 1964) online review .

Other languages [ edit ] Lagarrigue, Max . "Manuel Azaña en Montauban. La ultima morada del presidente de la República española, Manuel Azaña", in Azkárraga, José Ma (2001).

República 70 anys després: 1931–2001 . Valencia: Amics del Dia de la Foto. pp.

64– 65.

.

Amalric, Jean-Pierre (2007).

"Manuel Azaña and France" (in French). Arkheia Revue. Archived from the original on 2008-12-25 . Retrieved 2008-06-17 .

Amalric, Jean-Pierre (2008).

"Intellectuals in the political arena (1898–1940)" (in French). Arkheia Revue. Archived from the original on 2008-12-24 . Retrieved 2008-11-30 .

External links [ edit ] Works by or about Manuel Azaña at the Internet Archive (in French) Manuel Azaña Association Political offices Preceded by Dámaso Berenguer Minister of War 1931–1933 Succeeded by Juan José Rocha García Preceded by Juan Bautista Aznar Cabañas Prime Minister of Spain 1931–1933 Succeeded by Alejandro Lerroux Preceded by Manuel Portela Valladares Prime Minister of Spain 1936 Succeeded by Santiago Casares Quiroga Preceded by Niceto Alcalá-Zamora President of the Spanish Republic 1936–1939 Succeeded by Álvaro de Albornoz Liminiana ( in exile ) Preceded by Niceto Alcalá-Zamora Spanish Head of State 1936–1939 Succeeded by Francisco Franco Bahamonde as Caudillo Party political offices Preceded by Party created Leader of Republican Action 1925–1934 Succeeded by Party dissolved Preceded by Party created Leader of Republican Left 1934–1936 Succeeded by Marcelino Domingo v t e Presidents of Spain Spanish Republic (1873–1874) Estanislao Figueras ^ Francesc Pi i Margall ^ Nicolás Salmerón y Alonso ^ Emilio Castelar y Ripoll ^ Francisco Serrano ^ Spanish Republic (1931–1939) Niceto Alcalá-Zamora ^^ Manuel Azaña ^^ Niceto Alcalá-Zamora Diego Martínez Barrio ^^ Manuel Azaña Diego Martínez Barrio ^^ Segismundo Casado ^^^ José Miaja ^^^ Spanish Republic in exile (1939–1977) Álvaro de Albornoz ^^ Diego Martínez Barrio Luis Jiménez de Asúa José Maldonado González ^President of the Executive Power ^^Acting head of state ^^^Interim head of state v t e Prime ministers of Spain Acting prime ministers shown in italics .

Queen Isabella II (1833–1868) Martínez de la Rosa Toreno Álava Álvarez Mendizábal Istúriz Calatrava Espartero Bardají Heredia-Spínola Frías Alaix Pérez de Castro A. González Ferraz Cortázar Sancho Espartero Ferrer A. González Rodil J. M. López Gómez Becerra Olózaga González Bravo Narváez Miraflores Narváez Sotomayor Pacheco Salamanca García Goyena Narváez Clonard Bravo Murillo Roncali Lersundi Sartorius Mendigorría Rivas Espartero O'Donnell Narváez Armero Istúriz O'Donnell Arrazola Mon Narváez O'Donnell Narváez González Bravo Havana Democratic Sexennium (1868–1874) Madoz Serrano Prim Topete Serrano Ruiz Zorrilla Malcampo Sagasta Topete Serrano Mendigorría Ruiz Zorrilla Figueras Pi Salmerón Castelar Serrano Sierra Bullones Sagasta The Restoration (1874–1931) Cánovas Jovellar Martínez Campos Sagasta Posada Azcárraga Silvela Fernández-Villaverde Maura Montero Moret López Domínguez Vega de Armijo Canalejas García Prieto Romanones Dato Maura Sánchez de Toca Bugallal Sánchez-Guerra Primo de Rivera Berenguer Aznar-Cabañas Second Republic (1931–1939) Alcalá-Zamora Azaña Lerroux Martínez Barrio Samper Chapaprieta Portela Barcía Casares Martínez Barrio Giral Largo Negrín Spain under Franco (1936–1975) Franco Carrero Blanco Fernández-Miranda Arias Since 1975 Arias Santiago Suárez Calvo-Sotelo F. González Aznar Zapatero Rajoy Sánchez Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Chile Greece Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manuel_Azaña&oldid=1306473005 " Categories : 1880 births 1940 deaths People from Alcalá de Henares Reformist Party (Spain) politicians Republican Action (Spain) politicians Republican Left (Spain) politicians Presidents of Spain Prime ministers of Spain Leaders ousted by a coup Members of the Congress of Deputies of the Second Spanish Republic Spanish male dramatists and playwrights Spanish people of the Spanish Civil War (Republican faction) Spanish notaries Spanish agnostics Exiles of the Spanish Civil War in France Leaders of political parties in Spain Complutense University of Madrid alumni 20th-century Spanish dramatists and playwrights University of Zaragoza alumni Spanish political writers 20th-century Spanish male writers Exiled Spanish politicians Government ministers during the Second Spanish Republic Spanish Anti-Francoists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2022 All articles needing additional references Pages with Spanish IPA Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2025 CS1 errors: requires URL CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with French-language sources (fr) S-bef: 'before' parameter includes the word 'created' S-aft: 'after' parameter includes the word 'dissolved' This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manuel Azaña 56 languages Add topic

