Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early scholasticism 2.2 High scholasticism 2.3 Post-scholasticism 2.4 Spanish scholasticism 2.5 Late Scholasticism 2.6 Protestant Scholasticism 2.7 Lutheran Scholasticism 2.8 Reformed scholasticism 2.9 Neo-scholasticism 2.10 Thomistic scholasticism 2.11 Analytical scholasticism 3 Scholastic method 4 Scholastic instruction 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Scholasticism 79 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Scholastic philosophy ) Medieval school of philosophy "Scholastics" redirects here. For other uses, see Scholastic .

Not to be confused with Scholarism .

14th-century image of a university lecture Part of a series on Scholasticism Schools Thomism Scotism Occamism Major works Summa Theologica Cur Deus Homo Summa Grammatica Summa logicae Opus Oxoniense Libri Quattuor Sententiarum Precursors Augustine of Hippo Boethius Pope Gregory I Alcuin of York John Scotus Eriugena Philosophers Anselm of Canterbury ("Doctor Marianus") Peter Abelard ("Doctor Scholasticus") Peter Lombard ("The Master") Averroes ("The Commentator") Maimonides ("Rabbi Moses") Albertus Magnus ("Doctor Universalis") Thomas Aquinas ("Doctor Angelicus") Bonaventure ("Doctor Seraphicus") Duns Scotus ("Doctor Subtilis") William of Ockham ("Doctor Invincibilis") Francisco Suárez ("Doctor Eximius") Related Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Dominican Order Franciscan Order Catholic theology Islamic philosophy Empiricism Neoplatonism Neo-scholasticism Protestant scholasticism Problem of universals Protoscholastic writing Philosophy portal Catholicism portal v t e Scholasticism was a medieval European philosophical movement or methodology that was the predominant education in Europe from about 1100 to 1700.

[ 1 ] It is known for employing logically precise analyses and reconciling classical philosophy and Catholic Christianity .

[ 2 ] The Scholastics, also known as Schoolmen , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] used dialectical reasoning predicated upon Aristotelianism and the Ten Categories . Scholasticism emerged within the monastic schools that translated medieval Judeo-Islamic philosophies , and "rediscovered" the collected works of Aristotle . Endeavoring to harmonize Aristotle's metaphysics and Latin Catholic theology, these monastic schools became the basis of the earliest European medieval universities , and thus became the bedrock for the development of modern science and philosophy in the Western world. The rise of scholasticism was closely associated with these schools that flourished in Italy , France , Portugal , Spain and England .

[ 5 ] Scholasticism is a method of learning more than a philosophy or a theology, since it places a strong emphasis on dialectical reasoning to extend knowledge by inference and to resolve contradictions . Scholastic thought is also known for rigorous conceptual analysis and the careful drawing of distinctions. In the classroom and in writing, it often takes the form of explicit disputation : a topic drawn from the tradition is broached in the form of a proposition on a question to be debated, oppositional responses are given, a counterproposal is argued and oppositional arguments rebutted. Because of its emphasis on rigorous dialectical method, scholasticism was eventually applied to many other fields of study.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Scholasticism was initially a program conducted by medieval Christian thinkers attempting to harmonize the various authorities of their own tradition, and to reconcile Christian theology with classical and late antique philosophy, especially that of Aristotle but also of Neoplatonism .

[ 8 ] Prominent scholastic figures include Anselm of Canterbury ("the father of scholasticism" [ 9 ] ), Peter Abelard , Alexander of Hales , Albertus Magnus , Duns Scotus , William of Ockham , Bonaventure , and Thomas Aquinas . Aquinas's masterwork, Summa Theologica (1265–1274), is widely considered to be the pinnacle of scholastic, medieval, and Christian philosophy.

[ 10 ] Important work in the scholastic tradition has been carried on well past Aquinas's time, such as with English scholastics Robert Grosseteste and his student Roger Bacon , by Francisco Suárez and Luis de Molina , and also among Lutheran and Reformed thinkers.

Etymology [ edit ] The terms "scholastic" and "scholasticism" derive from the Latin word scholasticus , the Latinized form of the Greek σχολαστικός ( scholastikos ), an adjective derived from σχολή ( scholē ), " school ".

[ 11 ] Scholasticus means "of or pertaining to schools". The "scholastics", therefore, were roughly "schoolmen".

History [ edit ] The foundations of Christian scholasticism were laid by Boethius through his logical and theological essays.

[ 6 ] Later forerunners (and then companions) to scholasticism were Islamic Ilm al-Kalām , meaning "science of discourse", [ 12 ] and Jewish philosophy , especially Jewish Kalam .

[ 13 ] Early scholasticism [ edit ] Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard The first significant renewal of learning in the West came with the Carolingian Renaissance of the Early Middle Ages .

Charlemagne , advised by Peter of Pisa and Alcuin of York , attracted the scholars of England and Ireland, where some Greek works continued to survive in the original. By a 787 decree, he established schools at every abbey in his empire. These schools, from which the name scholasticism derived, [ dubious – discuss ] became centers of medieval learning.

[ 14 ] During this period, knowledge of Ancient Greek had vanished in the West except in Ireland, where its teaching and use was fairly common in its monastic schools .

[ 15 ] Irish scholars had a considerable presence in the Frankish court , where they were renowned for their learning.

[ 16 ] Among them was Johannes Scotus Eriugena (815–877), one of the founders of scholasticism.

[ 17 ] Eriugena was the most significant Irish intellectual of the early monastic period and an outstanding philosopher in terms of originality.

[ 16 ] He had considerable familiarity with the Greek language and translated many works into Latin, affording access to the Cappadocian Fathers and the Greek theological tradition .

[ 16 ] Three other primary founders of scholasticism were the 11th-century archbishops Lanfranc and Anselm of Canterbury in England and Peter Abelard in France .

[ 17 ] This period saw the beginning of the " rediscovery " of many Greek works which had been lost to the Latin West. As early as the latter half of the 10th century, the Toledo School of Translators in Muslim Spain had begun translating Arabic texts into Latin.

[ 18 ] After a successful burst of Reconquista in the 12th century, Spain opened even further for Christian scholars and, as these Europeans encountered Judeo-Islamic philosophies , they opened a wealth of Arab and Judaic knowledge of mathematics and astronomy.

[ 19 ] The Latin translations of the 12th century also included figures like Constantine the African in Italy and James of Venice in Constantinople. Scholars such as Adelard of Bath traveled to Spain and Sicily, translating works on astronomy and mathematics, including the first complete translation of Euclid 's Elements into Latin.

[ 20 ] At the same time, the School of Chartres produced Bernard of Chartres 's commentaries on Plato 's Timaeus and a range of works by William of Conches that attempted to reconcile the use of classical pagan and philosophical sources in a medieval Christian concept using the kludge of integumentum , treating the obviously heretical surface meanings as coverings disguising a deeper (and more orthodox) truth.

[ 21 ] Abelard himself was condemned by Bernard of Clairvaux at the 1141 Council of Sens and William avoided a similar fate through systematic self-bowdlerization of his early work, but his commentaries and encyclopedic De Philosophia Mundi and Dragmaticon were miscredited to earlier scholars like Bede and widely disseminated.

Anselm of Laon systematized the production of the gloss on Scripture, followed by the rise to prominence of dialectic (the middle subject of the medieval trivium ) in the work of Abelard .

Peter Lombard produced a collection of Sentences , or opinions of the Church Fathers and other authorities.

[ 22 ] More recently, Leinsle , [ 23 ] Novikoff , [ 24 ] and others have argued against the idea that scholasticism primarily derived from philosophical contact, emphasizing its continuity with earlier Patristic Christianity . This remains, however, a minority viewpoint.

[ citation needed ] High scholasticism [ edit ] Albertus Magnus Thomas Aquinas Duns Scotus William of Ockham The 13th and early 14th centuries are generally seen as the high period of scholasticism. The early 13th century witnessed the culmination of the recovery of Greek philosophy . Schools of translation grew up in Italy and Sicily, and eventually in the rest of Europe. Powerful Norman kings gathered men of knowledge from Italy and other areas into their courts as a sign of their prestige.

[ 25 ] William of Moerbeke 's translations and editions of Greek philosophical texts in the middle half of the thirteenth century helped form a clearer picture of Greek philosophy, particularly of Aristotle, than was given by the Arabic versions on which they had previously relied.

Edward Grant writes "Not only was the structure of the Arabic language radically different from that of Latin, but some Arabic versions had been derived from earlier Syriac translations and were thus twice removed from the original Greek text. Word-for-word translations of such Arabic texts could produce tortured readings. By contrast, the structural closeness of Latin to Greek, permitted literal, but intelligible, word-for-word translations." [ 19 ] Universities developed in the large cities of Europe during this period, and rival clerical orders within the church began to battle for political and intellectual control over these centers of educational life. The two main orders founded in this period were the Franciscans and the Dominicans . The Franciscans were founded by Francis of Assisi in 1209. Their leader in the middle of the century was Bonaventure , a traditionalist who defended the theology of Augustine and the philosophy of Plato , incorporating only a little of Aristotle in with the more neoplatonist elements. Following Anselm, Bonaventure supposed that reason can only discover truth when philosophy is illuminated by religious faith.

[ 26 ] Other important Franciscan scholastics were Duns Scotus , Peter Auriol and William of Ockham .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] By contrast, the Dominican order, a teaching order founded by St Dominic in 1215, to propagate and defend Christian doctrine, placed more emphasis on the use of reason and made extensive use of the new Aristotelian sources derived from the East and Moorish Spain. The great representatives of Dominican thinking in this period were Albertus Magnus and (especially) Thomas Aquinas , whose artful synthesis of Greek rationalism and Christian doctrine eventually came to define Catholic philosophy.

Aquinas's masterwork, Summa Theologica (1265–1274), is considered to be the pinnacle of scholastic, medieval, and Christian philosophy.

[ 10 ] It began while Aquinas was regent master at the studium provinciale of Santa Sabina in Rome, the forerunner of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas . Aquinas placed more emphasis on reason and argumentation, and was one of the first to use the new translation of Aristotle's metaphysical and epistemological writing. This was a significant departure from the Neoplatonic and Augustinian thinking that had dominated much of early scholasticism. Aquinas showed how it was possible to incorporate much of the philosophy of Aristotle without falling into the "errors" of the Commentator, Averroes .

[ 29 ] Post-scholasticism [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Scholasticism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) Philosopher Johann Beukes has suggested that from 1349 to 1464, the era between the deaths of William of Ockham and Nicholas of Cusa , there was a distinct period characterized by "robust and independent philosophers" who departed from high scholasticism on issues such as institutional criticism and materialism but retained scholasticism's method. These philosophers include Marsilius of Padua , Thomas Bradwardine , John Wycliffe , Catherine of Sienna , Jean Gerson , Gabriel Biel and ended with Nicholas of Cusa.

[ 30 ] Spanish scholasticism [ edit ] Main article: School of Salamanca Late Scholasticism [ edit ] Main article: Second scholasticism Protestant Scholasticism [ edit ] Main article: Protestant Scholasticism Lutheran Scholasticism [ edit ] Main article: Lutheran scholasticism Reformed scholasticism [ edit ] Main article: Reformed scholasticism Following the Reformation, Calvinists largely adopted the scholastic method of theology, while differing regarding sources of authority and content of theology.

[ 31 ] Neo-scholasticism [ edit ] Main article: Neo-scholasticism The revival and development from the second half of the 19th century of medieval scholastic philosophy is sometimes called neo- Thomism .

[ 32 ] Thomistic scholasticism [ edit ] As J. A. Weisheipl O.P.

emphasizes, within the Dominican Order Thomistic scholasticism has been continuous since the time of Aquinas: "Thomism was always alive in the Dominican Order, small as it was after the ravages of the Reformation, the French Revolution, and the Napoleonic occupation. Repeated legislation of the General Chapters, beginning after the death of St. Thomas, as well as the Constitutions of the Order, required all Dominicans to teach the doctrine of St. Thomas both in philosophy and in theology." [ 33 ] "Thomistic scholasticism" or "scholastic Thomism " identifies with the philosophical and theological tradition stretching back to the time of St. Thomas Aquinas. It focuses not only on exegesis of the historical Aquinas but also on the articulation of a rigorous system of orthodox Thomism to be used as an instrument of critique of contemporary thought. Due to its suspicion of attempts to harmonize Aquinas with non-Thomistic categories and assumptions, scholastic Thomism has sometimes been called, according to philosophers like Edward Feser , "Strict Observance Thomism".

[ 34 ] A discussion of recent and current Thomistic scholasticism can be found in La Metafisica di san Tommaso d'Aquino e i suoi interpreti (2002) by Battista Mondin [ it ] , which includes such figures as Sofia Vanni Rovighi (1908–1990), [ 35 ] Cornelio Fabro (1911–1995), Carlo Giacon (1900–1984), [ 36 ] Tomas Tyn O.P.

(1950–1990), Abelardo Lobato O.P.

(1925–2012), Leo Elders (1926– ) and Giovanni Ventimiglia (1964– ), among others. Fabro in particular emphasizes Aquinas' originality, especially with respect to the actus essendi or act of existence of finite beings by participating in being itself. Other scholars such as those involved with "Il Progetto Tommaso" seek to establish an objective and universal reading of Aquinas' texts.

[ 37 ] Thomistic scholasticism in the English speaking world went into decline in the 1970s when the Thomistic revival that had been spearheaded by Jacques Maritain , Étienne Gilson , and others, diminished in influence. Partly, this was because this branch of Thomism had become a quest to understand the historical Aquinas after the Second Vatican Council .

Analytical scholasticism [ edit ] A renewed interest in the "scholastic" way of doing philosophy has recently awoken within analytic philosophy .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Attempts emerged to combine elements of scholastic and analytic methodology in pursuit of a contemporary philosophical synthesis. Proponents of various incarnations of this approach include Anthony Kenny , Peter King, Thomas Williams or David Oderberg .

[ citation needed ] Scholastic method [ edit ] Cornelius O'Boyle explained that Scholasticism focuses on how to acquire knowledge and how to communicate effectively so that it may be acquired by others. It was thought that the best way to achieve this was by replicating the discovery process ( modus inveniendi ).

[ 40 ] The scholasticists would choose a book by a renowned scholar, auctor (author), as a subject for investigation. By reading it thoroughly and critically, the disciples learned to appreciate the theories of the author. Other documents related to the book would be referenced, such as Church councils, papal letters and anything else written on the subject, be it ancient or contemporary. The points of disagreement and contention between multiple sources would be written down in individual sentences or snippets of text, known as sententiae . Once the sources and points of disagreement had been laid out through a series of dialectics , the two sides of an argument would be made whole so that they would be found to be in agreement and not contradictory. (Of course, sometimes opinions would be totally rejected, or new positions proposed.) This was done in two ways. The first was through philological analysis. Words were examined and argued to have multiple meanings. It was also considered that the auctor might have intended a certain word to mean something different. Ambiguity could be used to find common ground between two otherwise contradictory statements. The second was through logical analysis, which relied on the rules of formal logic – as they were known at the time – to show that contradictions did not exist but were subjective to the reader.

[ 41 ] Scholastic instruction [ edit ] Scholastic instruction consisted of several elements. The first was the lectio : a teacher would read an authoritative text followed by a commentary, but no questions were permitted. This was followed by the meditatio ( meditation or reflection) in which students reflected on and appropriated the text. Finally, in the quaestio students could ask questions ( quaestiones ) that might have occurred to them during meditatio . Eventually the discussion of quaestiones became a method of inquiry apart from the lectio and independent of authoritative texts.

Disputationes were arranged to resolve controversial quaestiones .

[ 42 ] Questions to be disputed were ordinarily announced beforehand, but students could propose a question to the teacher unannounced – disputationes de quodlibet . In this case, the teacher responded and the students rebutted; on the following day the teacher, having used notes taken during the disputation, summarised all arguments and presented his final position, riposting all rebuttals.

[ 41 ] [ 43 ] The quaestio method of reasoning was initially used especially when two authoritative texts seemed to contradict one another. Two contradictory propositions would be considered in the form of an either/or question, and each part of the question would have to be approved ( sic ) or denied ( non ). Arguments for the position taken would be presented in turn, followed by arguments against the position, and finally the arguments against would be refuted. This method forced scholars to consider opposing viewpoints and defend their own arguments against them.

[ 44 ] See also [ edit ] Actus primus Allegory in the Middle Ages Casuistry History of science in the Middle Ages Medieval philosophy Nominalism Pardes (Jewish exegesis) Renaissance of the 12th century Scotism References [ edit ] ^ See Steven P. Marone, "Medieval philosophy in context" in A. S. McGrade, ed., The Cambridge Companion to Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003). On the difference between scholastic and medieval monastic postures towards learning, see Jean Leclercq, The Love of Learning and the Desire for God (New York: Fordham University Press, 1970) esp. 89; 238ff.

^ Grayling, A. C. (2019).

The History of Philosophy . Penguin Press, pp. 146-7.

^ "Schoolmen" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ Campbell, Timothy P.; Harrison, Timothy M.; McDonagh, Josephine; Saltzman, Benjamin A., eds. (May 1950).

"Modern Philology" .

University of Chicago Press .

47 (4).

doi : 10.1086/mp.1950.47.issue-4 .

ISSN 0026-8232 . Retrieved 15 June 2023 .

^ Gracia, Jorge JE, and Timothy B. Noone, eds. A companion to philosophy in the middle ages. John Wiley & Sons, 2008, 55–64 ^ a b Patte, Daniel.

The Cambridge Dictionary of Christianity.

Ed. Daniel Patte. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010, 11132-1133 ^ Grant, Edward.

God and Reason in the Middle Ages.

Cambridge University Press, 2004, 159 ^ Particularly through Pseudo-Dionysius , Augustine , and Boethius , and through the influence of Plotinus and Proclus on Muslim philosophers. In the case of Aquinas, for instance, see Jan Aertsen, "Aquinas' philosophy in its historical setting" in The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas , ed. Norman Kretzmann and Eleonore Stump (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993). Jean Leclerq, The Love of Learning and the Desire for God (New York: Fordham University Press, 1970).

^ Grant, Edward.

God and Reason in the Middle Ages.

Cambridge University Press, 2004, 56 ^ a b Gilson, Etienne (1991).

The Spirit of Medieval Philosophy (Gifford Lectures 1933–35) . Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. p. 490.

ISBN 978-0-268-01740-8 .

^ "school" .

"scholastic" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

σχολή , σχολαστικός .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ Winter, Tim J. "Introduction." Introduction. The Cambridge Companion to Classical Islamic Theology. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2008. 4–5. Print.

^ Madeleine Pelner Cosman, Linda Gale Jones, Handbook to Life in the Medieval World, p. 391.

ISBN 1438109075 ^ Colish, Marcia L.

Medieval foundations of the western intellectual tradition, 400–1400.

Yale University Press, 1999, 66–67 ^ Sandys, John Edwin (1903).

A History of Classical Scholarship . Cambridge University Press. p. 438.

^ a b c "John Scottus Eriugena" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Stanford University . 17 October 2004 . Retrieved 21 July 2008 .

^ a b Toman 2007 , p. 10: " Abelard himself was ... together with John Scotus Erigena (9th century), and Lanfranc and Anselm of Canterbury (both 11th century), one of the founders of scholasticism." ^ Lindberg 1978 , pp. 60–61.

^ a b Grant, Edward, and Emeritus Edward Grant. The foundations of modern science in the Middle Ages: their religious, institutional and intellectual contexts. Cambridge University Press, 1996, 23–28 ^ Clagett 1982 , p. 356.

^ Adamson, Peter (2019), Medieval Philosophy , A History of Philosophy without Any Gaps , Vol. 4, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.

93 ff , ISBN 978-0-19-884240-8 .

^ Hoffecker, Andrew.

"Peter Lombard, Master of the Sentences" . Ligonier Ministries.

^ Leinsle, Ulrich G.

Introduction to Scholastic Theology .

ISBN 0-8132-1925-6 .

OCLC 1303318773 .

^ Novikoff, Alex J. (April 2012).

"Toward a Cultural History of Scholastic Disputation" .

The American Historical Review .

117 (2): 331– 364.

doi : 10.1086/ahr.117.2.331 .

S2CID 163903902 .

^ Lindberg 1978 , pp. 70–72.

^ Hammond, Jay, Wayne Hellmann, and Jared Goff, eds.

A companion to Bonaventure.

Brill, 2014, 122 ^ Evans, Gillian Rosemary.

Fifty key medieval thinkers.

Routledge, 2002, 93–93, 147–149, 164–169 ^ Gracia, Jorge JE, and Timothy B. Noone, eds. A companion to philosophy in the middle ages. John Wiley & Sons, 2008, 353–369, 494–503, 696–712 ^ Hannam, James. The genesis of science: How the Christian Middle Ages launched the scientific revolution. Simon and Schuster, 2011, 90–93 ^ Beukes, Johann (19 March 2021).

"The case for post-scholasticism as an internal period indicator in Medieval philosophy" .

HTS Teologiese Studies / Theological Studies .

77 (4).

doi : 10.4102/hts.v77i4.6270 .

^ Douglass, Jane Dempsey , et al. The Cambridge Companion to John Calvin. Cambridge University Press, 2004, 227–228 ^ Edward Feser (15 October 2009).

"The Thomistic tradition, Part I (archived copy)" .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2010 . Retrieved 2 January 2011 .

^ Weisheipl, James (1962).

"The Revival of Thomism: An Historical Survey" . Archived from the original on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ "Edward Feser: The Thomistic tradition, Part I" .

edwardfeser.blogspot.com . 15 October 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2013 .

^ Vanni Rovighi, Sofia .

Treccani Encyclopedia./ Accessed 17 August 2013 ^ GIACON, Carlo . Treccani Encyclopedia./ Accessed 9 April 2013 ^ See Rizzello, Raffaele (1999).

"Il Progetto Tommaso" . In Giacomo Grasso, O.P.; Stefano Serafini (eds.).

Vita quaerens intellectum . Rome: Millennium Romae. pp.

157– 161. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 25 September 2013 .

^ Peterson, Craig; Pugh, Matthew, eds. (2006).

Analytical Thomism: traditions in dialogue . Aldershot, England: Ashgate.

ISBN 0754634388 .

^ Simpson, William M. R.; Koons, Robert C.; Orr, James, eds. (11 October 2021).

Neo-Aristotelian Metaphysics and the Theology of Nature . New York: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003125860-3 .

ISBN 9781003125860 .

S2CID 244179976 – via Taylor & Francis Group.

^ Cornelius, O'Boyle (1998).

The art of medicine: medical teaching at the University of Paris, 1250–1400 . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 9789004111240 .

OCLC 39655867 .

^ a b Colish, Marcia L.

Medieval foundations of the western intellectual tradition, 400–1400.

Yale University Press, 1999, 265–273 ^ van Asselt 2011 , p. 59.

^ van Asselt 2011 , p. 60.

^ van Asselt 2011 , pp. 61–62.

Works cited [ edit ] van Asselt, Willem J.

(2011).

Inleiding in de Gereformeerde Scholastiek [ Introduction to Reformed Scholasticism ] (in Dutch). With contributions by T. Theo J. Pleizier, Pieter L. Rouwendal, and Maarten Wisse; Translated by Albert Gootjes. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Reformation Heritage Books.

ISBN 978-1-60178-121-5 .

Clagett, Marshall (1982). "William of Moerbeke: Translator of Archimedes".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

126 (5): 356– 366.

JSTOR 986212 .

Decock, W. (2013), Theologians and Contract Law: The Moral Transformation of the Ius Commune (c. 1500–1650) , Leiden/Boston, Brill/Nijhoff, ISBN 978-90-04-23284-6 .

Fryde, E., The Early Palaeologan Renaissance , Brill 2000.

Gracia, J. G. and Noone, T. B., eds., (2003) A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages . London: Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-21672-3 McGrade, A. S., ed., (2003) The Cambridge Companion to Medieval Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lindberg, David C. (1978).

Science in the Middle Ages . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-48232-3 .

Toman, Rolf (2007).

The Art of Gothic: Architecture, Sculpture, Painting . photography by Achim Bednorz.

Tandem Verlag GmbH .

ISBN 978-3-8331-4676-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Primary Hyman, J.; Walsh, J. J., eds. (1973).

Philosophy in the Middle Ages . Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-915144-05-1 .

Schoedinger, Andrew B., ed. (1996).

Readings in Medieval Philosophy . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-509293-6 .

Secondary Gallatin, Harlie Kay (2001).

"Medieval Intellectual Life and Christianity" . Archived from the original on 1 February 2009.

Maurer, Armand A. (1982).

Medieval Philosophy (2nd ed.). Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.

ISBN 978-0-88844-704-3 .

Rexroth, Frank (2023).

Knowledge True and Useful: A Cultural History of Early Scholasticism . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-1-5128-2471-1 .

Trueman, Carl R; Clark, R. Scott, eds. (1999).

Protestant Scholasticism: Essays in Reassessment . Carlisle, UK: Paternoster Press.

ISBN 0-85364-853-0 .

External links [ edit ] This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Scholasticon by Jacob Schmutz Medieval Philosophy Electronic Resources "Scholasticism" . In Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

Scholasticism Joseph Rickaby, (1908), 121 pp.

(also at googlebooks) Scholasticism in The Catholic Encyclopedia Yahoo! directory category: Scholasticism The genius of the scholastics and the orbit of Aristotle , article by James Franklin on the influence of scholasticism on later thought Medieval Philosophy, Universities and the Church by James Hannam (in German) ALCUIN – Regensburger Infothek der Scholastik – Huge database with information on biography, text chronology, editions.

v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e European Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Decline of the Western Roman Empire Barbarian kingdoms Late antiquity Decline of Hellenistic religion Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Rise of Islam Papal States First Bulgarian Empire Frankish Empire Principality of Serbia Duchy of Croatia Kingdom of Croatia Anglo-Saxon England Viking Age Carolingian Empire Old Church Slavonic Rise of the Venetian Republic Civitas Schinesghe Kievan Rus' Growth of the Eastern Roman Empire Reconquista High Middle Ages Norman Conquest Holy Roman Empire Second Bulgarian Empire Georgian Empire Kingdom of Poland Croatia in personal union with Hungary Kingdom of Serbia Feudalism Rise of the Republic of Genoa Great Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Republic of Florence Scholasticism Capet–Plantagenet feud Monasticism Communalism Manorialism Medieval Warm Period Mongol invasion of Europe Kingdom of Portugal Late Middle Ages Hundred Years' War Wars of the Roses Hussite Wars Burgundy Milan France England Serbian Empire Castile Western Schism Fall of Constantinople Rise of the Ottoman Empire Swiss mercenaries Chivalry Renaissance Humanism Universities Crisis of the late Middle Ages Great Famine Little Ice Age Culture Agriculture Architecture Art Church and State Cuisine Crusading movement Dance Demography Domes Hastilude Household Hunting In popular culture Itinerant court Literature Medicine Minstrel Music Instruments Philosophy Poetry Science Slavery Technology Theatre Warfare Women Related Medieval anthropology Dark Ages Disability in the Middle Ages Basic topics list Land terms Medievalism Medieval reenactment Medieval studies Misconceptions Neo-medievalism Peasant Wars Post-classical history Timeline Historiography in the Middle Ages Medieval archaeology Portal Category WikiProject v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hcwsp
Cached time: 20250816100554
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.216 seconds
Real time usage: 1.516 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6017/1000000
Revision size: 35561/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 424648/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5184/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 202158/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.669/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19085483/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1075.194      1 -total
 20.47%  220.076      1 Template:Reflist
 10.68%  114.811     15 Template:Navbox
  9.71%  104.421      1 Template:Scholasticism
  9.67%  103.918     10 Template:Lang
  9.56%  102.745      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.60%   81.687      3 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  7.37%   79.273     13 Template:Cite_book
  6.74%   72.504      1 Template:Cite_Dictionary.com
  6.56%   70.567      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:39872:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816100554 and revision id 1304514337. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scholasticism&oldid=1304514337 " Categories : Scholasticism Philosophical schools and traditions Christian theological movements Catholicism in the Middle Ages Christianity in the Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Trinitarianism Christian terminology Western Christianity Western culture Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from July 2022 Use dmy dates from July 2022 Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from May 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Wikipedia external links cleanup from August 2024 Articles with German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 13:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scholasticism 79 languages Add topic

