Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Types 3 Uses 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Genetic marker 24 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Phylogenetic marker ) Gene or DNA sequence with a known location on a chromosome A genetic marker is a gene or DNA sequence with a known location on a chromosome that can be used to identify individuals or species . It can be described as a variation (which may arise due to mutation or alteration in the genomic loci) that can be observed. A genetic marker may be a short DNA sequence, such as a sequence surrounding a single base-pair change ( single nucleotide polymorphism , SNP), or a long one, like minisatellites .

Background [ edit ] For many years, gene mapping was limited to identifying organisms by traditional phenotypes  markers. This included genes that encoded easily observable characteristics, such as blood types or seed shapes. The insufficient number of these types of characteristics in several organisms limited the possible mapping efforts. This prompted the development of gene markers, which could identify genetic characteristics that are not readily observable in organisms (such as protein variation).

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] SFP discovery principle for gene probing Some commonly used types of genetic markers are: RFLP (or Restriction fragment length polymorphism ) SSLP (or Simple sequence length polymorphism ) AFLP (or Amplified fragment length polymorphism ) RAPD (or Random amplification of polymorphic DNA ) VNTR (or Variable number tandem repeat ) SSCP (or Single-strand conformation polymorphism ) SSR Microsatellite polymorphism, (or Simple sequence repeat ) [ 2 ] SNP (or Single nucleotide polymorphism ) STR (or Short tandem repeat ) SFP (or Single feature polymorphism ) DArT (or Diversity Arrays Technology ) RAD markers (or Restriction site associated DNA markers ) STS (using Sequence-tagged sites ) [ 2 ] Molecular genetic markers can be divided into two classes: a) biochemical markers which detect variation at the gene product level such as changes in proteins and amino acids and b) molecular markers which detect variation at the DNA level such as nucleotide changes: deletion, duplication, inversion and/or insertion. Markers can exhibit two modes of inheritance, i.e. dominant/recessive or co-dominant. If the genetic pattern of homo-zygotes can be distinguished from that of hetero-zygotes, then a marker is said to be co-dominant. Generally co-dominant markers are more informative than the dominant markers.

[ 3 ] Uses [ edit ] Genetic markers can be used to study the relationship between an inherited disease and its genetic cause (for example, a particular mutation of a gene that results in a defective protein ). It is known that pieces of DNA that lie near each other on a chromosome tend to be inherited together. This property enables the use of a marker, which can then be used to determine the precise inheritance pattern of the gene that has not yet been exactly localized.

Genetic markers are employed in genealogical DNA testing for genetic genealogy to determine genetic distance between individuals or populations. Uniparental markers (on mitochondrial or Y chromosomal DNA) are studied for assessing maternal or paternal lineages .

Autosomal markers are used for all ancestry.

Genetic markers have to be easily identifiable, associated with a specific locus , and highly polymorphic , because homozygotes do not provide any information. Detection of the marker can be direct by RNA sequencing, or indirect using allozymes .

Some of the methods used to study the genome or phylogenetics are RFLP, AFLP, RAPD, SSR. They can be used to create genetic maps of whatever organism is being studied.

There was a debate over what the transmissible agent of CTVT ( canine transmissible venereal tumor ) was. Many researchers hypothesized that virus like particles were responsible for transforming the cell, while others thought that the cell itself was able to infect other canines as an allograft . With the aid of genetic markers, researchers were able to provide conclusive evidence that the cancerous tumor cell evolved into a transmissible parasite. Furthermore, molecular genetic markers were used to resolve the issue of natural transmission, the breed of origin ( phylogenetics ), and the age of the canine tumor.

[ 4 ] Genetic markers have also been used to measure the genomic response to selection in livestock. Natural and artificial selection leads to a change in the genetic makeup of the cell. The presence of different alleles due to a distorted segregation at the genetic markers is indicative of the difference between selected and non-selected livestock.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Marker gene Molecular marker DNA marking Eukaryotic chromosome fine structure Repeated sequence (DNA) References [ edit ] ^ Benjamin A. Pierce (2013-12-27).

Genetics: A Conceptual Approach . Macmillan Learning.

ISBN 978-1-4641-0946-1 .

^ a b Mehta, Sahil; Singh, Baljinder; Dhakate, Priyanka; Rahman, Mehzabin; Islam, Muhammad Aminul (2019). "5 Rice, Marker-Assisted Breeding, and Disease Resistance". In Wani, Shabir Hussain (ed.).

Disease Resistance in Crop Plants : Molecular, Genetic and Genomic Perspectives .

Cham, Switzerland : Springer . pp. 83–112/xii+307.

ISBN 978-3-030-20727-4 .

OCLC 1110184027 .

ISBN 978-3-030-20728-1 .

^ N Manikanda Boopathi (2012-12-12).

Genetic Mapping and Marker Assisted Selection: Basics, Practice and Benefits . Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 60–.

ISBN 978-81-322-0958-4 .

^ Murgia C, Pritchard JK , Kim SY, Fassati A, Weiss RA. Clonal origin and evolution of a transmissible cancer. Cell. 2006 Aug 11;126(3):477-87.

^ Gomez-Raya L, Olsen HG, Lingaas F, Klungland H, Våge DI, Olsaker I, Talle SB, Aasland M, Lien S (November 2002).

"The use of genetic markers to measure genomic response to selection in livestock" .

Genetics .

162 (3): 1381– 8.

doi : 10.1093/genetics/162.3.1381 .

PMC 1462338 .

PMID 12454081 .

Further reading [ edit ] de Vicente C, Fulton T (2003).

Molecular Marker Learning Modules – Vol. 1 . IPGRI, Rome, Italy and Institute for Genetic Diversity, Ithaca, New York, USA.

[ permanent dead link ] de Vicente C, Fulton T (2004).

Molecular Marker Learning Modules – Vol. 2 . IPGRI, Rome, Italy and Institute for Genetic Diversity, Ithaca, New York, USA.

de Vicente C, Glaszmann JC (2006).

Molecular Markers for Allele Mining . AMS (Bioversity's Regional Office for the Americas), CIRAD, GCP, IPGRI, M.S. Swaminathan Research Foundation. p. 85. Archived from the original on 2007-12-04 . Retrieved 2007-12-12 .

Spooner D, van Treuren R, de Vicente MC (2005).

Molecular markers for genebank management . CGN, IPGRI, USDA. p. 126. Archived from the original on 2008-05-03 . Retrieved 2007-12-12 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Genetic markers at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genetic_marker&oldid=1244528284 " Categories : Genetics techniques Genomics techniques DNA Molecular biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 September 2024, at 17:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Genetic marker 24 languages Add topic

