Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political positions Toggle Political positions subsection 1.1 Influence on conservatism 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins 2.1.1 John Birch 2.1.2 Founding and beliefs 2.2 Eisenhower issue 2.3 1960s 2.4 1970s 2.5 1980s and 1990s 2.6 2000–present 3 Officers Toggle Officers subsection 3.1 Chairmen and presidents 3.2 CEOs 4 In popular culture 5 See also 6 References 7 General and cited references 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Scholarly studies 8.2 Primary sources 8.2.1 Criticizing the John Birch Society 9 External links Toggle the table of contents John Birch Society 22 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American right-wing advocacy group John Birch Society Abbreviation JBS Named after John Birch Formation December 9, 1958 ; 66 years ago ( 1958-12-09 ) Founder Robert W. Welch Jr.

Founded at Indianapolis, Indiana , U.S.

Type Not-for-profit Purpose Political advocacy group anti-communism paleoconservatism right-wing politics Headquarters Grand Chute , Wisconsin , U.S.

Chief executive officer Wayne Morrow President Martin Ohlson Subsidiaries The New American Affiliations American Opinion Foundation FreedomProject Academy Website jbs .org The John Birch Society ( JBS ) is an American right-wing political advocacy group .

[ 1 ] Founded in 1958, it is anti-communist , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] supports social conservatism , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and is associated with ultraconservative , radical right , far-right , right-wing populist , and right-wing libertarian ideas.

[ 12 ] Originally based in Belmont, Massachusetts , the JBS is now headquartered in Grand Chute, Wisconsin , [ 13 ] with local chapters throughout the United States. It owns American Opinion Publishing, Inc., which publishes the magazine The New American , [ 7 ] and it is affiliated with an online school called FreedomProject Academy.

[ 14 ] The society's founder, businessman Robert W. Welch Jr.

(1899–1985), developed an organizational infrastructure of nationwide chapters in December 1958. The society rose quickly in membership and influence, and also became known for Welch's conspiracy theories .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] His allegation that Republican president Dwight D. Eisenhower was a communist agent was especially controversial.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In the 1960s, the conservative William F. Buckley Jr.

and National Review attempted to shun the JBS to the fringes of the American right.

[ 19 ] [ 16 ] JBS membership is kept private but is said to have neared 100,000 in the 1960s and 1970s, declining afterward.

[ 3 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] In the 2010s and 2020s, several observers and commentators argued that, while the organization's influence peaked in the 1970s, " Bircherism " and its legacy of conspiracy theories began making a resurgence in the mid-2010s, [ 21 ] and had become the dominant strain in the conservative movement.

[ 22 ] In particular, they argued that the JBS and its beliefs shaped the Republican Party , [ 23 ] [ 24 ] the Christian right , [ 25 ] : iv, 156–157 the Trump administration , [ 26 ] and the broader conservative movement.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Political positions [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Part of a series on Anti-communism History Conflicts and military engagements Revolutions and violence after 1917 Russia White movement Basmachi Finland Whites Hungary Germany Chinese Civil War Spanish Civil War Bando nacional World War II and aftermath Axis powers Anti-Comintern Pact Collaboration Eastern Front Anti-Soviet insurgencies Yugoslav Front Chetniks Post-war period in Germany Resistance in Poland (1944–1989) Greek Civil War Reverse Course Malayan Emergency Korean War Indochina wars Vietnam War Central American crisis New Order Afghan conflict Afghan mujahideen Operation Cyclone Revolutions of 1989 Repression and mass killings White Terror Russia Pogroms Hungary China Shanghai Spain Greece Taiwan Finnish Civil War prison camps First Red Scare Palmer Raids The Holocaust Bodo League massacre Guatemalan genocide Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 Operation Condor 1981–1982 Iran Massacres East Timor genocide Miscellaneous McCarthyism Decommunization Russia Ukraine Ideologies Anti-imperialism Anti-Marxism Anti-Stalinist Left Liberal socialism Anti-Sovietism Christian democracy Class collaboration Conservatism Authoritarian Neo- Fascism Nazism Neo- Para- Post- Islamism Liberalism Classical Cold War Neo- Personal ideologies Chiangism Fujimorism Khomeinism Metaxism Orthodox Peronism Pinochetism Reaganism Thatcherism Nationalisms Afghan Chinese French Révolution nationale Hong Kong Hungarian Szeged Idea Indonesian Pancasila Korean Ilminism Polish Romanian Russian Spanish National Catholicism Taiwanese Huadu Ukrainian Natsdems Vietnamese Person Dignity Theory Prominent figures Adenauer Antonescu Bandera Batista Berlusconi Boris III Bordaberry Buckley Bush Castelo Branco Chiang Churchill Cohn Dollfuss Dulles Duvalier (François) Duvalier (Jean-Claude) Eisenhower Franco Fujimori Goldwater Habre Habyarimana Hácha Hitler Hoover Horthy John Paul II Johnson Kennedy Khomeini Kishi Kohl Kolchak Lee K. Y.

MacArthur Mannerheim Marcos McCarthy Médici Metaxas Mihailović Milei Montt Mulroney Mussolini Nedić Ngo Nicholas II Nol Pahlavi II Palmer Papadopoulos Park Pavelić Pétain Piłsudski Pinochet Pius XII Poroshenko Reagan Rhee Sann Saakashvili Salazar Selassie Smith Stroessner Suharto Thanom Thatcher Tiso Tunku Vargas (earlier) Videla Wałęsa Welch Yeltsin Political parties Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Party (United States) Democratic Progressive Party Democratic Republican Party (South Korea) FET y de las JONS Golkar Greater Japan Patriotic Party Independent Anti-Communist Party of the West Kataeb Party Khmer Serei Kuomintang (historical, now factions) Law and Justice Liberal Democratic Party (Japan) Liberal Party Brazil South Korea Liberty Korea Party Nazi Party National Fascist Party Republican Party Chile United States Social Republican Party VMRO-DPMNE Organisations Anti-Communist Action Argentine Anticommunist Alliance CIA activities Indonesia Italy Japan Vietnam Contras Falun Gong The Epoch Times Freikorps Iron Front John Birch Society National Revolutionary Army NATO Pancasila Youth Propaganda Due Ukrainian Insurgent Army Unification Church Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation World League for Freedom and Democracy By region China Central and Eastern Europe Japan Tenkō Uyoku dantai Taiwan " Green Terror " Laws and systems Anti-Socialist Laws Peace Preservation Law Temporary Provisions (Taiwan) National Security Act (South Korea) Decree against Communism Communist Control Act of 1954 Ukrainian decommunization laws Anti-Infiltration Act Crucial Communism Teaching Act See also Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Lavender Scare Anti-national sentiments Chinese PRC Jewish Judeo-Bolshevism North Korean Soviet Union Russian Anti anti-communism Capitalism Cold War Post Second Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism Totalitarianism Western Bloc " Free World " Pro-Americanism Pro-ROC sentiment " Free China " Red Scare Red-baiting U.S. policy toward authoritarian governments Communism portal Politics portal v t e The John Birch Society from its start opposed collectivism as a "cancer" and by extension communism and big government .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] JBS publications referred to the fight against Communism as a spiritual war against the devil.

[ 25 ] : iv, 156–157 Allegations that so-called "Insiders" have conspired to control the United States through communism and world government are a recurring theme of JBS publications.

[ 32 ] The organization and its founder, Robert W. Welch Jr.

, promoted Americanism as "the philosophical antithesis of Communism." [ 33 ] It contended that the United States is a republic , not a democracy , and argued that states' rights should supersede those of the federal government.

[ 34 ] Welch infused constitutionalist and classical liberal principles, in addition to his conspiracy theories, into the JBS's ideology and rhetoric.

[ 35 ] In 1983, Congressman Larry McDonald , then the society's newly appointed chairman, characterized the JBS as belonging to the Old Right rather than the New Right .

[ 36 ] The society opposes " one world government ", the United Nations (UN), [ 37 ] the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), and other free trade agreements . It argues the U.S. Constitution has been devalued in favor of political and economic globalization . It has cited the existence of the former Security and Prosperity Partnership as evidence of a push towards a North American Union .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] The JBS has sought immigration reduction .

[ citation needed ] The JBS opposed the civil rights movement of the 1960s and the Equal Rights Amendment in the 1970s.

[ 16 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] It has campaigned for state nullification .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] It opposes efforts to call an Article V convention to amend the U.S. Constitution, [ 44 ] [ 45 ] and it has been influential at promoting opposition to it among Republican legislators.

[ 46 ] The JBS also supports auditing and eventually dismantling the Federal Reserve System .

[ 47 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The JBS holds that the United States Constitution gives only Congress the ability to coin money, and does not permit it to delegate this power, or to transform the dollar into a fiat currency not backed by gold or silver .

[ non-primary source needed ] Its publication The New American has described what it sees as American moral decline and threats to the family, including abortion, birth control, divorce, drugs, homosexuality, crime, violence, secular humanism, teenage pregnancy, teen suicide, environmentalism, feminism and pornography.

[ 48 ] The JBS has alleged that moral degeneracy is perpetrated by a conspiracy to make the United States vulnerable to internationalism.

[ 49 ] A JBS pamphlet distributed in 2024 illustrating a school on fire urged parents to withdraw children from public education , saying, "Reforming the schools is no longer an option. We must get them out now!" [ 50 ] The JBS has been described as ultraconservative, [ 4 ] far-right, [ 7 ] [ 51 ] extremist, [ 52 ] and fringe.

[ 23 ] The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) lists the society as a "Patriot" group, a group that "advocate[s] or adhere[s] to extreme antigovernment doctrines".

[ 53 ] By the 1990s, the JBS was perceived as "more mainstream conservative" than in the 1960s.

[ 54 ] It has also been associated with the American libertarian movement , [ 10 ] [ 11 ] as well as business nationalism .

[ 55 ] The society's worldview was noted in the early 2000s for influencing the American militia movement , although the JBS had not publicly called for paramilitary training.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Extremism expert George Michael wrote that "a virtual who's who of the American radical right had at one time or another sojourned" in the JBS.

[ 56 ] Influence on conservatism [ edit ] The JBS contributed to the development of modern American conservatism through its organizational tactics and its promotion of right-wing political views.

[ 59 ] Despite never considering itself a religious organization, the JBS played a role in the rise of the Moral Majority and the Christian right as major political forces, ideologically and tactically influencing multiple leaders in that movement including Tim LaHaye and Phyllis Schlafly .

[ 25 ] : iv, 156–157 Scholar Celestini Carmen argues that LaHaye used the JBS's culture war methods and rhetoric of "fear, apocalyptic thought and conspiracy" to forge the Moral Majority, with "fear, anger, and disgust as essential ingredients." [ 25 ] : iv, 37, 156–157, 283, 322–325, 328–334 Joyce Mao states that "Evangelical theology easily lent itself to anticommunist crusade". She additionally contends that Christian pastors, including James W. Fifield Jr . who helped Welch expand to California, helped pave the way for the JBS.

[ 60 ] The historian D. J. Mulloy wrote in 2014 that the JBS has served as "a kind of bridge" between the Old Right (including the McCarthyites ) of the 1940s–50s, the New Right of the 1970s–80s, and the Tea Party right of the 21st century.

[ 30 ] Professor Edward H. Miller wrote that Welch and the JBS were "never excommunicated" from conservatism and that "the ideas of the John Birch Society paved the way for the conservatism of the twentieth century" and "shaped events in the twenty-first century".

[ 61 ] : 8–10 Scholar Daniel Smith writes that as the JBS, along with Liberty Lobby , became institutionalized "ideological hubs" between the 1960s and 1980s – with a focus on spreading their views through publications and other media – they helped shape anti-internationalism into anti-globalism .

[ 62 ] Miller also writes that JBS helped stop the Equal Rights Amendment and helped set the stage for the Reagan Era , [ 61 ] : 330, 347–351 while Mulloy writes that the JBS "played an essential role in the revitalization of conservatism" [ 63 ] and "trained a generation of conservative activists." [ 14 ] According to Professor Matthew Dallek, modern American conservatism "bear[s] the imprint of the John Birch Society," [ 64 ] : 2 and "the GOP has largely replaced the ideological tenets of Reaganism with a worldview inherited from the John Birch Society (JBS)." [ 24 ] Dallek also writes that the organization's pioneering use of front groups "became a template for conservative advocacy for decades to come." [ 64 ] : 50 According to The Atlantic in 2024, Donald Trump 's 2016 election "saw many of its core instincts finally reflected in the White House," and the JBS "now fits neatly into the mainstream of the American right." [ 65 ] According to Professor John Kenneth White, noting actions taken by the second Trump administration and state governments, "Trump’s second term has brought about the final victory of the John Birch Society." [ 26 ] JBS took an early stance in opposing abortion and social liberalism, [ 61 ] : 347, 357–360 and its TRIM committees, which supported lower taxes, helped lead to the Reagan tax cuts .

[ 61 ] : 361–64 [ 66 ] By the early 2020s, multiple commentators and academics argued that the John Birch Society and its beliefs had successfully taken over the Republican Party and the broader conservative movement.

[ 28 ] [ 27 ] [ 67 ] [ 64 ] [ 29 ] [ 68 ] Efforts of Moms for Liberty in the 2020s to influence public education in the United States via school board elections and book bans have been compared to JBS's efforts in the 1960s.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] When introducing legislation to withdraw the U.S. from the UN, Senator Mike Lee used "some of the same arguments to support the bill" that the JBS "first employed." [ 71 ] By the 2020s, some national Republican and conservative figures openly associated with the JBS.

[ 65 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] The John Birch Society was established on December 9, 1958, [ 72 ] in Indianapolis, Indiana , at the conclusion of a two-day session of a group of 12 people led by Robert W. Welch Jr.

Welch was a retired candy manufacturer from Belmont, Massachusetts , who had been a state Republican Party official and had unsuccessfully run in its 1950 lieutenant governor primary.

[ 3 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] In 1954, Welch wrote the first book about John Birch (an Air Force intelligence officer and Baptist missionary), titled The Life of John Birch . He organized an anti-Communist society to "promote less government, more responsibility, and a better world".

[ 73 ] He named his new organization in memory of Birch, saying that Birch was an unknown but dedicated anti-Communist, and the first American casualty of the Cold War .

[ 75 ] Welch alleged that a Communist conspiracy within the American government had suppressed the truth about Birch's killing.

[ 17 ] John Birch [ edit ] Main article: John Birch (missionary) John Birch was an American Baptist who went to China as a missionary in 1940, when the Japanese invasion had created suffering and chaos during the Second Sino-Japanese War . He was a U.S.

military intelligence officer under Brigadier General Claire Lee Chennault in China. Chennault commanded the " Flying Tigers " and afterwards U.S. Army Air Forces units in China. In April 1942, Birch helped Lieutenant Colonel Doolittle and his flight crew, among other crews, a few days after they bailed out of their B-25 bomber over Japanese-held territory in China. Sixteen B-25s led by Doolittle bombed Tokyo ( "Doolittle raid" ) off the Navy aircraft carrier USS Hornet during the United States' first attack on Japan.

[ 76 ] Beginning in July 1942, Birch, who spoke Chinese, became an Army intelligence officer. He operated alone or with Nationalist Chinese soldiers, and regularly risked his life in Japanese-held territory in China. His many activities included setting up Chinese agent and radio intelligence networks, and rescuing downed American pilots; he had two emergency aircraft runways built.

[ 76 ] Although he suffered from malaria, he refused furloughs.

[ 76 ] In 1945, Birch was promoted to captain and began working in China both for and with the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the U.S. wartime intelligence service in World War II.

[ 76 ] In August, after the Japanese surrendered, Birch was ordered by the OSS to northern China to obtain the surrender of the Japanese commanders at their installations. On August 24, nine days after the war, Birch left by train with his party which included two American soldiers, five Chinese officers, and two Koreans who spoke Japanese.

[ 76 ] After spending a night in a village, the party proceeded by handcar the next morning, and ran into a group of 300 armed Chinese Communists. Birch and his Chinese officer aide approached them and were told to surrender their weapons and the group's equipment. Birch refused, and after arguing about it with their commander, they were allowed to proceed. Along the way, Birch's party encountered more groups of Communists. The party arrived at a train station at Hwang Kao which was occupied by more Chinese Communists.

[ 76 ] Birch requested to speak with their leader. Birch and his aide approached the group's leader and after Birch refused to give up his sidearm, both were beaten and shot. Birch's corpse was bayonetted.

[ 76 ] The rest of Birch's party were taken prisoner. Birch's aide survived and the prisoners were later released.

[ 76 ] Birch's remains were recovered, and a Catholic burial service was held with military honors on a hillside outside of Suzhou , in eastern China.

[ 76 ] The Chinese Communists, who were active in northern China and Manchuria , were supposedly World War II allies with the United States. Birch believed that Mao Zedong and the Chinese Communists intended to take over China after the war and move into Korea.

[ 76 ] There were different explanations and theories as to why Birch was killed, ranging from his party showing up at Hwang Kao instead of Ninchuan, Birch's scheduled meeting with Chinese puppet troops of the Sixth Army under General Hu Peng-chu, misunderstanding by local guerillas, and provocation from Birch himself.

[ 77 ] Founding and beliefs [ edit ] The founding members of the JBS included Harry Lynde Bradley , co-founder of the Allen Bradley Company and the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation , [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Fred C. Koch , founder of Koch Industries , [ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] and Robert Waring Stoddard , president of Wyman-Gordon , a major industrial enterprise.

[ 84 ] Another was Revilo P. Oliver , a University of Illinois professor who was later expelled from the Society and helped found the National Alliance . Koch became one of the organization's primary financial supporters. According to investigative journalist Jane Mayer, David Koch and Charles Koch , Koch's sons, were also members of the JBS; however, both left it before the 1970s.

[ 85 ] A transcript of Welch's two-day presentation at the founding meeting was published as The Blue Book of the John Birch Society , and became a cornerstone of its beliefs, with each new prospective member receiving a copy.

[ 86 ] Welch stated: "[B]oth the U.S. and Soviet governments are controlled by the same furtive conspiratorial cabal of internationalists, greedy bankers, and corrupt politicians. If left unexposed, the traitors inside the U.S. government would betray the country's sovereignty to the United Nations for a collectivist New World Order , managed by a 'one-world socialist government'." [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Welch saw collectivism as the main threat to Western culture , and modern American liberals as "secret Communist traitors" who provided cover for the gradual process of collectivism, with the ultimate goal of replacing the nations of western civilization with a one-world socialist government. He wrote: "There are many stages of welfarism , socialism, and collectivism in general, but Communism is the ultimate state of them all, and they all lead inevitably in that direction." [ 88 ] Welch predicted that "you have only a few more years before the country in which you live will become four separate provinces in a world-wide Communist dominion ruled by police-state methods from the Kremlin." [ 2 ] Welch held that devout, fundamentalist religious believers (though fundamentalist Christians in particular) were key to resisting atheistic communism. He saw such religious belief as something which would "instill values of individual responsibility and morality that prevented practitioners from relying on the state for their welfare. By inference, those who took government assistance or supported New Deal concepts not only forfeited their self-determination but also could not be considered to be truly spiritual." [ 60 ] He believed that ecumenism , in the form of the National Council of Churches whom he opposed, was a way of exerting Communist control over Protestant churches.

[ 89 ] The JBS was organized to be, in Welch's words, "under completely authoritative control at all levels". It incorporated aspects of business hierarchies and also the Communist cells Welch opposed but whose discipline he admired. Chapters of 10 to 20 members each had a leader appointed from above, and were expected to meet twice a month. Members of chapters that grew larger than 20 members were expected to break off and form a new small chapter.

[ 3 ] The activities of the JBS include distributing literature, pamphlets, magazines, videos and other material; the society also sponsors a Speaker's Bureau, which invites "speakers who are keenly aware of the motivations that drive political policy".

[ 90 ] One of the first public activities of the society was a "Get US Out!" (of membership in the UN ) campaign, which claimed in 1959 that the "Real nature of [the] UN is to build a One World Government".

[ 91 ] The society also alleged that Communists and UN supporters were conducting an "assault on Christmas" to "destroy all religious beliefs and customs".

[ 16 ] In 1960, Welch advised JBS members to: "Join your local P.T.A.

at the beginning of the school year, get your conservative friends to do likewise, and go to work to take it over." [ 92 ] One Man's Opinion , [ 93 ] a magazine launched by Welch in 1956, was renamed American Opinion .

[ 94 ] In 1965, Welch established a JBS-affiliated publication known as The Review of the News , which was intended for a larger readership and covered news.

[ 95 ] In 1985, these magazines merged into The New American , a biweekly magazine published by the Society.

[ 96 ] Eisenhower issue [ edit ] For the first eighteen months of its existence, JBS "operated in relative obscurity"; [ 15 ] though in 1959 it began to gain momentum as it started one of its earliest front groups , the Committee Against Summit Entanglements (CASE), to oppose President Dwight D. Eisenhower 's 1959 summit with Soviet First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev . The JBS viewed Eisenhower as weak, having surrendered to the Soviet Union. By raising money – in part from wealthy figures in business – in order to purchase advertisements in The New York Times and over a hundred other newspapers, sending hundreds of thousands of postcards, as well as circulating a petition, CASE's cause gained the support of the right. The group's campaign was a success in terms of bringing Birch talking points into broader discourse.

[ 64 ] : 48–50 The following year, in July 1960, the Chicago Daily News published a relatively in-depth story on the Society, including the contention of founder Robert Welch, that Eisenhower was a "dedicated, conscious agent" of the communist conspiracy in the United States. "For the next few years Birchers found themselves at the center of a storm of controversy".

[ 15 ] Welch had first made the statement in 1954 when he wrote in a widely circulated statement, The Politician : "Could Eisenhower really be simply a smart politician, entirely without principles and hungry for glory, who is only the tool of the Communists? The answer is yes." He went on: "With regard to ... Eisenhower, it is difficult to avoid raising the question of deliberate treason." [ 97 ] The controversial paragraph was removed before final publication of The Politician .

[ 98 ] The sensationalism of Welch's charges against Eisenhower prompted several conservatives and Republicans, most prominently Goldwater and the intellectuals of William F. Buckley's circle, to renounce outright or quietly shun the group. Buckley, an early friend and admirer of Welch, regarded his accusations against Eisenhower as "paranoid and idiotic libels" and attempted unsuccessfully to purge Welch from the Birch Society.

[ 99 ] From then on, Buckley became the leading intellectual spokesman and organizer of the anti-Bircher conservatives.

[ 100 ] Buckley's biographer, John B. Judis , wrote that "Buckley was beginning to worry that with the John Birch Society growing so rapidly, the right-wing upsurge in the country would take an ugly, even Fascist turn rather than leading toward the kind of conservatism National Review had promoted." [ 100 ] Despite Buckley's opposition, the author Edward H. Miller wrote, the JBS "remained a force in the conservative movement", and arguments to the contrary are "greatly exaggerated".

[ 61 ] : 211, 258 The booklet found support from Ezra Taft Benson , then Eisenhower's Secretary of Agriculture and later the 13th president of the LDS Church . In a letter to his friend FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover , Benson asked "how can a man [Eisenhower] who seems to be so strong for Christian principles and base American concepts be so effectively used as a tool to serve the Communist conspiracy?" Benson privately fought to prevent the Bureau from condemning the JBS, which prompted Hoover to distance himself from Benson. At one point in 1971, Hoover directed his staff to lie to Benson to avoid having to meet with him about the issue.

[ 101 ] 1960s [ edit ] In the 1960s, the JBS became known as a right-wing organization with an anti-Communist ideology.

[ 76 ] It was moderately active in that decade with numerous chapters, but rarely engaged in coalition building with other conservatives. It was rejected by most conservatives because of Welch's conspiracy theories. The philosopher Ayn Rand said in a 1964 Playboy interview: "I consider the Birch Society futile, because they are not for capitalism but merely against Communism ... I gather they believe that the disastrous state of today's world is caused by a Communist conspiracy. This is childishly naïve and superficial. No country can be destroyed by a mere conspiracy, it can be destroyed only by ideas." [ 102 ] [ 103 ] Some historians said the JBS had a large role in 1960s politics, and functioned much like a third party, forcing "the GOP, the Democrats, and conservatives of all types to respond to its agenda", in Jonathan M. Schoenwald's words.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] By March 1961, the JBS had 60,000 to 100,000 members and, according to Welch, "a staff of 28 people in the Home Office; about 30 Coordinators (or Major Coordinators) in the field, who are fully paid as to salary and expenses; and about 100 Coordinators (or Section Leaders as they are called in some areas), who work on a volunteer basis as to all or part of their salary, or expenses, or both". According to Political Research Associates (a non-profit research group that investigates the far-right), the society "pioneered grassroots lobbying, combining educational meetings, petition drives and letter-writing campaigns.

[ 88 ] Rick Perlstein described its main activity in the 1960s as "monthly meetings to watch a film by Welch, followed by writing postcards or letters to government officials linking specific policies to the Communist menace".

[ 106 ] One early campaign against the second summit between the United States and the Soviet Union (which urged President Dwight D. Eisenhower , "If you go, don't come back!" [ 3 ] ) generated over 600,000 postcards and letters, according to the society. In 1961 Welch offered $2,300 in prizes to college students for the best essays on "grounds of impeachment" of Chief Justice Warren , a prime target of ultra-conservatives.

[ 107 ] A June 1964 society campaign to oppose Xerox corporate sponsorship of TV programs favorable to the UN produced 51,279 letters from 12,785 individuals." [ 88 ] By the middle of the decade, it had 400 American Opinion bookstores selling its literature.

[ 2 ] In 1962, William F. Buckley Jr.

, editor of the National Review , an influential conservative magazine, denounced Welch and the John Birch Society as "far removed from common sense" and urged the GOP to purge itself of Welch's influence.

[ 108 ] In the late 1960s, Welch insisted that the Lyndon B. Johnson administration 's war against Communist guerillas and North Vietnamese troops during the Vietnam War , which was unpopular among liberals and leftists but not among conservatives, was part of a Communist plot aimed at taking over the United States. Welch demanded that the United States get out of Vietnam , thus aligning the JBS with the left.

[ 109 ] The society opposed water fluoridation , which it called "mass medicine" and a Communist effort to destroy American children.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] Former Eisenhower cabinet member Ezra Taft Benson —a leading Mormon —spoke in favor of the JBS. In January 1963, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints issued a statement distancing itself from the Society.

[ 114 ] Antisemitic, racist, anti-Mormon, anti-Masonic groups criticized the organization's acceptance of Jews, non-whites, Masons, and Mormons as members. These opponents accused Welch of harboring feminist, ecumenical , and evolutionary ideas.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Welch rejected these accusations by his detractors: "All we are interested in here is opposing the advance of the Communists, and eventually destroying the whole Communist conspiracy, so that Jews and Christians alike, and Mohammedans and Buddhists , can again have a decent world in which to live." [ 117 ] [ non-primary source needed ] In a 1963 report, the California Senate Factfinding Subcommittee on Un-American Activities , following an investigation into the JBS, found no evidence it was "a secret, fascist, subversive, un-American, [or] anti-Semitic organization." [ 118 ] [ 119 ] In 1964, Welch favored Barry Goldwater for the Republican presidential nomination, but the membership split, with two-thirds supporting Goldwater and one-third supporting Richard Nixon , who did not run. A number of Birch members and their allies were Goldwater supporters in 1964 [ 108 ] and a hundred of them were delegates at the 1964 Republican National Convention .

[ 120 ] In April 1966, a New York Times article on New Jersey and the society voiced—in part—a concern for "the increasing tempo of radical right attacks on local government, libraries, school boards, parent-teacher associations, mental health programs, the Republican Party and, most recently, the ecumenical movement." [ 121 ] It then characterized the society as "by far the most successful and 'respectable' radical right organization in the country. It operates alone or in support of other extremist organizations whose major preoccupation, like that of the Birchers, is the internal Communist conspiracy in the United States." The JBS also opposed the creation of the first sex education curriculum in the United States through a division called the Movement to Restore Decency (MOTOREDE).

[ 122 ] Surviving MOTOREDE pamphlets date from 1967 to 1971. Additionally, the JBS advocated against other manifestations of social liberalism, including abortion.

[ 61 ] : 347, 357–360 JBS members and activities were featured in "The Radical Americans", a series produced by National Educational Television (NET) and WGBH-TV that aired in 1966 on NET outlets.

[ 123 ] JBS membership peaked in 1965 or 1966 at an estimated 100,000.

[ 3 ] The JBS opposed the 1960s civil rights movement and claimed the movement had Communists in important positions. In the latter half of 1965, the JBS produced a flyer titled "What's Wrong With Civil Rights?" and used the flyer as a newspaper advertisement.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] In the piece, one of the answers was: "For the civil rights movement in the United States, with all of its growing agitation and riots and bitterness, and insidious steps towards the appearance of a civil war, has not been infiltrated by the Communists, as you now frequently hear. It has been deliberately and almost wholly created by the Communists patiently building up to this present stage for more than forty years." [ 126 ] The society believed that the ultimate aim of the civil rights movement was the creation of a " Soviet Negro Republic " in the southeastern United States [ 40 ] and opposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , claiming it violated the Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and overstepped individual states' rights to enact laws regarding civil rights . Some prominent black conservatives such as George Schuyler and Manning Johnson joined forces with the JBS during this period and echoed the Society's rhetoric about the civil-rights movement and the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] Although Welch and the JBS publicly opposed racism and antisemitism, and had a policy of expelling individuals who held such views, [ 129 ] in 1968, a notable faction of JBS members expressed opposition towards desegregation efforts and demonstrated solidarity with white nationalists by supporting George Wallace .

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Both the SPLC and the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith have ascertained the existence in the past of antisemitic and racist elements, such as Revilo P. Oliver and Eric D. Butler .

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] Many of these individuals later left or were expelled from the JBS because of these views.

[ 134 ] The JBS launched a "Support Your Local Police" campaign in the mid-1960s. The campaign openly advocated against the use of federal officers to enforce civil rights laws.

[ 128 ] At the organization's tenth anniversary celebration in 1968, Welch announced the creation of John Birch University (now Robert Welch University), [ 135 ] which it later described as an "alternative to the socialist/internationalist/atheist education afforded by the major government-controlled colleges and universities." [ 136 ] John Birch University primarily served as a library and educational resource for decades, running summer youth camps around the United States.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] 1970s [ edit ] By 1976, the JBS had 90,000 members, 240 paid staffers, and a $7 million annual budget according to a paper written by the American libertarian conservative tycoon Charles Koch .

[ 20 ] The JBS was at the center of a free-speech law case in the 1970s, after American Opinion accused a Chicago lawyer, Elmer Gertz , who was representing the family of a young man killed by a police officer, of being part of a Communist conspiracy to merge all police agencies in the country into one large force. The resulting libel suit, Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc.

, reached the United States Supreme Court , which held that a state may allow a private figure such as Gertz to recover actual damages from a media defendant without proving malice but that a public figure does have to prove actual malice, according to the standard laid out in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan , in order to recover presumed damages or punitive damages.

[ 139 ] The court ordered a retrial in which Gertz prevailed.

[ 140 ] Key causes of the JBS in the 1970s included opposition to both the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and to the establishment of diplomatic ties with the People's Republic of China. The JBS claimed that Nixon 's visit to mainland China had "humiliated the American people and betrayed our anti-communist allies" and that it was the primary supplier of illicit heroin into the United States.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] The society also was opposed to transferring control of the Panama Canal from American to Panamanian sovereignty.

[ 143 ] During the 1970s, the Kuomintang in the Republic of China under Executive Yuan Premier Chiang Ching-kuo organized a people's diplomacy campaign in the United States in an effort to mobilize American political sentiment in opposition to the PRC through mass demonstrations and petitions.

[ 144 ] : 42 Among these efforts, the John Birch Society worked with the KMT on a petition writing campaign through which Americans were urged to write their local government officials and ask them to "Cut the Red China connection." [ 144 ] : 42 The John Birch Society, along with other conservative groups such as the Eagle Forum and the Christian right , successfully opposed the Equal Rights Amendment in the 1970s.

[ 145 ] [ 41 ] JBS played a key role in stopping the ERA's ratification – on par with Phyllis Schlafly , herself a JBS member – and it organized opposition to it across the nation.

[ 61 ] : 347–351 JBS accused the ERA's supporters of subversion, asserting that the ERA was part of a Communist plot "to reduce human beings to living at the same level as animals." [ 41 ] The JBS advocated for lower taxes, including reducing the federal income tax rate. By 1977, it had established over 200 TRIM (Tax Relief Immediately) committees across the U.S.

[ 61 ] : 361–64 In the 1970s, the JBS also played a prominent role in promoting the false claim that laetrile was a cancer cure , and in advocating for the legalization of the compound as a drug.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] A New York Times review in 1977 found JBS and other far-right groups were involved in pro-laetrile campaigns in at least nine states.

[ 146 ] "Virtually all" of the officers of the "Committee for Freedom of Choice in Cancer Therapy," the leading pro-laetrile group, were JBS members.

[ 147 ] Congressman and Birch Society leader Lawrence P. McDonald was involved in the campaign as a member of the committee.

[ 146 ] [ 148 ] The JBS opposed Earth Day , suggesting that it was a Communist plot and noting that the first celebration fell on the 100th anniversary of Vladimir Lenin 's birth.

[ 16 ] The JBS was organized into local chapters during this period. Ernest Brosang, a New Jersey regional coordinator, claimed that it was virtually impossible for opponents of the society to penetrate its policy-making levels, thereby protecting it from "anti-American" takeover attempts. Its activities included the distribution of literature critical of civil rights legislation, warnings over the influence of the United Nations, and the release of petitions to impeach United States Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren . To spread their message, members held showings of documentary films and operated initiatives such as "Let Freedom Ring", a nationwide network of recorded telephone messages.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] 1980s and 1990s [ edit ] A sign advocating America's withdrawal produced by the John Birch Society After the Vietnam War , the JBS's membership and influence declined. This decline continued through the 1980s and 1990s due to Welch's death in 1985 (at age 85) and the end of the Cold War in 1991.

[ 151 ] [ 18 ] By the mid-1990s, membership in the JBS was estimated between 15,000 and 20,000.

[ 152 ] While other anti-Communist organizations faded away following the Cold War's end, the JBS survived and experienced some growth in the 1990s.

[ 153 ] News reports said President George H.W. Bush 's invocation of a "new world order" during the 1991 Gulf War gave the society a new audience.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] The society consolidated its national office in Appleton, Wisconsin, the birthplace of Senator Joseph McCarthy .

[ 2 ] In 1984, three members of the San Diego Padres , namely Eric Show , Mark Thurmond , and Dave Dravecky , revealed they were members of the JBS.

[ 156 ] The society campaigned against the ratification of the Genocide Convention , arguing it would erode U.S. national sovereignty.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] The JBS continued to press for an end to United States membership in the United Nations. As evidence of its effectiveness, the society pointed to the Utah State Legislature 's failed resolution calling for United States withdrawal, as well as the actions of several other states where the society's membership was active.

[ 159 ] The second head of the JBS was Congressman Larry McDonald (D) from Georgia. McDonald's first wife "estimated that, over the years, he had hosted 10,000 people in his living room for Bircher-inspired lectures and documentaries." [ 148 ] In 1982, McDonald was appointed as national chairman of the Society.

[ 148 ] McDonald was killed in 1983 when airliner KAL 007 was shot down by a Soviet interceptor.

[ 148 ] William P. Hoar, a writer for the JBS who has attacked mainstream politicians from Franklin D. Roosevelt to George W. Bush , published regularly in The New American and its predecessor American Opinion.

He coauthored The Clinton Clique with Larry Abraham alleging that Bill Clinton was part of the Anglo-American conspiracy supposedly ruled through the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission . The Birch Society publications arm, Western Islands , published his Architects of Conspiracy: An Intriguing History (1984), and Huntington House Publishers published his Handouts and Pickpockets: Our Government Gone Berserk (1996).

[ 160 ] [ better source needed ] In 1995, the JBS campaigned against plans for a Conference of States; proponents said such a conference would reduce federal powers. The JBS feared it would lead to a second Constitutional Convention .

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] 2000–present [ edit ] In the mid-2000s, the JBS, along with the Eagle Forum , mobilized conservative opposition to a so-called North American Union and the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America .  As a result of two organizations' activities, 23 state legislatures saw bills introduced condemning an NAU while the Bush and Obama administrations were deterred "from any grand initiatives." [ 39 ] In 2007, The New American published a special issue devoted to the topic; approximately 500,000 copies were distributed.

[ 165 ] The JBS also advocated for U.S. withdrawal from the UN.

[ 37 ] The JBS was a co-sponsor of the 2010 Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), ending its decades-long distance from the mainstream conservative movement.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] [ 14 ] It attended CPAC again in 2023 [ 168 ] and 2024.

[ 65 ] [ 169 ] In 2005, Robert Welch University, renamed from John Birch University in the 1990s, was approved as an online university by the Wisconsin Educational Approval Board, granting two-year associates' degrees.

[ 170 ] On June 15, 2007, the university had its first graduating class.

[ 171 ] As of 2025 [update] , the university states its two-year program is paused while it works to develop a four-year degree program.

[ 172 ] Although JBS membership numbers are kept private, it reported a resurgence of members in the 2010s and 2020s, specifically in Texas .

[ 21 ] [ 173 ] [ 174 ] A 2017 article in Politico describing the group's activities in Texas listed some of its stances as opposing the UN's Agenda 21 based on a conspiracy theory that it will "establish control over all human activity", opposing a bill that would allow people who entered the United States illegally to pay in-state college tuition, pulling the United States out of NAFTA , returning America to what the group calls its Christian foundations, and abolishing the federal departments of education and energy .

[ 21 ] In 2012, the Tennessee House of Representatives passed an anti-Agenda 21 resolution with nearly identical wording as a JBS model resolution.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] With Donald Trump 's election in 2016, the JBS "saw many of its core instincts finally reflected in the White House." [ 65 ] Political commentator Jeet Heer argued in 2016 that " Trumpism " is essentially Bircherism, [ 22 ] and journalist Andrew Reinbach called the JBS "the intellectual seed bank of the right." [ 177 ] Trump confidant and longtime advisor Roger Stone said that Trump's father Fred Trump was a financier of the JBS and a personal friend of founder Robert Welch.

[ 178 ] Trump's former Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney was the speaker at the John Birch Society's National Council dinner shortly before joining the Trump administration.

[ 179 ] Former Congressman Ron Paul (R-Texas) has had a long and close relationship with the JBS, celebrating its work in his 2008 keynote speech at its 50th anniversary event and saying that the JBS was leading the fight to restore freedom.

[ 180 ] [ self-published source?

] [ 181 ] The keynote speaker at the organization's 60th anniversary celebration was Congressman Thomas Massie (R-Kentucky), who maintained a near-perfect score on the JBS's "Freedom Index" ranking of members of Congress.

[ 182 ] [ self-published source?

] Right-wing conspiracy theorist Alex Jones , who hosted Trump on his InfoWars radio show and claimed to have a personal relationship with the president, called Trump a "John Birch Society president", [ 183 ] and previously said Trump was "more John Birch Society than the John Birch Society." [ 184 ] [ better source needed ] Former JBS CEO Arthur R. Thompson stated, "The bulk of Trump’s campaign was Birch".

[ 185 ] Trump's talk of a deep state has been described as "repeating a longtime Birch talking point." [ 185 ] In July 2021, the Republican central committees of Kootenai County, Idaho , and Benewah County, Idaho , unanimously approved resolutions calling JBS "a valuable organization that is dedicated to restoring the Republic according to the vision of the Founding Fathers." [ 186 ] The Idaho Republican Party declined to endorse the resolutions, [ 187 ] though the party elected a JBS member, Dorothy Moon , as chair in July 2022.

[ 188 ] The JBS had been active in Idaho.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] In the early 2020s, the JBS campaigned against carbon-capture pipelines in Iowa, arguing they threatened property rights.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] [ 193 ] The JBS is affiliated with FreedomProject Academy, an online school "based on Judeo-Christian values." Between 2011 and 2020, its enrollment grew from 22 to 1,000 students.

[ 14 ] The JBS publishes the Freedom Index, which rates members of Congress and state legislators "based on their adherence to constitutional principles of limited government, fiscal responsibility, national sovereignty and a traditional foreign policy of avoiding foreign entanglements." [ 194 ] Officers [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "John Birch Society" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chairmen and presidents [ edit ] Robert W. Welch Jr.

(1958–1983) Larry McDonald (1983), a U.S. Representative who was killed in the KAL-007 shootdown incident Robert W. Welch Jr. (1983–1985) Charles R. Armour (1985–1991) John F. McManus (1991–2004) G. Vance Smith (2004–2005) John F. McManus (2005–2016) Ray Clark (2016–2019) [ 195 ] Martin Ohlson (since 2019) [ 196 ] CEOs [ edit ] G. Allen Bubolz (1988–1991) G. Vance Smith (1991–2005) Arthur R. Thompson (2005–2020) Bill Hahn (2020–2024) Wayne Morrow (2024–present) [ 197 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Pete Seeger lampooned the John Birch Society with a song called "The Jack Ash Society", recorded on his 1961 Folkways Records LP album Gazette Vol. 2 . The name is a pun. On the surface, it changes the name from one type of tree, birch to another, ash . However, the name Jack Ash also sounds like the word jackass meaning 'a foolish person'.

[ 198 ] In 1962, Bob Dylan recorded " Talkin' John Birch Paranoid Blues ", which poked fun at the society and its tendency to see Communist conspiracies in many situations. When he attempted to perform it on the Ed Sullivan Show in 1963, however, CBS 's Standards and Practices department forbade it, fearing that lyrics equating the Society's views with those of Adolf Hitler might trigger a defamation lawsuit. Dylan was offered the opportunity to perform a different song, but he responded that if he could not sing the number of his choice he would rather not appear at all. The story generated widespread media attention in the days that followed; Sullivan denounced the network's decision in published interviews.

[ 199 ] Pogo cartoonist Walt Kelly lampooned the American anti-Communist movement, and the John Birch Society in particular, in a series of strips collected in 1962 in The Jack Acid Society Black Book .

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] In 1962 The Chad Mitchell Trio recorded a satirical song, "The John Birch Society", which made its way to no. 99 in the Billboard Hot 100 .

[ 202 ] When jazz trumpeter John Birks "Dizzy" Gillespie launched a joke presidential campaign in 1963, fans created a "John Birks Society" to campaign for him.

[ 203 ] In the 1964 film Dr. Strangelove , a deranged U.S. Air Force general claims that water fluoridation would "sap and impurify all of our precious bodily fluids" and is part of a communist conspiracy, a parody of JBS claims.

[ 204 ] The 1973 song " Uneasy Rider " by Charlie Daniels contains a reference to "Brother John Birch" in the lyrics.

[ 205 ] The 2020 American miniseries Mrs. America involves a subplot in which Betty Friedan speaks out against Phyllis Schlafly's STOP ERA campaign accepting funds from the John Birch Society in episode 4, "Betty".

In 2020, American journalist Robert Evans released a multi-part series on his podcast Behind the Bastards entitled "How The John Birch Society Invented the Modern Far Right".

[ 206 ] See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal Granville Knight Rousas Rushdoony W. Cleon Skousen References [ edit ] ^ Webster's guide to American history: a chronological, geographical, and biographical survey and compendium . Springfield, Mass.: G. & C. Merriam Co. 1971. p. 576.

ISBN 978-0877790815 .

^ a b c d e Stewart 2002 , pp. 423–447.

^ a b c d e f g Mulloy 2014 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ a b Lunsford, J. Lynn (February 4, 2009). "Business Bookshelf: Piles of Green From Black Gold".

The Wall Street Journal . p. A.11.

Haddock, Sharon (March 21, 2009). "Beck's backing bumps Skousen book to top".

Deseret News . Salt Lake City, Utah.

Byrd, Shelia (May 25, 2008). "Churches tackle tough topic of race".

Sunday Gazette-Mail . Charleston, W.V. p. C.5.

^ Blumenthal, Max (2010).

Republican Gomorrah: inside the movement that shattered the party . New York: Nation Books. p. 332.

ISBN 978-1568584171 .

Skousen's vocal support for the Far-right John Birch Society's claim that Communists controlled President Dwight Eisenhower cost him the support of the corporate backers who had paid for his Red-bashing lecture tours.

^ Eatwell, Roger (2004), "Introduction: The new extreme right challenge" , Western Democracies and The New Extreme Right challenge , Routledge, p. 7, ISBN 978-1134201570 Potok, Mark (2004), "The American radical right: The 1990s and beyond" , Western Democracies and The New Extreme Right challenge , Routledge, p. 43, ISBN 978-1134201570 ^ a b c Levine, Deborah; Brenman, Marc (November 15, 2019).

"The Local–Global Context" .

When Hate Groups March Down Main Street: Engaging a Community Response .

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 978-1-5381-3266-1 – via Google Books .

...there are fierce objections on the extreme right to initiatives related to international collaboration. This attitude is typified by The New American (TNA), a print magazine published by American Opinion Publishing, Inc., a subsidiary of the John Birch Society (JBS), a far-right organization.

^ Bernstein, Richard (May 21, 2007). "The JFK assassination and a '60s leftist prism Letter from America".

International Herald Tribune . Paris. p. 2.

Jordan, Ida Kay (August 26, 2001). "Voters Admired N.C. Senator's Independent Streak, Southern Charm".

The Virginian-Pilot . Norfolk, Va. p. J.1.

Brinkley, Douglas (February 10, 1997). "The Right Choice for the C.I.A.".

The New York Times . p. A.15.

^ Webb, Clive.

Rabble rousers: the American far right in the civil rights era . Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 2010 ISBN 0820327646 p. 10 ^ a b Tanenhaus, Sam; Rutenberg, Jim (January 25, 2014).

"Rand Paul's Mixed Inheritance" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 5, 2021 .

^ a b Kaminer, Wendy (March 18, 2010).

"Will the Right Find Libertarianism?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved August 5, 2021 .

^ [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] ^ Dan Barry (June 25, 2009).

"Holding Firm Against Plots by Evildoers" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 4, 2010 .

^ a b c d Leonard, Collin (February 22, 2023).

"Is this the death of the John Birch Society - or its renaissance?" .

Deseret News . Retrieved March 7, 2023 .

^ a b c Mulloy 2014a , p. 15.

^ a b c d e Chapman, Roger (2010).

Culture Wars: An Encyclopedia of Issues, Viewpoints, and Voices . M.E. Sharpe. pp. 58, 91, 148.

ISBN 978-0765617613 .

^ a b Mallon, Thomas (January 4, 2016).

"A View from the Fringe: The John Birch Society and the rise of the radical right" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved April 7, 2022 .

^ a b Stewart 2002 , p. 425.

^ Regnery, Alfred S. (2008).

Upstream: The Ascendance of American Conservatism . Simon and Schuster. p. 79.

ISBN 978-1416522881 .

^ a b Jane Mayer.

Dark Money . p. 55.

^ a b c d Savage, John (July 16, 2017).

"The John Birch Society Is Back" .

Politico . Retrieved January 4, 2019 .

^ a b Heer, Jeet (June 14, 2016).

"Donald Trump's United States of Conspiracy" .

The New Republic . Retrieved February 11, 2018 .

^ a b Ward, Ian (March 19, 2023).

"The fringe group that broke the GOP's brain — and helped it win elections" .

Vox . Retrieved September 28, 2023 .

^ a b Dallek, Matthew (October 20, 2023).

"The History That Makes It So Difficult for Republicans to Pick a Speaker of the House" .

Time . Retrieved October 24, 2023 .

^ a b c d Celestini, Carmen (2018).

God, Country, and Christian Conservatives: The National Association of Manufacturers, the John Birch Society, and the Rise of the Christian Right (PDF) (PhD).

University of Waterloo .

^ a b White, John Kenneth (June 2, 2025).

"Trump 2.0 is the final victory of the John Birch Society" .

The Hill . Retrieved June 3, 2025 .

^ a b Lehmann, Chris (November 23, 2021).

"We All Live in the John Birch Society's World Now" .

The New Republic . Retrieved April 19, 2022 .

^ a b Miller, Edward H. (January 9, 2022).

"Op-Ed: Today's right-wing conspiracy theory mentality can be traced back to the John Birch Society" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved April 19, 2022 .

^ a b Robinson, Nathan (June 8, 2023).

"How the John Birch Society Won the Long Game" .

The Nation . Retrieved October 24, 2023 .

^ a b Mulloy 2014 , p. 11.

^ Stewart 2002 , pp. 428–429, 436, 441–442.

^ Stewart 2002 .

^ Celestini, Carmen (2018).

God, Country, and Christian Conservatives: The National Association of Manufacturers, the John Birch Society, and the Rise of the Christian Right (PDF) (PhD).

University of Waterloo . pp. 10, 114– 116, 124– 126.

^ Stewart 2002 , pp. 428–429.

^ Verhoeven 2015 , pp. 3, 56–57, 103.

^ Larry McDonald on the New World Order (Television).

Crossfire . May 1983.  Event occurs at 2:22.

^ a b Spangler, Jerry D.; Bernick, Bob Jr. (June 16, 2003).

"John Birch Society forges on in Utah" .

Deseret News . Retrieved July 26, 2022 .

^ Farmer, Brian (September 17, 2007).

"The North American Union: Conspiracy Theory or Conspiracy Fact?" . The John Birch Society. Archived from the original on October 20, 2007 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ a b Pastor, Robert (2011).

The North American Idea: A Vision of a Continental Future . New York: Oxford University Press, USA. pp. 11, 76.

ISBN 978-0-19-978241-3 .

OCLC 741646639 .

^ a b Hill, Gladwin (August 16, 1963).

"Birch Head Sees Red Rights Plot" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 5, 2020 .

^ a b c Rhode, Deborah L. (2009).

Justice and Gender . Harvard University Press. pp. 63, 70– 71.

ISBN 9780674042674 .

[T]he John Birch Society perceived the amendment as an integral part of "Communist plans...at work in a now vast effort to reduce human beings to the same level as animals." ^ Stone, Junius (October 28, 2021).

"Local Patriots talk about constitutional convention, nullification" .

Texarkana Gazette . Retrieved October 29, 2021 .

^ Steinback, Robert (April 26, 2011).

"Nullification Advocates Take Show On The Road" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved April 7, 2022 .

^ H. Neale, Thomas (November 15, 2017).

"The Article V Convention to Propose Constitutional Amendments:Current Developments" (PDF) .

fas.org . Congressional Research Service . Retrieved April 28, 2021 .

^ Wilson, Sam (February 11, 2021).

"Fiery Constitutional Debate Splits Senate Republicans" .

Independent Record . Retrieved April 30, 2021 .

^ Russ, Feingold; Prindiville, Peter (2022).

The Constitution in Jeopardy . New York: Hachette Book Group. pp. 142, 164– 65.

ISBN 978-1541701526 .

^ "Federal Reserve" .

Jbs.org . Archived from the original on July 21, 2012 . Retrieved July 7, 2012 .

^ Stewart 2002 , p. 440.

^ Stewart 2002 , p. 441.

^ Schott, Bryan (April 10, 2024).

"Fringe politics take center stage at Republican U.S. Senate debate hosted by Utah Eagle Forum" .

The Salt Lake Tribune . Retrieved April 16, 2024 .

One particularly eye-catching pamphlet from the radical John Birch Society shows a public school on fire with the phrase "Get them out!" in capital letters on the front. "If the public school were on fire, and your children and grandchildren were inside, what would you do?" the back of the pamphlet read. After warning of the dangers of critical race theory and how students are allegedly being sexualized, the reader is told, "Reforming the schools is no longer an option. We must get them out now!" ^ Burch, Kurt; Robert Allen Denemark (1997).

Constituting international political economy . Lynne Rienner Publishers. p. 125.

ISBN 978-1-55587-660-9 .

Oshinsky, David (January 27, 2008). "In the Heart of the Heart of Conspiracy".

The New York Times Book Review . p. 23.

Danielson, Chris (February 2009). "Lily White and Hard Right: The Mississippi Republican Party and Black Voting, 1965–1980".

The Journal of Southern History .

75 (1): 83.

Lee, Martha F (Fall 2005). "Nesta Webster: The Voice of Conspiracy".

Journal of Women's History .

17 (3): 81.

doi : 10.1353/jowh.2005.0033 .

S2CID 143991823 .

Blumenthal, Max (2010).

Republican Gomorrah: inside the movement that shattered the party . New York: Nation Books. p. 332.

ISBN 978-1568584171 .

Skousen's vocal support for the Far-right John Birch Society's claim that Communists controlled President Dwight Eisenhower cost him the support of the corporate backers who had paid for his Red-bashing lecture tours.

Walsh, DA. (2020). "The Right-Wing Popular Front: The Far Right and American Conservatism in the 1950s".

Journal of American History .

107 (2): 411– 432.

doi : 10.1093/jahist/jaaa182 .

"But this emphasis on the 1960s and the setting of the boundaries between the 'responsible' conservatism of Buckley and Goldwater and the far-right 'fringe' of the Birchers has occluded the deep relationship between conservatives and the far right in the 1950s." ^ Liebman, Marvin (March 17, 1996). "Perspective on Politics; The Big Tent Isn't Big Enough; By allowing extremists to flourish openly, the GOP forces out those who represent the party's moderate values".

Los Angeles Times . p. 5.

Tobin, Jonathan S. (March 9, 2008). "The writer who chased the anti-Semites out".

The Jerusalem Post . p. 14.

Gerson, Michael (March 10, 2009). "Looking for conservatism".

Times Daily . Florence, Ala.

^ " 'Patriot' Groups" . Southern Poverty Law Center. February 26, 2009 . Retrieved February 1, 2018 .

Generally, Patriot groups define themselves as opposed to the 'New World Order' or advocate or adhere to extreme antigovernment doctrines. ... Listing here does not imply that the groups advocate or engage in violence or other criminal activities, or are racist.

^ Stewart 2002 , pp. 443–444.

^ Verhoeven 2015 , pp. 2, 4, 38.

^ a b Michael, George (September 2, 2003).

Confronting Right Wing Extremism and Terrorism in the USA . Routledge. pp.

41– 42.

doi : 10.4324/9780203563212 .

ISBN 978-1-134-37762-6 .

^ Freilich, Joshua D.; Pienik, Jeremy A.; Howard, Gregory J. (May 1, 2001).

"Toward Comparative Studies of the U.S. Militia Movement" .

International Journal of Comparative Sociology .

42 (1): 163– 210.

doi : 10.1163/156851801300171751 .

^ Crothers, Lane (June 2002).

"The Cultural Foundations of the Modern Militia Movement" .

New Political Science .

24 (2): 222, 230.

doi : 10.1080/07393140220145225 .

ISSN 0739-3148 .

S2CID 143461538 .

^ Verhoeven 2015 , pp. 260–263, 266–271.

^ a b Mao, Joyce (2015). "Onward, Christian Soldiers: The John Birch Society".

Asia First: China and the Making of Modern American Conservatism . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226252858 .

^ a b c d e f g h Miller, Edward H. (2021).

A Conspiratorial Life: Robert Welch, the John Birch Society, and the Revolution of American Conservatism . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226449050 .

OCLC 1304351277 .

^ Smith, Daniel John (November 2021). "From Anti-Internationalism to Anti-Globalism: Populism, Conspiracism, and the New Right, 1965–1985".

'The False Song of Globalism': Anti-Globalist Politics and Ideology in the United States from 1945 to 2000 (Thesis). University of Cambridge . Retrieved June 1, 2025 .

^ Mulloy 2014 , pp. 188–189.

^ a b c d Dallek, Matthew (2023).

Birchers: How the John Birch Society Radicalized the American Right . New York: Hachette Book Group.

ISBN 978-1541673564 .

^ a b c d Calabro, Elaina Plott (February 23, 2024).

"The Return of the John Birch Society" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved February 27, 2024 .

^ Brooks, Anthony; Chang, Jonathan (July 13, 2022).

"The history of far-right populism, from the John Birch Society to Trumpism" .

WBUR-FM . Retrieved July 26, 2022 .

^ Tracinski, Robert (April 13, 2022).

"Did the John Birch Society Win in the End?" .

The Bulwark . Retrieved April 19, 2022 .

^ Perlstein, Rick (March 8, 2021).

"The John Birch Society Never Left" .

The New Republic . Retrieved October 24, 2023 .

^ Pengelly, Martin (May 6, 2023).

"Moms for Liberty, meet John Birch: the roots of US rightwing book bans" .

the Guardian . Retrieved October 24, 2023 .

^ Dallek, Matthew (September 20, 2023).

"How the extreme right tried to 'win' California schools in the 1960s" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved October 24, 2023 .

^ Schott, Bryan (December 7, 2023).

"Sen. Mike Lee wants the U.S. to sever ties with the United Nations" .

The Salt Lake Tribune . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ "John Birch Society", by Thomas C. Ellington, in Culture Wars: An Encyclopedia of Issues, Viewpoints, and Voices , ed. by Roger Chapman (M. E. Sharpe, 2010) p. 286 ^ a b James and Marti Hefley, The Secret File on John Birch , Tyndale House Publishers, 1980, ISBN 0-8423-5862-5 ^ History ^ Schoenwald, Jonathan M. (2002). "3 – A New Kind of Conservatism: The John Birch Society".

A Time for Choosing: The Rise of Modern American Conservatism .

Oxford University Press (US).

ISBN 0-19-515726-5 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k McGowan, Sam (September 6, 2016).

"For God and Country: The Story of John Birch" .

Warfare History Net . Retrieved March 10, 2021 .

^ Spector, Ronald H. (2007).

In the ruins of empire: the Japanese surrender and the battle for postwar Asia (1st ed.). New York: Random House.

ISBN 9780375509155 .

^ Horwitz, Jeff; Bauer, Scott (June 12, 2015).

"Before Walker run, a conservative foundation set the stage" .

Yahoo.com . Retrieved October 21, 2015 .

^ Daniel, Bice; Bill, Glauber; Poston, Ben (November 28, 2011).

"Conservative empire built from Wisconsin foundation" .

The Seattle Times . Retrieved November 12, 2019 .

^ Davis, Jonathan T. (1997).

Forbes Richest People: The Forbes Annual Profile of the World's Wealthiest Men and Women . Wiley. p. 138.

ISBN 978-0-471-17751-7 .

Founding member (1958) John Birch Society—reportedly after seeing Russian friends liquidated ^ Hoover's 500: Profiles of America's Largest Business Enterprises .

Hoover's Business Press . 1996. p.

286 .

ISBN 978-1-57311-009-9 .

In 1929 Koch took his process to the Soviet Union, but he grew disenchanted with Stalinism and returned home to become a founding member of the anticommunist John Birch Society.

^ Wayne, Leslie (December 7, 1986). "Brothers at Odds".

The New York Times . Sec. 6; Part 2, p 100 col. 1.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

He returned a fervent anti-Communist who would later become a founding member of the John Birch Society.

^ Diamond, Sara (1995).

Roads to Dominion: Right-Wing Movements and Political Power in the United States . New York: Guilford Press. p.

324 n. 86.

ISBN 0-89862-862-8 .

^ "Robert Stoddard Dies at 78; A Founder of Birch Society" .

The New York Times . December 16, 1984 . Retrieved May 7, 2012 .

^ Towler, Christopher (December 6, 2018).

"The John Birch Society is still influencing American politics, 60 years after its founding" .

The Conversation . Retrieved May 4, 2021 .

^ Mulloy 2014 , p. 3.

^ Welch, Robert E. (1961).

The Blue Book of the John Birch Society . American Opinion Books.

ISBN 0-88279-215-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b c d "John Birch Society" .

Political Research Associates . Retrieved July 18, 2008 .

^ Savage, James A. (2015).

Save Our Republic: Battling John Birch in California's Conservative Cradle (Thesis). University of Kentucky. pp.

52– 57 . Retrieved June 3, 2025 .

^ John Birch Society Speakers Bureau ^ Matthew Lyons; Chip Berlet (2000).

Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort . New York: The Guilford Press. p.

179 .

ISBN 1-57230-562-2 .

^ French, William Marshall (1967).

American Secondary Education . Odyssey Press. p. 477.

ISBN 0-7719-9198-3 . Retrieved July 20, 2008 .

^ OCLC 1713996 .

[ full citation needed ] ^ ISSN 0003-0236 OCLC 1480501 .

[ full citation needed ] ^ OCLC 12803345 .

[ full citation needed ] ^ Barbagallo, Paul (June 1, 2006).

"The New American Goes Mobile" .

Adweek . Retrieved September 29, 2023 .

^ Quoted at "Glenn Beck talks with JBS President John F. McManus" Aug. 15, 2006 , The John Birch Society Archived January 12, 2010, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Welch, Robert (1975).

The Politician . Boston: Western Islands.

cxxxviii– cxxxix.

ISBN 99908-64-98-5 .

At this point in the original manuscript, there was one paragraph in which I expressed my own personal belief as to the most likely explanation of the events and actions with this document had tried to bring into focus. In a confidential letter, neither published nor offered for sale and restricted to friends who were expected to respect the confidence but offer me in exchange their own points of view, this seemed entirely permissible and proper. It does not seem so for an edition of the letter that is now to be published and given, probably, fairly wide distribution. So that paragraph, and two explanatory paragraphs, connected with it, have been omitted here. And the reader is left entirely free to draw his own conclusions.

^ John B. Judis, William F. Buckley, Jr.: Patron Saint of the Conservatives (2001) pp. 193–200 ^ a b Confounding Fathers: The Tea Party's Cold War Roots by historian Sean Wilentz , The New Yorker , October 18, 2010 ^ Davidson, Lee (November 16, 2010).

"FBI files shed light on Ezra Taft Benson, Ike and the Birch Society" .

The Salt Lake Tribune . Retrieved February 11, 2018 .

^ "Who was Ayn Rand? – a biography, Playboy interview, 1964" . Retrieved July 18, 2008 .

^ Hauptman, Don (March 1, 2004).

"The 'Lost' Parts of Ayn Rand's Playboy Interview" .

The Atlas Society . Archived from the original on June 20, 2010.

^ Schoenwald, Jonathan M. (2001).

Time for Choosing: The Rise of Modern American Conservatism . Oxford University Press. p. 9.

^ Mulloy 2014 , pp. 12–13.

^ Rick Perlstein (2001).

Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and the Unmaking of the American Consensus . Hill and Wang. p. 117.

ISBN 0786744154 .

^ Oscar Theodore Barck Jr.; Nelson Manfred Blake (1969).

Since 1900 A History of the United States in Our Times . New York: Macmillan Company. p. 754.

^ a b William F. Buckley Jr. (March 1, 2008).

"Goldwater, the John Birch Society, and Me" .

Commentary . Retrieved March 9, 2008 .

^ Stephen Earl, Bennett (1971). "Modes of Resolution of a 'Belief Dilemma' in the Ideology of the John Birch Society".

Journal of Politics .

33 (3): 735– 772.

doi : 10.2307/2128280 .

JSTOR 2128280 .

S2CID 154740758 .

^ Dion Lefler (October 27, 2012).

"Fluoride fight has long roots, passionate advocates" .

The Wichita Eagle . Retrieved December 8, 2016 .

The John Birch Society was an active participant in Wichita's 1964 referendum that repealed fluoridation after the City Commission had voted to implement it.

^ William Heisel (November 11, 2016).

"Does fluoride have lessons for the vaccine debate?" .

Center for Health Journalism Newsletter . Retrieved December 8, 2016 .

From the 1940s through the 1960s, groups like the John Birch Society were vocal opponents of water fluoridation.

^ Coates, Paul (April 28, 1966). "It's a Day of Decision".

Los Angeles Times . p. 3.

^ Stewart 2002 , p. 430.

^ Prince, Gregory A. (2004).

"The Red Peril, the Candy Maker, and the Apostle: David O. Mckay's Confrontation with Communism" .

Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought .

37 (2): 37– 94.

doi : 10.2307/45227582 .

JSTOR 45227582 .

S2CID 254391712 .

^ "A Spectre Haunting Mormonism" . Retrieved July 18, 2008 .

^ Bove, Nicholas J. Jr.

"The Belmont Brotherhood" . Archived from the original on May 13, 2008 . Retrieved July 18, 2008 .

^ Robert Welch (1963).

The Neutralizers . John Birch Society. p. 20.

^ Twelfth Report of the Senate Factfinding Subcommittee on Un-American Activities .

Sacramento, California : Senate of the State of California. 1963. pp.

61– 62.

^ Mulloy 2014 , p. 63.

^ Mulloy 2014 , p. 98.

^ Sullivan, Ronald (April 20, 1966).

"Foes of Rising Birch Society Organize in Jersey" .

The New York Times . p. 1 . Retrieved May 2, 2018 .

^ Irvine, Janice M. (2004).

Talk about Sex: the battles over sex education in the United States . Berkeley, California: University of California Press. p. 52.

ISBN 9780520243293 .

^ "The Radical Americans" .

American Archive of Public Broadcasting . Retrieved March 14, 2022 .

^ Epstein, Benjamin R.; Forster, Arnold (1966).

Report on the John Birch Society, 1966 . Random House. p. 9.

^ What's Wrong with Civil Rights?

. Belmont, MA: American Opinion. 1965.

OCLC 56596124 .

^ "The John Birch Society Asks: What's Wrong With Civil Rights?" .

The Post-Times . West Palm Beach, FL. October 31, 1965. p. A10 cols. 1–6 . Retrieved January 30, 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Russler, Brett (July 2, 2020). " "We aren't after a House Negro to prove our love for Black People": the complicated relationship between George S. Schuyler and the John Birch society".

The Sixties .

13 (2). Informa UK Limited: 121– 145.

doi : 10.1080/17541328.2020.1837494 .

ISSN 1754-1328 .

S2CID 226314820 .

^ a b Berlet, Chip; Lyons, Matthew N. (March 8, 2018).

Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort . Guilford Publications. p. 181.

ISBN 978-1-4625-3760-0 .

^ Mulloy 2014 , p. 63–64, 109.

^ Nelson, Michael (2017).

Resilient America – Electing Nixon in 1968, Channeling Dissent, and Dividing Government . University Press of Kansas. p. 209.

ISBN 978-0700624423 .

^ Roberts, Zach D. (May 5, 2023).

"The Origins and Afterlife of the Infamous John Birch Society" .

Progressive.org . Retrieved July 8, 2023 .

^ a b Terry, Don (March 3, 2013).

"The John Birch Society, the conspiracist group exiled by the right a half century ago, is on the march and gaining influence" .

Intelligence Report (2013 Spring Issue).

^ "John Birch Society Charged with 'contributing to Anti-semitism' " .

Jewish Telegraphic Agency . March 20, 2015 . Retrieved September 26, 2023 .

^ Mulloy 2014 , p. 64, 185.

^ "John Birch University Envisioned" .

The Courier-Journal . December 8, 1968. p. 36 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 – via Newspapers.com .

^ "Society: Group fighting number of misconceptions" .

The Post-Crescent . July 17, 2002. pp. A8 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 – via Newspapers.com .

^ "Society: Anti-communist period was group's heyday" .

The Post-Crescent . October 17, 2003. pp. C8 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 – via Newspapers.com .

^ "Camp offers politics with right-wing twist" .

Sun Journal .

Associated Press . July 25, 1993. pp. 2B . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ Haiman, Franklyn Saul; Tedford, Thomas L.; Herbeck, Dale (2005).

"Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc" .

Freedom Of Speech In The United States . Strata Publishing.

ISBN 1-891136-10-0 . Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved May 12, 2008 .

^ "Civil Libertarian Wins $400,00 in Suit for Libel" .

The New York Times . April 23, 1981.

^ Hamilton, Neil A. (2009).

The 1970s . Infobase Publishing. p. 87.

ISBN 978-1-4381-0878-0 .

^ Clarity, James F. (September 26, 1971).

"Wallace, Here to 'Test the Atmosphere,' Attacks President and Mayor" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 1, 2023 .

^ Hudson, Richard (May 16, 1976).

"Storm Over the Canal" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 1, 2023 .

^ a b Minami, Kazushi (2024).

People's Diplomacy: How Americans and Chinese Transformed US-China Relations during the Cold War . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 9781501774157 .

^ Ruth Murray Brown, For a Christian America: A History of the Religious Right (Prometheus Books, 2002), pp. 49-51.

^ a b c Richard D. Lyons, Rightists Are Linked to Laetrile's Lobby, The New York Times (July 5, 1977).

^ a b Gerald E. Markle, James C. Petersen & Morton O.Wagenfeld, "Notes from the Cancer Underground: Participation in the Laetrile Movement," Social Science & Medicine (January 1978), Vol. 12: pp. 31-37.

^ a b c d Dorfman, Zach (December 2, 2018).

"The Congressman Who Created His Own Deep State. Really" .

Politico . Retrieved January 4, 2019 .

^ Glass, Andrew (December 9, 2017).

"John Birch Society founded Dec 9, 1958" . Politico . Retrieved November 12, 2019 .

^ "US right-wing group disseminates lies against Weizmann Institute" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency. January 9, 1967 . Retrieved November 12, 2019 .

^ Thomas Lansford, "John Birch Society" in Encyclopedia of American Religion and Politics (eds: Paul A. Djupe & Laura R. Olson; Facts on File, 2003), pp. 233-34.

^ Mulloy 2014 , "Introduction": "by the mid-1990s the figure was down to fifteen thousand or twenty thousand (estimates are all that are available because the Society declined to release its official membership rolls)." ^ Stewart 2002 , pp. 425–426, 441–444.

^ Lackmeyer, Steve (January 20, 1992).

"Birch Society Sees Plot In "New World Order" " .

The Oklahoman . Retrieved May 11, 2022 .

^ Stewart 2002 , pp. 424–447.

^ Curtis, Bryan (October 31, 2017).

"Remembering Baseball's Right-Wing Rotation" .

The Ringer . Retrieved July 26, 2022 .

^ Oberdorfer, Don; Cannon, Lou (September 6, 1984).

"Administration Calls for Ratification of Treaty Against Genocide" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Relations, United States Congress Senate Committee on Foreign (1985).

Crime of Genocide: Hearing Before the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, First Session, on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, March 5, 1985 . U.S. Government Printing Office.

^ Spangler, Jerry; Bernick, Bob (June 16, 2003).

"John Birch Society forges on in Utah" .

Deseret News .

^ see short biography from Claremont Review of Books ^ "Birch Informant Decries 'Influence' of Big Business" .

Deseret News . May 30, 1995 . Retrieved August 23, 2022 .

^ "States Conference Encounters Resistance" .

The Washington Post . March 27, 1995 . Retrieved August 23, 2022 .

^ "States' Rights Meeting Coming Under Attack Right-Wingers Undermining Plans, Idaho Lawmaker Says" .

The Spokesman-Review . April 25, 1995 . Retrieved August 23, 2022 .

^ Sullivan, Laurie (April 25, 1995). "States' Rights Backers Are Not Backing Down".

The Salt Lake Tribune .

Salt Lake City . p. D-2.

^ Berlet, Chip (March 10, 2008).

"The North American Union Right-Wing Populist Conspiracism Rebounds" .

Political Research Associates . Retrieved April 22, 2022 .

^ Just, Sara (February 19, 2010).

"Far-Right John Birch Society 2010" .

ABC News . Archived from the original on February 21, 2010 . Retrieved February 6, 2016 .

^ Sam Tanenhaus (October 19, 2010).

The Death of Conservatism: A Movement and Its Consequences . Random House Digital, Inc. p. 121.

ISBN 978-0-8129-8103-2 .

^ Niquette, Mark (March 2, 2023).

"Donald Trump Is a Star Among Ultra-Conservatives, But He Faces a New Test" .

Bloomberg.com . Retrieved March 7, 2023 .

Nearby, conference-goers could pick up Ginger Betty Bakery's $8 gingerbread Trump-shaped cookies while browsing booths set up by groups including the John Birch Society and Moms For America.

^ Mondeaux, Cami (February 24, 2024).

"CPAC 2024: Once a Republican bastion, annual gathering brings fringe movement to the mainstream" .

Washington Examiner . Retrieved February 27, 2024 .

^ "Online university gets state approval" .

Green Bay Press-Gazette . March 7, 2005. pp. B2 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 – via Newspapers.com .

^ "Robert Welch University" .

The Post-Crescent . June 30, 2007. pp. A5 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ "Robert Welch University" .

Robert Welch University .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2025 . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ Monacelli, Steven (July 21, 2022).

"The John Birch Society Sees a Renaissance in North Texas" .

The Texas Observer . Retrieved August 23, 2022 .

^ Downen, Robert (May 28, 2024).

"At Texas GOP convention, Republicans call for spiritual warfare" .

The Texas Tribune . Retrieved May 28, 2024 .

^ Humphrey, Matt (March 16, 2012).

"Tennessee Republicans Copy John Birch Society Model Legislation on Agenda 21" .

Right Wing Watch . Retrieved January 17, 2024 .

^ Sher, Andy (March 15, 2012).

"U.N.'s Agenda 21 sparks bitter debate in Tennessee House" .

Chattanooga Times Free Press . Retrieved January 17, 2024 .

^ Reinbach, Andrew (September 12, 2011).

"The John Birch Society's Reality" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved December 6, 2023 .

^ Newman, Alex (January 1, 2018).

"Deep State "Plan C" Is to Kill Trump, Advisor Roger Stone Warns" .

The New American . Retrieved January 5, 2019 .

^ Levy, Pema (December 19, 2016).

"Trump's Budget Director Pick Spoke at a John Birch Society Event" .

The New Republic . Retrieved January 5, 2019 .

^ Farmer, Brian (October 8, 2008).

"Ron Paul Addresses John Birch Society" .

The New American . Retrieved January 5, 2019 .

^ Kirchick, James (February 27, 2009).

"Yes, Ron Paul Is A Bircher" .

The New Republic .

ISSN 0028-6583 . Retrieved April 2, 2022 .

^ Newman, Alex (October 8, 2018).

"At John Birch Society's 60th Anniversary, Lawmakers Speak Out" .

The New American . Retrieved January 5, 2019 .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Jones, Alex (host) (December 3, 2018).

Infowars (radio/tv broadcast). Austin, Texas: Infowars . Retrieved January 5, 2018 .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Jones, Alex (host) (January 10, 2017).

Infowars (radio/tv broadcast). Austin, Texas: Infowars . Retrieved January 5, 2018 .

^ a b Sullivan, Tim (January 21, 2024).

"In small-town Wisconsin, looking for the roots of the modern American conspiracy theory" .

AP News . Retrieved September 19, 2024 .

^ Hardy, Madison (July 29, 2021).

"Embracing Birch" .

Coeur d'Alene Press . Retrieved September 23, 2021 .

^ Hardy, Madison (September 3, 2021).

"Idaho GOP bursts Bircher bubble" .

Coeur d'Alene Press . Retrieved September 23, 2021 .

^ Moseley-Morris, Kelcie (July 16, 2022).

"Rep. Dorothy Moon becomes new chairwoman of Idaho Republican Party" .

Idaho Capital Sun . Retrieved January 7, 2023 .

^ Baker, Mike (May 17, 2022).

"A Fracture in Idaho's G.O.P. as the Far Right Seeks Control" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 3, 2022 .

^ Smith, David (May 11, 2022).

" 'Republican and more Republican': Idaho shifts ever rightward" .

The Guardian . Retrieved November 3, 2022 .

...elections for other offices of state are more competitive between the hard right and harder right. ... Dorothy Moon, a member of the far-right John Birch Society, is a contender for secretary of state.

^ Kurt, Dylan (June 13, 2022).

" 'This is winnable' " .

manchesterpress.com . Retrieved November 3, 2022 .

^ Helton, Elijah (July 16, 2022).

"Unlikely allies leading anti-pipeline fight" .

The N'West Iowa REVIEW . Retrieved November 3, 2022 .

^ Shelhart, Cheri (October 4, 2023).

"John Birch Society hosts meeting against carbon storage proposals" .

Kankakee Valley Post News . Retrieved October 24, 2023 .

^ Wolfson, Leo (August 17, 2023).

"John Birch Society Says Wyoming Part Of Conservative Resurgence" .

Your Wyoming News Source . Retrieved August 31, 2023 .

^ "The John Birch Society Leadership" . John Birch Society. Archived from the original on October 11, 2016 . Retrieved September 21, 2016 .

^ "2019 FOREIGN NOT FOR PROFIT CORPORATION ANNUAL REPORT Entity Name:THE JOHN BIRCH SOCIETY INCORPORATED" .

sunbiz.org . Florida Department of State. February 22, 2019 . Retrieved August 9, 2020 .

Title PRESIDENT Name OHLSON, MARTIN P ^ "The John Birch Society Leadership Team" . John Birch Society . Retrieved August 29, 2020 .

^ Ruhlmann, William.

"Gazette, Vol. 2 - Pete Seeger" .

AllMusic . Retrieved March 12, 2024 .

^ "Bob Dylan walks out on "The Ed Sullivan Show" " .

HISTORY . May 11, 2021 . Retrieved March 12, 2024 .

^ Cart, Michael (March 15, 2012). "Carte Blanche: My Choice for President".

Booklist . p. 51.

^ Dussere, E. (March 2003). "Subversion in the Swamp: Pogo and the Folk in the McCarthy Era".

Journal of American Culture .

26 (1): 134– 141.

doi : 10.1111/1542-734X.00081 .

^ "Billboard Hot 100: May 19, 1962" .

Billboard . January 2, 2013 . Retrieved March 12, 2024 .

^ Clarence Lusane (January 23, 2013).

The Black History of the White House . City Lights Books. pp. 332–.

ISBN 978-0-87286-611-9 .

^ Bailey, Ronald (December 5, 2001).

"Impurifying our precious bodily fluids" .

Reason . Retrieved November 14, 2022 .

^ "Uneasy Rider" .

Genius . Retrieved October 7, 2021 .

^ Evans, Robert (December 15, 2020).

"Part One: How The John Birch Society Invented The Modern Far Right" .

Stitcher . Retrieved October 7, 2021 .

General and cited references [ edit ] Mulloy, D. J. (2014).

The World of the John Birch Society: Conspiracy, Conservatism, and the Cold War . Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.

ISBN 978-0826519818 .

Mulloy, D. J. (2014a). "1. exposure".

The World of the John Birch Society: Conspiracy, Conservatism, and the Cold War . Vanderbilt University Press. pp.

15– 41.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1675660 .

ISBN 9780826519818 .

JSTOR j.ctv1675660 .

Stewart, Charles J. (2002). "The Master Conspiracy of the John Birch Society: From Communism to the New World Order".

Western Journal of Communication .

66 (4): 423– 447.

doi : 10.1080/10570310209374748 .

S2CID 145081268 .

Verhoeven, Bart (July 2015).

The Rearguard of Freedom: The John Birch Society and the Development of Modern Conservatism in the United States, 1958–1968 (PDF) (PhD).

University of Nottingham . Retrieved September 26, 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Scholarly studies [ edit ] Lautz, Terry E (2016).

John Birch: A Life . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0190262891 .

McGirr, Lisa.

Suburban Warriors: The Origins of the New American Right (2001), focus on Los Angeles suburbs in 1960s Schoenwald, Jonathan M. (2002).

A Time for Choosing: The Rise of Modern American Conservatism pp. 62–99 excerpt and text search , a national history of the party Stone, Barbara S. "The John Birch Society: a Profile", Journal of Politics 1974 36(1): 184–197, JSTOR 2129115 .

Wander, Philip. "The John Birch and Martin Luther King, Symbols in the Radical Right", Western Speech (Western Journal of Communication), 1971 35(1): 4–14.

Wilcox, Clyde. "Sources of Support for the Old Right: A Comparison of the John Birch Society and the Christian Anti-Communism Crusade".

Social Science History 1988 12(4): 429–450, JSTOR 1171382 .

Wright, Stuart A.

Patriots, politics, and the Oklahoma City Bombing . Cambridge University Press. 2007.

ISBN 978-0-521-87264-5 .

Primary sources [ edit ] Gary Allen.

None Dare Call It Conspiracy . G S G & Associates, Inc., 1971.

Griffin, G. Edward (1972).

This is the John Birch Society; an invitation to membership . Thousand Oaks, Calif: American Media.

ISBN 0-912986-04-2 .

OCLC 2192524 .

McManus, John F. (2018).

The John Birch Society: Its History Recounted by Someone Who Was There . Wakefield, Massachusetts: Overview Productions.

ISBN 978-0692132968 .

Robert W. Welch Jr.

The New Americanism and Other Speeches . Boston: Western Islands, 1966.

Welch, Robert (1961).

The blue book of the John Birch Society . Boston: Western Islands.

ISBN 0-88279-105-2 .

OCLC 16903114 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Welch, Robert (1964).

The Politician . Belmont, Massachusetts: Belmont Publishing.

ISBN 99908-64-98-5 .

OCLC 376165 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Welch, Robert (1964).

The White Book of the John Birch Society for 1964 . Belmont, Massachusetts: John Birch Society.

OCLC 21571870 .

Welch, Robert (1966).

The New Americanism and Other Speeches . Boston: Western Islands.

ISBN 0-88279-211-3 .

Criticizing the John Birch Society [ edit ] Buckley, William F. Jr. (March 2008).

"Goldwater, the John Birch Society, and Me" .

Commentary .

Conner, Claire (2013).

Wrapped in the Flag: A Personal History of America's Radical Right . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0807077504 .

OCLC 930959176 .

De Koster, Lester (1967).

The Citizen and the John Birch Society . A Reformed Journal monograph. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans.

Epstein, Benjamin R., and Arnold Forster (1966).

The Radical Right: Report on the John Birch Society and Its Allies . New York: Vintage Books .

Grove, Gene (1961).

Inside the John Birch Society . Greenwich, CT: Fawcett.

Grupp, Fred W. Jr. (1969). "The Political Perspectives of Birch Society Members". In Robert A. Schoenberger, ed., The American Right Wing: Readings in Political Behavior . New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

OCLC 470572700 .

Hardisty, Jean V. (1999).

Mobilizing Resentment: Conservative Resurgence from the John Birch Society to the Promise Keepers . Boston: Beacon Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to John Birch Society .

Official website The New American , JBS biweekly publication which publishes the Freedom Index Archived August 27, 2017, at the Wayback Machine congressional scorecard twice a year John Birch Society at Political Research Associates "What Is the John Birch Society?" , short excerpt of a film, released c. 1965, of Robert W. Welch Jr.

, explaining why he founded the John Birch Society and its aims Rating group positions by year at Project Vote Smart Portals : Conservatism Libertarianism United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Norway Poland Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐c69ph
Cached time: 20250817155352
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.371 seconds
Real time usage: 2.602 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 23067/1000000
Revision size: 115329/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 589625/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25713/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 748878/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.428/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15301348/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2138.905      1 -total
 49.35% 1055.529      1 Template:Reflist
 13.89%  297.116     50 Template:Cite_book
 12.48%  266.889     59 Template:Cite_web
 11.71%  250.550     38 Template:Sfn
 10.42%  222.851     46 Template:Cite_news
  6.76%  144.506      1 Template:Infobox_organization
  6.48%  138.528      1 Template:Infobox
  6.31%  134.893     20 Template:Fix
  4.05%   86.576      7 Template:Page_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:231378:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817155352 and revision id 1306409294. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Birch_Society&oldid=1306409294 " Categories : John Birch Society 1958 establishments in Indiana American nationalism Anti-communist organizations in the United States Appleton, Wisconsin Conservative political advocacy groups in the United States Conspiracist media Far-right organizations in the United States Organizations established in 1958 Paleoconservative organizations Political organizations based in the United States Politics and race in the United States Right-wing populism in the United States Social movements in the United States Ultraconservatism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2023 CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from September 2023 Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2018 Use American English from January 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from October 2021 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from October 2021 Articles lacking reliable references from October 2021 Articles needing additional references from December 2019 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 15:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Birch Society 22 languages Add topic

