Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Books 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Peter Gowan 2 languages Català Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scottish professor, activist, and author Peter Gowan Born ( 1946-01-15 ) 15 January 1946 Glasgow, UK Died 12 June 2009 (2009-06-12) (aged 63) Academic background Alma mater Southampton University Academic work Institutions London Metropolitan University Main interests International relations Peter Gowan (15 January 1946, Glasgow – 12 June 2009) was a professor of international relations at London Metropolitan University , activist, published author and public speaker. He was a member of the editorial committee of New Left Review [ 1 ] and was one of the founders of Labour Focus on Eastern Europe .

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Along with his older sister and his mother Gowan moved to Belfast in April 1946 and lived there until he was nine. He never knew his father.

He went to school at Princess Gardens in Belfast until he was seven and then to Brackenburgh House. When he was nine his mother moved to London to work and he went to prep school in Suffolk, Orwell Park, ultimately becoming head boy. He left there to go to Haileybury and Imperial Service College , in Hertfordshire when he was 13, in 1959 and from there went on to read politics and history at Southampton University .

Gowan was diagnosed with his fatal illness only a couple of weeks into the 2008 financial crisis .

[ 3 ] Despite knowing that his condition was terminal and his health fast-deteriorating, he not only bore it with good humour, but bravely continued to work to the limits of his capacity over the following months: his article "Crisis in the Heartland" for the January–February 2009 issue of New Left Review provides a succinct account of how he interpreted the origins of the 2008 financial crisis . He died at age 63 from the asbestos related disease, peritoneal mesothelioma on 12 June 2009.

[ 4 ] Books [ edit ] A Calculus of Power: Grand Strategy in the Twenty-First Century (Verso 2010) The Search for Order: Historical Reflections on the Crisis of Grand Strategies (Verso 2008) The Twisted Road to Kosovo ; Introduction (Manifest, Stockholm, 2000) The Global Gamble: Washington's Faustian Bid for World Dominance (Verso, 1999) Crisis East and West: Must it be Global Barbarism?

(Spokesman Books 1997) The Question of Europe – Peter Gowan & Perry Anderson (eds) (Verso 1997) European Union Policy Towards the Visegrad States (London Metropolitan University 1996) References [ edit ] ^ Gowan, Peter (October 2009).

"Peter Gowan, The Ways of the World, NLR 59, September–October 2009" .

New Left Review (59): 51– 70 . Retrieved 28 May 2021 .

^ Guzek, Martin (June 2020). "Supporting the Democratic Opposition in Eastern Europe".

Labour Briefing . Translated by Holland, David. Labour Representation Committee. p. 30.

^ Glenny, Misha (16 June 2009).

"Peter Gowan | Obituary" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2023.

^ "(1946-2009) Peter Gowan" .

Revolutionary History . Archived from the original on 29 January 2018.

External links [ edit ] Peter Gowan Archive at marxists.org Articles at Labour Focus on Eastern Europe List of Peter Gowan works Awards Preceded by Francis Wheen Deutscher Memorial Prize 2000 Succeeded by James Holstun [ Wikidata ] Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peter_Gowan&oldid=1293913310 " Categories : Scottish Marxists Deutscher Memorial Prize winners International Marxist Group members British international relations scholars Scottish Trotskyists 1946 births 2009 deaths Academics of London Metropolitan University Alumni of the University of Southampton Writers about globalization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2025 Use British English from November 2013 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 12:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peter Gowan 2 languages Add topic

