Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Exploration and research 1.2 Commerce 1.3 Naval power 2 Modern applications Toggle Modern applications subsection 2.1 Recreation 2.2 Sport 3 Navigation Toggle Navigation subsection 3.1 Point of sail 3.1.1 Effect on apparent wind 3.2 Course under sail 3.2.1 Upwind 3.2.1.1 Changing tack by tacking 3.2.2 Downwind 3.2.2.1 Changing tack by jibing 3.3 Wind and currents 4 Trimming Toggle Trimming subsection 4.1 Sails 4.1.1 Reducing sail 4.2 Hull 4.2.1 Heeling 4.2.2 Helm force 4.2.3 Hull drag 5 Other aspects of seamanship Toggle Other aspects of seamanship subsection 5.1 Nautical terms 5.2 Management of lines 6 Sail physics Toggle Sail physics subsection 6.1 Apparent wind velocity 6.2 Lift and drag on sails 6.2.1 Lift predominance (wing mode) 6.2.2 Drag predominance (parachute mode) 6.2.3 Wind variation with height and time 7 Hull physics Toggle Hull physics subsection 7.1 Drag 7.2 Lateral resistance 7.3 Hull speed and beyond 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Sailing 54 languages العربية Asturianu अवधी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska עברית Kurdî Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Pälzisch Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Propulsion of a vehicle by wind power For other uses, see Sailing (disambiguation) .

Sailing craft and their rigs Sloops racing with fore-and-aft sails Three-masted barque with square sails Sailing hydrofoil catamaran with wingsail DN class ice boat Class 3 competition land yacht Sailing employs the wind—acting on sails , wingsails or kites —to propel a craft on the surface of the water ( sailing ship , sailboat , raft , windsurfer , or kitesurfer ), on ice ( iceboat ) or on land ( land yacht ) over a chosen course , which is often part of a larger plan of navigation .

From prehistory until the second half of the 19th century, sailing craft were the primary means of maritime trade and transportation; exploration across the seas and oceans was reliant on sail for anything other than the shortest distances. Naval power in this period used sail to varying degrees depending on the current technology, culminating in the gun-armed sailing warships of the Age of Sail . Sail was slowly replaced by steam as the method of propulsion for ships over the latter part of the 19th century – seeing a gradual improvement in the technology of steam through a number of developmental steps.

[ a ] Steam allowed scheduled services that ran at higher average speeds than sailing vessels. Large improvements in fuel economy allowed steam to progressively outcompete sail in, ultimately, all commercial situations, giving ship-owning investors a better return on capital.

[ 2 ] : 9, 16 In the 21st century, most sailing represents a form of recreation or sport .

Recreational sailing or yachting can be divided into racing and cruising .  Cruising can include extended offshore and ocean-crossing trips, coastal sailing within sight of land, and daysailing.

Sailing relies on the physics of sails as they derive power from the wind, generating both lift and drag. On a given course, the sails are set to an angle that optimizes the development of wind power, as determined by the apparent wind , which is the wind as sensed from a moving vessel. The forces transmitted via the sails are resisted by forces from the hull , keel , and rudder of a sailing craft, by forces from skate runners of an iceboat, or by forces from wheels of a land sailing craft which are steering the course. This combination of forces means that it is possible to sail an upwind course as well as downwind. The course with respect to the true wind direction (as would be indicated by a stationary flag) is called a point of sail . Conventional sailing craft cannot derive wind power on a course with a point of sail that is too close into the wind.

History [ edit ] Further information: Maritime history and Sailing ship § History Throughout history, sailing was a key form of propulsion that allowed for greater mobility than travel over land. This greater mobility increased capacity for exploration, trade, transport, warfare, and fishing, especially when compared to overland options.

[ 3 ] : ch.2 Until the significant improvements in land transportation that occurred during the 19th century, if water transport was an option, it was faster, cheaper and safer than making the same journey by land. This applied equally to sea crossings, coastal voyages and use of rivers and lakes. Examples of the consequences of this include the large grain trade in the Mediterranean during the classical period . Cities such as Rome were totally reliant on the delivery by sailing ships of the large amounts of grain needed. It has been estimated that it cost less for a sailing ship of the Roman Empire to carry grain the length of the Mediterranean than to move the same amount 15 miles by road. Rome consumed about 150,000 tons of Egyptian grain each year over the first three centuries AD.

[ 4 ] : 297 [ 3 ] : ch. 2 [ 5 ] : 147 [ b ] A similar but more recent trade, in coal, was from the mines situated close to the River Tyne to London – which was already being carried out in the 14th century and grew as the city increased in size. In 1795, 4,395 cargoes of coal were delivered to London. This would have needed a fleet of about 500 sailing colliers (making 8 or 9 trips a year). This quantity had doubled by 1839. (The first steam-powered collier was not launched until 1852 and sailing colliers continued working into the 20th century.) [ 7 ] [ c ] Exploration and research [ edit ] Replica of Christopher Columbus 's carrack , Santa María under sail The earliest image suggesting the use of sail on a boat may be on a piece of pottery from Mesopotamia , dated to the 6th millennium BCE. The image is thought to show a bipod mast mounted on the hull of a reed boat – no sail is depicted.

[ 8 ] The earliest representation of a sail, from Egypt, is dated to circa 3100 BCE.

[ 4 ] : figure 6 The Nile is considered a suitable place for early use of sail for propulsion. This is because the river's current flows from south to north, whilst the prevailing wind direction is north to south. Therefore, a boat of that time could use the current to go north – an unobstructed trip of 750 miles – and sail to make the return trip.

[ 4 ] : 11 Evidence of early sailors has also been found in other locations, such as Kuwait, Turkey, Syria, Minoa, Bahrain, and India, among others.

[ 9 ] Austronesian peoples used sails from some time before 2000 BCE.

[ 10 ] : 144 Their expansion from what is now Southern China and Taiwan started in 3000 BCE. Their technology came to include outriggers , catamarans , [ 11 ] and crab claw sails , [ 12 ] which enabled the Austronesian Expansion at around 3000 to 1500 BCE into the islands of Maritime Southeast Asia , and thence to Micronesia , Island Melanesia , Polynesia , and Madagascar . Since there is no commonality between the boat technology of China and the Austronesians, these distinctive characteristics must have been developed at or some time after the beginning of the expansion.

[ 13 ] They traveled vast distances of open ocean in outrigger canoes using navigation methods such as stick charts .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The windward sailing capability of Austronesian boats allowed a strategy of sailing to windward on a voyage of exploration, with a return downwind either to report a discovery or if no land was found. This was well suited to the prevailing winds as Pacific islands were steadily colonized.

[ 13 ] By the time of the Age of Discovery —starting in the 15th century—square-rigged, multi-masted vessels were the norm and were guided by navigation techniques that included the magnetic compass and making sightings of the sun and stars that allowed transoceanic voyages.

[ 16 ] During the Age of Discovery, sailing ships figured in European voyages around Africa to China and Japan; and across the Atlantic Ocean to North and South America. Later, sailing ships ventured into the Arctic to explore northern sea routes and assess natural resources. In the 18th and 19th centuries sailing vessels made Hydrographic surveys to develop charts for navigation and, at times, carried scientists aboard as with the voyages of James Cook and the Second voyage of HMS Beagle with naturalist Charles Darwin .

Commerce [ edit ] A late-19th-century American clipper ship A French squadron forming a line of battle circa 1840.

In the early 1800s, fast blockade-running schooners and brigantines— Baltimore Clippers —evolved into three-masted, typically ship-rigged sailing vessels with fine lines that enhanced speed, but lessened capacity for high-value cargo, like tea from China.

[ 17 ] Masts were as high as 100 feet (30 m) and were able to achieve speeds of 19 knots (35 km/h), allowing for passages of up to 465 nautical miles (861 km) per 24 hours. Clippers yielded to bulkier, slower vessels, which became economically competitive in the mid 19th century.

[ 18 ] Sail plans with just fore-and-aft sails ( schooners ), or a mixture of the two ( brigantines , barques and barquentines ) emerged.

[ 16 ] Coastal top-sail schooners with a crew as small as two managing the sail handling became an efficient way to carry bulk cargo, since only the fore-sails required tending while tacking and steam-driven machinery was often available for raising the sails and the anchor.

[ 19 ] Iron-hulled sailing ships represented the final evolution of sailing ships at the end of the Age of Sail. They were built to carry bulk cargo for long distances in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

[ 20 ] They were the largest of merchant sailing ships, with three to five masts and square sails, as well as other sail plans . They carried bulk cargoes between continents. Iron-hulled sailing ships were mainly built from the 1870s to 1900, when steamships began to outpace them economically because of their ability to keep a schedule regardless of the wind.  Steel hulls also replaced iron hulls at around the same time. Even into the twentieth century, sailing ships could hold their own on transoceanic voyages such as Australia to Europe, since they did not require bunkerage for coal nor fresh water for steam, and they were faster than the early steamers, which usually could barely make 8 knots (15 km/h).

[ 21 ] Ultimately, the steamships' independence from the wind and their ability to take shorter routes, passing through the Suez and Panama Canals , made sailing ships uneconomical.

[ 22 ] Naval power [ edit ] Further information: Sailing ship tactics Until the general adoption of carvel -built ships that relied on an internal skeleton structure to bear the weight of the ship and for gun ports to be cut in the side, sailing ships were just vehicles for delivering fighters to the enemy for engagement.

[ 23 ] Early Phoenician, Greek, Roman galleys would ram each other, then pour onto the decks of the opposing force and continue the fight by hand, meaning that these galleys required speed and maneuverability.

[ 24 ] This need for speed translated into longer ships with multiple rows of oars along the sides, known as biremes and triremes .

[ 25 ] Typically, the sailing ships during this time period were the merchant ships.

[ 26 ] By 1500, Gun ports allowed sailing vessels to sail alongside an enemy vessel and fire a broadside of multiple cannon.

[ 27 ] This development allowed for naval fleets to array themselves into a line of battle , whereby, warships would maintain their place in the line to engage the enemy in a parallel or perpendicular line.

[ 28 ] Modern applications [ edit ] Cruising sailing yacht at anchor in Duck Harbor on Isle au Haut, Maine Comanche leaving Newport, Rhode Island for Plymouth , England in the 2015 Rolex Transatlantic Race Cranbrook Kingswood High School sailing team competing in the 2022 SugarBowl fleet race regatta on 20 November 2022 While the use of sailing vessels for commerce or naval power has been supplanted with engine-driven vessels, there continue to be commercial operations that take passengers on sailing cruises.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Modern navies also employ sailing vessels to train cadets in seamanship .

[ 31 ] Recreation or sport accounts for the bulk of sailing in modern boats.

Recreation [ edit ] Recreational sailing can be divided into two categories, day-sailing, where one gets off the boat for the night, and cruising, where one stays aboard.

Day-sailing primarily affords experiencing the pleasure of sailing a boat. No destination is required. It is an opportunity to share the experience with others.

[ 32 ] A variety of boats with no overnight accommodations, ranging in size from 10 feet (3.0 m) to over 30 feet (9.1 m), may be regarded as day sailors.

[ 33 ] Cruising on a sailing yacht may be either near-shore or passage-making out of sight of land and entails the use of sailboats that support sustained overnight use.

[ 34 ] Coastal cruising grounds include areas of the Mediterranean and Black Seas, Northern Europe, Western Europe and islands of the North Atlantic, West Africa and the islands of the South Atlantic, the Caribbean, and regions of North and Central America.

[ 35 ] Passage-making under sail occurs on routes through oceans all over the world. Circular routes exist between the Americas and Europe, and between South Africa and South America. There are many routes from the Americas, Australia, New Zealand, and Asia to island destinations in the South Pacific. Some cruisers circumnavigate the globe.

[ 36 ] Sport [ edit ] Main article: Sailing (sport) Sailing as a sport is organized on a hierarchical basis, starting at the yacht club level and reaching up into national and international federations; it may entail racing yachts , sailing dinghies , or other small, open sailing craft, including iceboats and land yachts.

Sailboat racing is governed by World Sailing with most racing formats using the Racing Rules of Sailing .

[ 37 ] It entails a variety of different disciplines, including: Oceanic racing, held over long distances and in open water, often last multiple days and include world circumnavigation , such as the Vendée Globe and The Ocean Race .

[ 38 ] Fleet racing, featuring multiple boats in a regatta that comprises multiple races or heats.

[ 39 ] Match racing comprises two boats competing against each other, as is done with the America's Cup , vying to cross a finish line, first.

[ 40 ] Team racing between two teams of three boats each in a format analogous to match racing.

[ 41 ] Speed sailing to set new records for different categories of craft with oversight by the World Sailing Speed Record Council .

[ 37 ] [ 42 ] Sail boarding has a variety of disciplines particular to that sport.

[ 43 ] Navigation [ edit ] Points of sail (and predominant sail force component for a displacement sailboat).

A. Luffing ( no propulsive force ) — 0-30° B. Close-hauled ( lift )— 30–50° C. Beam reach ( lift )— 90° D. Broad reach ( lift–drag )— ~135° E. Running ( drag )— 180° True wind ( V T ) is the same everywhere in the diagram, whereas boat velocity ( V B ) and apparent wind ( V A ) vary with point of sail.

Point of sail [ edit ] Further information: Point of sail A sailing craft's ability to derive power from the wind depends on the point of sail it is on—the direction of travel under sail in relation to the true wind direction over the surface. The principal points of sail roughly correspond to 45° segments of a circle, starting with 0° directly into the wind. For many sailing craft, the arc spanning 45° on either side of the wind is a "no-go" zone, [ 44 ] where a sail is unable to mobilize power from the wind.

[ 45 ] Sailing on a course as close to the wind as possible—approximately 45°—is termed "close-hauled". At 90° off the wind, a craft is on a "beam reach". At 135° off the wind, a craft is on a "broad reach". At 180° off the wind (sailing in the same direction as the wind), a craft is "running downwind".

In points of sail that range from close-hauled to a broad reach, sails act substantially like a wing, with lift predominantly propelling the craft. In points of sail from a broad reach to down wind, sails act substantially like a parachute, with drag predominantly propelling the craft. For craft with little forward resistance, such as ice boats and land yachts , this transition occurs further off the wind than for sailboats and sailing ships .

[ 45 ] Wind direction for points of sail always refers to the true wind —the wind felt by a stationary observer. The apparent wind —the wind felt by an observer on a moving sailing craft—determines the motive power for sailing craft.

A sailboat on three points of sail The waves give an indication of the true wind direction. The flag gives an indication of apparent wind direction.

Close-hauled : the flag is streaming backwards, the sails are sheeted in tightly.

Reaching : the flag is streaming slightly to the side as the sails are sheeted to align with the apparent wind.

Running : the wind is coming from behind the vessel; the sails are "wing on wing" to be at right angles to the apparent wind.

Effect on apparent wind [ edit ] Further information: Forces on sails § Effect of points of sail on forces True wind velocity ( V T ) combines with the sailing craft's velocity ( V B ) to give the apparent wind velocity ( V A ), the air velocity experienced by instrumentation or crew on a moving sailing craft. Apparent wind velocity provides the motive power for the sails on any given point of sail. It varies from being the true wind velocity of a stopped craft in irons in the no-go zone, to being faster than the true wind speed as the sailing craft's velocity adds to the true windspeed on a reach. It diminishes towards zero for a craft sailing dead downwind.

[ 46 ] Effect of apparent wind on sailing craft at three points of sail Sailing craft A is close-hauled. Sailing craft B is on a beam reach. Sailing craft C is on a broad reach.

Boat velocity (in black) generates an equal and opposite apparent wind component (not shown), which combines with the true wind to become apparent wind.

Apparent wind and forces on a sailboat .

As the boat sails further from the wind, the apparent wind becomes smaller and the lateral component becomes less; boat speed is highest on the beam reach.

Apparent wind on an iceboat .

As the iceboat sails further from the wind, the apparent wind increases slightly and the boat speed is highest on the broad reach. The sail is sheeted in for all three points of sail.

[ 45 ] The speed of sailboats through the water is limited by the resistance that results from hull drag in the water. Ice boats typically have the least resistance to forward motion of any sailing craft.

[ 45 ] Consequently, a sailboat experiences a wider range of apparent wind angles than does an ice boat, whose speed is typically great enough to have the apparent wind coming from a few degrees to one side of its course, necessitating sailing with the sail sheeted in for most points of sail. On conventional sailboats, the sails are set to create lift for those points of sail where it's possible to align the leading edge of the sail with the apparent wind.

[ 46 ] For a sailboat, point of sail affects lateral force significantly. The higher the boat points to the wind under sail, the stronger the lateral force, which requires resistance from a keel or other underwater foils, including daggerboard, centerboard, skeg and rudder. Lateral force also induces heeling in a sailboat, which requires resistance by weight of ballast from the crew or the boat itself and by the shape of the boat, especially with a catamaran. As the boat points off the wind, lateral force and the forces required to resist it become less important.

[ 47 ] On ice boats, lateral forces are countered by the lateral resistance of the blades on ice and their distance apart, which generally prevents heeling.

[ 48 ] Course under sail [ edit ] Atmospheric circulation , showing wind direction at various latitudes Wind circulation around an occluded front in the Northern Hemisphere Wind and currents are important factors to plan on for both offshore and inshore sailing. Predicting the availability, strength and direction of the wind is key to using its power along the desired course. Ocean currents, tides and river currents may deflect a sailing vessel from its desired course.

[ 49 ] If the desired course is within the no-go zone, then the sailing craft must follow a zig-zag route into the wind to reach its waypoint or destination. Downwind, certain high-performance sailing craft can reach the destination more quickly by following a zig-zag route on a series of broad reaches.

Negotiating obstructions or a channel may also require a change of direction with respect to the wind, necessitating changing of tack with the wind on the opposite side of the craft, from before.

Changing tack is called tacking when the wind crosses over the bow of the craft as it turns and jibing (or gybing ) if the wind passes over the stern.

Upwind [ edit ] A sailing craft can sail on a course anywhere outside of its no-go zone.

[ 50 ] If the next waypoint or destination is within the arc defined by the no-go zone from the craft's current position, then it must perform a series of tacking maneuvers to get there on a zigzag route, called beating to windward .

[ 51 ] The progress along that route is called the course made good ; the speed between the starting and ending points of the route is called the speed made good and is calculated by the distance between the two points, divided by the travel time.

[ 52 ] The limiting line to the waypoint that allows the sailing vessel to leave it to leeward is called the layline .

[ 53 ] Whereas some Bermuda-rigged sailing yachts can sail as close as 30° to the wind, [ 52 ] most 20th-Century square riggers are limited to 60° off the wind.

[ 54 ] Fore-and-aft rigs are designed to operate with the wind on either side, whereas square rigs and kites are designed to have the wind come from one side of the sail only.

Because the lateral wind forces are highest when sailing close-hauled, the resisting water forces around the vessel's keel, centerboard, rudder and other foils must also be highest in order to limit sideways motion or leeway . Ice boats and land yachts minimize lateral motion with resistance from their blades or wheels.

[ 55 ] Changing tack by tacking [ edit ] Further information: Tacking (sailing) § For various sailing craft Two sailing yachts on opposite tacks Tacking or coming about is a maneuver by which a sailing craft turns its bow into and through the wind (referred to as "the eye of the wind" [ 56 ] ) so that the apparent wind changes from one side to the other, allowing progress on the opposite tack.

[ 57 ] The type of sailing rig dictates the procedures and constraints on achieving a tacking maneuver. Fore-and-aft rigs allow their sails to hang limp as they tack; square rigs must present the full frontal area of the sail to the wind, when changing from side to side; and windsurfers have flexibly pivoting and fully rotating masts that get flipped from side to side.

Tacking from the port tack (bottom) to the starboard (top) tack Beating to windward on short (P1), medium (P2), and long (P3) tacks Downwind [ edit ] 18ft Skiff , flying a sprit-mounted asymmetrical spinnaker on a broad reach A sailing craft can travel directly downwind only at a speed that is less than the wind speed. However,  some sailing craft such as iceboats , sand yachts , and some high-performance sailboats can achieve a higher downwind velocity made good by traveling on a series of broad reaches, punctuated by jibes in between. It was explored by sailing vessels starting in 1975 and now extends to high-performance skiffs, catamarans and foiling sailboats.

[ 58 ] Navigating a channel or a downwind course among obstructions may necessitate changes in direction that require a change of tack, accomplished with a jibe.

Changing tack by jibing [ edit ] Further information: Jibe § For various sailing craft Jibing or gybing is a sailing maneuver by which a sailing craft turns its stern past the eye of the wind so that the apparent wind changes from one side to the other, allowing progress on the opposite tack. This maneuver can be done on smaller boats by pulling the tiller towards yourself (the opposite side of the sail).

[ 57 ] As with tacking, the type of sailing rig dictates the procedures and constraints for jibing. Fore-and-aft sails with booms, gaffs or sprits are unstable when the free end points into the eye of the wind and must be controlled to avoid a violent change to the other side; square rigs as they present the full area of the sail to the wind from the rear experience little change of operation from one tack to the other; and windsurfers again have flexibly pivoting and fully rotating masts that get flipped from side to side.

Wind and currents [ edit ] The ocean currents Winds and oceanic currents are both the result of the sun powering their respective fluid media. Wind powers the sailing craft and the ocean bears the craft on its course, as currents may alter the course of a sailing vessel on the ocean or a river.

Wind – On a global scale, vessels making long voyages must take atmospheric circulation into account, which causes zones of westerlies , easterlies , trade winds and high-pressure zones with light winds, sometimes called horse latitudes , in between.

[ 59 ] Sailors predict wind direction and strength with knowledge of high- and low-pressure areas , and the weather fronts that accompany them. Along coastal areas, sailors contend with diurnal changes in wind direction—flowing off the shore at night and onto the shore during the day.

[ 60 ] Local temporary wind shifts are called lifts , when they improve the sailing craft's ability travel along its rhumb line in the direction of the next waypoint. Unfavorable wind shifts are called headers .

[ 61 ] : 97 Currents – On a global scale, vessels making long voyages must take major ocean current circulation into account.

[ 62 ] Major oceanic currents, like the Gulf Stream in the Atlantic Ocean and the Kuroshio Current in the Pacific Ocean require planning for the effect that they will have on a transiting vessel's track. Likewise, tides affect a vessel's track, especially in areas with large tidal ranges, [ 51 ] like the Bay of Fundy or along Southeast Alaska , or where the tide flows through straits , like Deception Pass in Puget Sound .

[ 63 ] Mariners use tide and current tables to inform their navigation.

[ 49 ] Before the advent of motors, it was advantageous for sailing vessels to enter or leave port or to pass through a strait with the tide.

[ 54 ] Trimming [ edit ] A Contender dinghy trimmed for a reach with the sail aligned with the apparent wind and the crew providing moveable ballast to promote planing Trimming refers to adjusting the lines that control sails, including the sheets that control angle of the sails with respect to the wind, the halyards that raise and tighten the sail, and to adjusting the hull's resistance to heeling, yawing or progress through the water.

Sails [ edit ] Spinnakers are adapted for sailing off the wind.

In their most developed version, square sails are controlled by two each of: sheets,  braces, clewlines , and reef tackles, plus four buntlines , each of which may be controlled by a crew member as the sail is adjusted.

[ 64 ] Towards the end of the Age of Sail, steam-powered machinery reduced the number of crew required to trim sail.

[ 65 ] Adjustment of the angle of a fore-and-aft sail with respect to the apparent wind is controlled with a line, called a "sheet". On points of sail between close-hauled and a broad reach, the goal is typically to create flow along the sail to maximize power through lift. Streamers placed on the surface of the sail, called tell-tales , indicate whether that flow is smooth or turbulent. Smooth flow on both sides indicates proper trim. A jib and mainsail are typically configured to be adjusted to create a smooth laminar flow , leading from one to the other in what is called the "slot effect".

[ 66 ] On downwind points of sail, power is achieved primarily with the wind pushing on the sail, as indicated by drooping tell-tales.

Spinnakers are light-weight, large-area, highly curved sails that are adapted to sailing off the wind.

[ 66 ] In addition to using the sheets to adjust the angle with respect to the apparent wind, other lines control the shape of the sail, notably the outhaul , halyard , boom vang and backstay . These control the curvature that is appropriate to the windspeed, the higher the wind, the flatter the sail. When the wind strength is greater than these adjustments can accommodate to prevent overpowering the sailing craft, sail area is reduced through reefing , substituting a smaller sail or by other means.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Reducing sail [ edit ] Reducing sail on square-rigged ships could be accomplished by exposing less of each sail, by tying it off higher up with reefing points.

[ 65 ] Additionally, as winds get stronger, sails can be furled or removed from the spars, entirely until the vessel is surviving hurricane-force winds under "bare poles".

[ 61 ] : 137 On fore-and-aft rigged vessels, reducing sail may furling the jib and by reefing or partially lowering the mainsail, that is reducing the area of a sail without actually changing it for a smaller sail. This results both in a reduced sail area but also in a lower centre of effort from the sails, reducing the heeling moment and keeping the boat more upright.

There are three common methods of reefing the mainsail: [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Slab reefing, which involves lowering the sail by about one-quarter to one-third of its full length and tightening the lower part of the sail using an outhaul or a pre-loaded reef line through a cringle at the new clew , and hook through a cringle at the new tack .

In-boom roller-reefing, with a horizontal foil inside the boom . This method allows for standard- or full-length horizontal battens.

In-mast (or on-mast) roller-reefing. This method rolls the sail up around a vertical foil either inside a slot in the mast, or affixed to the outside of the mast. It requires a mainsail with either no battens , or newly developed vertical battens.

[ 69 ] Hull [ edit ] Hull trim has three aspects, each tied to an axis of rotation, they are controlling: [ 61 ] : 131–5 Heeling (rotation about the longitudinal axis –  or leaning to either port or starboard) Helm force (rotation about the vertical axis) Hull drag (rotation about the horizontal axis amidships [ citation needed ] ) Each is a reaction to forces on sails and is achieved either by weight distribution or by management of the center of force of the underwater foils (keel, daggerboard, etc.), compared with the center of force on the sails.

Heeling [ edit ] Boats heeling in front of Britannia Bridge in a round- Anglesey race 1998 A sailing vessel heels when the boat leans over to the side in reaction to wind forces on the sails.

A sailing vessel's form stability (derived from the shape of the hull and the position of the center of gravity) is the starting point for resisting heeling. Catamarans and iceboats have a wide stance that makes them resistant to heeling. Additional measures for trimming a sailing craft to control heeling include: [ 61 ] : 131–5 Ballast in the keel, which counteracts heeling as the boat rolls.

Shifting of weight, which might be crew on a trapeze or moveable ballast across the boat.

Reducing sail Adjusting the depth of underwater foils to control their lateral resistance force and center of resistance Helm force [ edit ] The alignment of center of force of the sails with center of resistance of the hull and its appendices controls whether the craft will track straight with little steering input, or whether correction needs to be made to hold it away from turning into the wind (a weather helm) or turning away from the wind (a lee helm). A center of force behind the center of resistance causes a weather helm. The center of force ahead of the center of resistance causes a lee helm. When the two are closely aligned, the helm is neutral and requires little input to maintain course.

[ 61 ] : 131–5 Hull drag [ edit ] Fore-and-aft weight distribution changes the cross-section of a vessel in the water. Small sailing craft are sensitive to crew placement. They are usually designed to have the crew stationed midships to minimize hull drag in the water.

[ 61 ] : 131–5 Other aspects of seamanship [ edit ] 1 – mainsail 2 – staysail 3 – spinnaker 4 – hull 5 – keel 6 – rudder 7 – skeg 8 – mast 9 – spreader 10 – shroud 11 – sheet 12 – boom 13 - mast 14 – spinnaker pole 15 – backstay 16 – forestay 17 – boom vang Seamanship encompasses all aspects of taking a sailing vessel in and out of port, navigating it to its destination, and securing it at anchor or alongside a dock. Important aspects of seamanship include employing a common language aboard a sailing craft and the management of lines that control the sails and rigging.

[ 70 ] Nautical terms [ edit ] Further information: Glossary of nautical terms (A-L) and Glossary of nautical terms (M-Z) Nautical terms for elements of a vessel: starboard (right-hand side), port or larboard (left-hand side), forward or fore (frontward), aft or abaft (rearward), bow (forward part of the hull), stern (aft part of the hull), beam (the widest part). Spars, supporting sails, include masts, booms, yards, gaffs and poles. Moveable lines that control sails or other equipment are known collectively as a vessel's running rigging . Lines that raise sails are called halyards while those that strike them are called downhauls . Lines that adjust (trim) the sails are called sheets . These are often referred to using the name of the sail they control (such as main sheet or jib sheet ).

Guys are used to control the ends of other spars such as spinnaker poles . Lines used to tie a boat up when alongside are called docklines , docking cables or mooring warps . A rode is what attaches an anchored boat to its anchor .

[ 71 ] Other than starboard and port, the sides of the boat are defined by their relationship to the wind. The terms to describe the two sides are Windward and leeward . The windward side of the boat is the side that is upwind while the leeward side is the side that is downwind.

Management of lines [ edit ] The following knots are commonly used to handle ropes and lines on sailing craft: [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Bowline – forms a loop at the end of a rope or line, useful for lassoing a piling.

Cleat hitch – affixes a line to a cleat , used with docking lines.

Clove hitch – two half hitches , used for tying onto a post or hanging a fender .

Figure-eight – a stopper knot, prevents a line from sliding past the opening in a fitting.

Rolling hitch – a friction hitch onto a line or a spar that pulls in one direction and slides in the other.

Sheet bend – joins two rope ends, when improvising a longer line.

Reef knot or square knot – used for reefing or storing a sail by tying two ends of a line together.

Lines and halyards are typically coiled neatly for stowage and reuse.

[ 74 ] Sail physics [ edit ] Main article: Forces on sails Aerodynamic force components for two points of sail.

Left-hand boat : Down wind with detached airflow like a parachute — predominant drag component propels the boat with little heeling moment.

Right-hand boat : Up wind (close-hauled) with attached airflow like a wing —predominant lift component both propels the boat and contributes to heel.

The physics of sailing arises from a balance of forces between the wind powering the sailing craft as it passes over its sails and the resistance by the sailing craft against being blown off course, which is provided in the water by the keel , rudder , underwater foils and other elements of the underbody of a sailboat, on ice by the runners of an iceboat , or on land by the wheels of a sail-powered land vehicle .

Forces on sails depend on wind speed and direction and the speed and direction of the craft. The speed of the craft at a given point of sail contributes to the " apparent wind "—the wind speed and direction as measured on the moving craft. The apparent wind on the sail creates a total aerodynamic force, which may be resolved into drag —the force component in the direction of the apparent wind—and lift —the force component normal (90°) to the apparent wind. Depending on the alignment of the sail with the apparent wind ( angle of attack ), lift or drag may be the predominant propulsive component.  Depending on the angle of attack of a set of sails with respect to the apparent wind, each sail is providing motive force to the sailing craft either from lift-dominant attached flow or drag-dominant separated flow. Additionally, sails may interact with one another to create forces that are different from the sum of the individual contributions of each sail, when used alone.

Apparent wind velocity [ edit ] The term " velocity " refers both to speed and direction. As applied to wind, apparent wind velocity ( V A ) is the air velocity acting upon the leading edge of the most forward sail or as experienced by instrumentation or crew on a moving sailing craft. In nautical terminology, wind speeds are normally expressed in knots and wind angles in degrees . All sailing craft reach a constant forward velocity ( V B ) for a given true wind velocity ( V T ) and point of sail . The craft's point of sail affects its velocity for a given true wind velocity. Conventional sailing craft cannot derive power from the wind in a "no-go" zone that is approximately 40° to 50° away from the true wind, depending on the craft. Likewise, the directly downwind speed of all conventional sailing craft is limited to the true wind speed. As a sailboat sails further from the wind, the apparent wind becomes smaller and the lateral component becomes less; boat speed is highest on the beam reach. To act like an airfoil, the sail on a sailboat is sheeted further out as the course is further off the wind.

[ 46 ] As an iceboat sails further from the wind, the apparent wind increases slightly and the boat speed is highest on the broad reach. In order to act like an airfoil, the sail on an iceboat is sheeted in for all three points of sail.

[ 45 ] Lift and drag on sails [ edit ] Main articles: Lift (force) and Lift-induced drag Sail angles of attack (α) and resulting (idealized) flow patterns for attached flow, maximum lift, and stalled for a hypothetical sail. The stagnation streamlines (red) delineate air passing to the leeward side (top) from that passing to the windward (bottom) side of the sail.

Lift on a sail, acting as an airfoil , occurs in a direction perpendicular to the incident airstream (the apparent wind velocity for the headsail) and is a result of pressure differences between the windward and leeward surfaces and depends on the angle of attack, sail shape, air density, and speed of the apparent wind. The lift force results from the average pressure on the windward surface of the sail being higher than the average pressure on the leeward side.

[ 75 ] These pressure differences arise in conjunction with the curved airflow. As air follows a curved path along the windward side of a sail, there is a pressure gradient perpendicular to the flow direction with higher pressure on the outside of the curve and lower pressure on the inside. To generate lift, a sail must present an " angle of attack " between the chord line of the sail and the apparent wind velocity. The angle of attack is a function of both the craft's point of sail and how the sail is adjusted with respect to the apparent wind.

[ 76 ] As the lift generated by a sail increases, so does lift-induced drag , which together with parasitic drag constitute total drag , which acts in a direction parallel to the incident airstream. This occurs as the angle of attack increases with sail trim or change of course and causes the lift coefficient to increase up to the point of aerodynamic stall along with the lift-induced drag coefficient . At the onset of stall, lift is abruptly decreased, as is lift-induced drag. Sails with the apparent wind behind them (especially going downwind) operate in a stalled condition.

[ 77 ] Lift and drag are components of the total aerodynamic force on sail, which are resisted by forces in the water (for a boat) or on the traveled surface (for an iceboat or land sailing craft). Sails act in two basic modes; under the lift-predominant mode, the sail behaves in a manner analogous to a wing with airflow attached to both surfaces; under the drag-predominant mode, the sail acts in a manner analogous to a parachute with airflow in detached flow, eddying around the sail.

Lift predominance (wing mode) [ edit ] Sails allow progress of a sailing craft to windward, thanks to their ability to generate lift (and the craft's ability to resist the lateral forces that result). Each sail configuration has a characteristic coefficient of lift and attendant coefficient of drag, which can be determined experimentally and calculated theoretically. Sailing craft orient their sails with a favorable angle of attack between the entry point of the sail and the apparent wind even as their course changes. The ability to generate lift is limited by sailing too close to the wind when no effective angle of attack is available to generate lift (causing luffing) and sailing sufficiently off the wind that the sail cannot be oriented at a favorable angle of attack to prevent the sail from stalling with flow separation .

Drag predominance (parachute mode) [ edit ] When sailing craft are on a course where the angle between the sail and the apparent wind (the angle of attack) exceeds the point of maximum lift, separation of flow occurs.

[ 78 ] Drag increases and lift decreases with increasing angle of attack as the separation becomes progressively pronounced until the sail is perpendicular to the apparent wind, when lift becomes negligible and drag predominates. In addition to the sails used upwind, spinnakers provide area and curvature appropriate for sailing with separated flow on downwind points of sail, analogous to parachutes, which provide both lift and drag.

[ 79 ] Downwind sailing with a spinnaker Spinnaker set for a broad reach, generating both lift, with separated flow, and drag.

Spinnaker cross-section trimmed for a broad reach showing transition from boundary layer to separated flow where vortex shedding commences.

Symmetric spinnaker while running downwind, primarily generating drag.

Symmetric spinnaker cross-section with following apparent wind, showing vortex shedding.

Wind variation with height and time [ edit ] Further information: Wind gradient § Sailing Wind speed increases with height above the surface; at the same time, wind speed may vary over short periods of time as gusts.

Wind shear affects sailing craft in motion by presenting a different wind speed and direction at different heights along the mast . Wind shear occurs because of friction above a water surface slowing the flow of air.

[ 80 ] The ratio of wind at the surface to wind at a height above the surface varies by a power law with an exponent of 0.11-0.13 over the ocean. This means that a 5 m/s (9.7 kn) wind at 3 m above the water would be approximately 6 m/s (12 kn) at 15 m (50 ft) above the water. In hurricane-force winds with 40 m/s (78 kn) at the surface the speed at 15 m (50 ft) would be 49 m/s (95 kn) [ 81 ] This suggests that sails that reach higher above the surface can be subject to stronger wind forces that move the centre of effort on them higher above the surface and increase the heeling moment. Additionally, apparent wind direction moves aft with height above water, which may necessitate a corresponding twist in the shape of the sail to achieve attached flow with height.

[ 82 ] Gusts may be predicted by the same value that serves as an exponent for wind shear, serving as a gust factor. So, one can expect gusts to be about 1.5 times stronger than the prevailing wind speed (a 10-knot wind might gust up to 15 knots). This, combined with changes in wind direction suggest the degree to which a sailing craft must adjust sail angle to wind gusts on a given course.

[ 83 ] Hull physics [ edit ] See also: High-performance sailing Waterborne sailing craft rely on the design of the hull and keel to provide minimal forward drag in opposition to the sails' propulsive power and maximum resistance to the sails' lateral forces. In modern sailboats, drag is minimized by control of the hull's shape (blunt or fine), appendages, and slipperiness. The keel or other underwater foils provide the lateral resistance to forces on the sails. Heeling increases both drag and the ability of the boat to track along its desired course. Wave generation for a displacement hull is another important limitation on boat speed.

[ 84 ] Drag [ edit ] Drag from its form is described by a prismatic coefficient , C p = displaced volume of the vessel divided by waterline length times maximum displaced section area—the maximum value of C p = 1.0 being for a constant displace cross section area, as would be found on a barge. For modern sailboats, values of 0.53 ≤ C p ≤ 0.6 are likely because of the tapered shape of the submerged hull towards both ends. Reducing interior volume allows creating a finer hull with less drag. Because a keel or other underwater foil produces lift, it also produces drag, which increases as the boat heels. Wetted area of the hull affects total the amount of friction between the water and the hull's surface, creating another component of drag.

[ 84 ] Lateral resistance [ edit ] Sailboats use some sort of underwater foil to generate lift that maintains the forward direction of the boat under sail. Whereas sails operate at angles of attack between 10° and 90° incident to the wind, underwater foils operate at angles of attack between 0° and 10° incident to the water passing by. Neither their angle of attack nor surface is adjustable (except for moveable foils) and they are never intentionally stalled, while making way through the water. Heeling the vessel away from perpendicular into the water significantly degrades the boat's ability to point into the wind.

[ 84 ] Hull speed and beyond [ edit ] Hull speed is the speed at which the wavelength of a vessel's bow wave is equal to its waterline length and is proportional to the square root of the vessel's length at the waterline. Applying more power does not significantly increase the speed of a displacement vessel beyond hull speed. This is because the vessel is climbing up an increasingly steep bow wave with the addition of power without the wave propagating forward faster.

[ 84 ] Planing and foiling vessels are not limited by hull speed, as they rise out of the water without building a bow wave with the application of power. Long narrow hulls, such as those of catamarans, surpass hull speed by piercing through the bow wave. Hull speed does not apply to sailing craft on ice runners or wheels because they do not displace water.

[ 85 ] See also [ edit ] Sports portal Main article: Outline of sailing Dinghy racing High-performance sailing Land sailing Racing Rules of Sailing Sailing at the Summer Olympics Single-handed sailing Notes [ edit ] ^ Steam power required a number of engineering problems to be solved to achieve the full level of efficiency that was obtained by, say, the beginning of the 20th century.

To pick a few: screw propulsion (replacing paddle wheels) needed an effective stern gland and thrust bearing ; more efficient compound engines , running off higher boiler pressures required the solution of both engineering and regulatory problems; even more fuel-efficient triple expansion engines relied on previously unobtainable boiler pressures (needing better quality steel for the boilers and effective boiler design); all of which needed to be housed in sufficiently light but rigid hulls –  this involved experimentation with composite construction and iron, and later steel hulls; the latter two needed effective anti-fouling paint as iron hulls could not be covered by the copper sheets used on wooden hulls due to galvanic corrosion .

[ 1 ] : passim ^ The distance by sea from Alexandria (the main Egyptian grain port during the Roman Empire) to Civitavecchia (the modern port for Rome) is 1,126 nautical miles (2,085 km; 1,296 mi).

[ 6 ] ^ The distance by sea from the Tyne to London is 315 nautical miles (583 km; 362 mi).

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Jarvis, Adrian (1993). Gardiner, Robert; Greenhill, Dr. Basil (eds.).

The Advent of Steam - The Merchant Steamship before 1900 . Conway Maritime Press Ltd. pp.

158– 159.

ISBN 0-85177-563-2 .

^ Gardiner, Robert J; Greenhill, Basil (1993).

Sail's Last Century : the Merchant Sailing Ship 1830-1930 . London: Conway Maritime Press.

ISBN 0-85177-565-9 .

^ a b Adams, Jonathan (2013).

A maritime archaeology of ships : innovation and social change in medieval and early modern Europe (First ed.). Oxford, UK.

ISBN 9781842172971 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c Casson, Lionel (1995).

Ships and seamanship in the ancient world . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 0-8018-5130-0 .

^ Jett, Stephen C. (2017).

Ancient ocean crossings : reconsidering the case for contacts with the pre-Columbian Americas . Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press.

ISBN 978-0-8173-1939-7 .

^ a b "SEA-DISTANCES.ORG - Distances" .

sea-distances.org . Retrieved 2 November 2023 .

^ Turner, Raymond (October 1921).

"English Coal Industry in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries" (PDF) .

The American Historical Review .

27 (1): 1– 23.

doi : 10.2307/1836917 .

JSTOR 1836917 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 .

^ Carter, Robert (8 December 2012).

"The Neolithic origins of seafaring in the Arabian Gulf" .

Archaeology International .

6 .

doi : 10.5334/ai.0613 .

ISSN 2048-4194 .

^ Kimball, John (2009).

Physics of Sailing .

doi : 10.1201/9781420073775 .

ISBN 9781420073775 .

^ Horridge, Adrian (2006). Bellwood, Peter (ed.).

The Austronesians : historical and comparative perspectives . Canberra, ACT.

ISBN 978-0731521326 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Doran, Edwin Jr. (1974).

"Outrigger Ages" .

The Journal of the Polynesian Society .

83 (2): 130– 140. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 .

^ Mahdi, Waruno (1999). "The Dispersal of Austronesian boat forms in the Indian Ocean". In Blench, Roger; Spriggs, Matthew (eds.).

Archaeology and Language III: Artefacts languages, and texts . One World Archaeology. Vol. 34. Routledge. pp.

144– 179.

ISBN 978-0415100540 .

^ a b Horridge, Adrian (2006). "The Austronesian Conquest of the Sea ? Upwind".

The Austronesian Conquest of the Sea — Upwind (PDF) . ANU Press. pp.

143– 160.

ISBN 0731521323 .

JSTOR j.ctt2jbjx1.10 . Retrieved 16 June 2022 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ O'Connor, Tom (September–October 2004). "Polynesians in the Southern Ocean: Occupation of the Auckland Islands in Prehistory".

New Zealand Geographic .

69 ( 6– 8).

^ Doran, Edwin Jr. (1981).

Wangka: Austronesian canoe origins . Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 9781585440863 .

^ a b Anderson, Romola; Anderson, R. C. (1 September 2003).

A Short History of the Sailing Ship . Courier Corporation.

ISBN 9780486429885 .

^ Villiers, Alan (1973).

Men, ships, and the sea . National Geographic Society (U.S.) (New ed.). Washington: National Geographic Society.

ISBN 0870440187 .

OCLC 533537 .

^ Baker, Kevin (2016).

America the Ingenious: How a Nation of Dreamers, Immigrants, and Tinkerers Changed the World . Artisan Books. pp.

13– 5.

ISBN 9781579657291 .

^ Chatterton, Edward Keble (1915).

Sailing Ships and Their Story :the Story of Their Development from the Earliest Times to the Present Day . Lippincott. pp.

298 .

^ Schäuffelen, Otmar (2005).

Chapman Great Sailing Ships of the World . Hearst Books.

ISBN 9781588163844 .

^ Randier, Jean (1968).

Men and Ships Around Cape Horn, 1616–1939 . Barker. p. 338.

ISBN 9780213764760 .

^ Pacific American Steamship Association; Shipowners Association of the Pacific Coast (1920).

"Safe Passage (Poem and photo of four masted John Ena in Canal)" .

Pacific Marine Review .

17 (October 1920). San Francisco: J.S. Hines . Retrieved 24 December 2014 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Marsden, Peter (2003).

Sealed by time : the loss and recovery of the Mary Rose . Vol. 1. Collins, K. J. Portsmouth: Mary Rose Trust. pp.

137– 142.

ISBN 0-9544029-0-1 .

OCLC 52143546 .

^ Denny, Mark (15 December 2008).

Float Your Boat!: The Evolution and Science of Sailing . JHU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-9568-5 .

^ Anderson, Romola; Anderson, R. C. (1 September 2003).

A Short History of the Sailing Ship . Courier Corporation.

ISBN 978-0-486-42988-5 .

^ Chatterton, Edward Keble (2010).

The History of Sailing Ships . BoD – Books on Demand.

ISBN 978-3-86195-308-1 .

^ Rodger, N. A. M. (1998).

The safeguard of the sea : a naval history of Britain, 660–1649 (1 ed.). New York: W.W. Norton. pp. 312, 316.

ISBN 0-393-04579-X .

OCLC 38199493 .

^ Glete, Jan (1993).

Navies and nations : warships, navies, and state building in Europe and America, 1500–1860 . Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell International. p. 176.

ISBN 91-22-01565-5 .

OCLC 28542975 .

^ Hannafin, Matt.

"Luxury Cruises & Romantic Sailing Ships" .

www.frommers.com . Retrieved 3 October 2021 .

^ Consoli, Jeanine (5 July 2021).

"7 Things To Know Before Taking A Windjammer Cruise" .

TravelAwaits . Retrieved 3 October 2021 .

^ Rowe, Nigel (3 July 2014).

Tall Ships Today: Their remarkable story . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4729-0348-8 .

^ Jobson, Gary (31 October 2017).

"The Joy of a Day Sail" .

Cruising World . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ Pillsbury, Mark (18 April 2019).

"18 Small Sailboats for the Weekender" .

Cruising World . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ Staff (1 January 2010).

Coastal Cruising Made Easy: The Official Manual For The ASA Basic Coastal Cruising Course (ASA 103) . American Sailing Association.

ISBN 978-0-9821025-1-0 .

^ Cornell, Jimmy (13 July 2010).

World Cruising Destinations: An Inspirational Guide to All Sailing Destinations . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4081-1401-8 .

^ Cornell, Jimmy (16 August 2012).

World Voyage Planner: Planning a Voyage from Anywhere in the World to Anywhere in the World . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4081-5631-5 .

^ a b Elvstrom, Paul (30 January 2009).

Paul Elvstrom Explains the Racing Rules of Sailing: 2009–2012 Rules . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4081-0949-6 .

^ Jeffery, Timothy (27 October 2016).

Sail: A tribute to the world's greatest races, sailors and their boats . Aurum Press.

ISBN 978-1-78131-658-0 .

^ Cort, Adam; Stearns, Richard (14 June 2013).

Getting Started in Sailboat Racing, 2nd Edition . McGraw Hill Professional.

ISBN 978-0-07-180827-9 .

^ Simpson, Richard V. (24 April 2012).

The Quest for the America's Cup: Sailing to Victory . Arcadia Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-61423-446-3 .

^ Tylecote, Steve (8 May 2002).

Team Racing for Sailboats . Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-898660-85-9 .

^ Bethwaite, Frank (4 August 2013).

Higher Performance Sailing: Faster Handling Techniques . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4729-0131-6 .

^ Hart, Peter (30 November 2014).

Windsurfing . Crowood.

ISBN 978-1-84797-963-6 .

^ Cunliffe, Tom (2016).

The Complete Day Skipper: Skippering with Confidence Right From the Start (5 ed.). Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 46.

ISBN 978-1-4729-2418-6 .

^ a b c d e Kimball, John (2009).

Physics of Sailing . CRC Press. p. 296.

ISBN 978-1466502666 .

^ a b c Jobson, Gary (1990).

Championship Tactics: How Anyone Can Sail Faster, Smarter, and Win Races . New York: St. Martin's Press. pp.

323 .

ISBN 978-0-312-04278-3 .

^ Marchaj, C. A. (2002), Sail Performance: Techniques to Maximize Sail Power (2 ed.), International Marine/Ragged Mountain Press, p. 416, ISBN 978-0071413107 ^ Bethwaite, Frank (2007).

High Performance Sailing . Adlard Coles Nautical.

ISBN 978-0-7136-6704-2 .

^ a b Howard, Jim; Doane, Charles J. (2000).

Handbook of Offshore Cruising: The Dream and Reality of Modern Ocean Cruising . Sheridan House. p. 214.

ISBN 9781574090932 .

^ Cunliffe, Tom (2016).

The Complete Day Skipper: Skippering with Confidence Right From the Start (5 ed.). Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 46.

ISBN 978-1-4729-2418-6 .

^ a b Cunliffe, Tom (January 1988).

"The shortest route to windward" .

Cruising World .

14 (1): 58– 64.

ISSN 0098-3519 .

^ a b Jobson, Gary (2008).

Sailing Fundamentals (Revised ed.). Simon and Schuster. p. 224.

ISBN 978-1-4391-3678-2 .

^ Walker, Stuart H.; Price, Thomas C. (1991).

Positioning: The Logic of Sailboat Racing . W. W. Norton & Company. p. 192.

ISBN 978-0-393-03339-7 .

^ a b Findlay, Gordon D. (2005).

My Hand on the Tiller . AuthorHouse. p. 138.

ISBN 9781456793500 .

^ Fossati, Fabio (1 November 2009).

Aero-hydrodynamics and the Performance of Sailing Yachts: The Science Behind Sailing Yachts and Their Design . Adlard Coles Nautical. p. 352.

ISBN 978-1408113387 .

^ Ell, Sarah (2002).

Dinghy Sailing . Stackpole Books. p. 49.

ISBN 978-0-8117-2474-6 .

^ a b Keegan, John (1989).

The Price of Admiralty . New York: Viking. p.

281 .

ISBN 978-0-670-81416-9 .

^ Bethwaite, Frank (2007).

High Performance Sailing .

Adlard Coles Nautical.

ISBN 978-0-7136-6704-2 .

^ Yochanan Kushnir (2000).

"The Climate System: General Circulation and Climate Zones" . Archived from the original on 22 August 2004 . Retrieved 13 March 2012 .

^ Ahrens, C. Donald; Henson, Robert (1 January 2015).

Meteorology Today (11 ed.). Cengage Learning. p. 656.

ISBN 9781305480629 .

^ a b c d e f Royce, Patrick M. (2015).

Royce's Sailing Illustrated . Vol. 2 (11 ed.). ProStar Publications.

ISBN 978-0-911284-07-2 .

^ National Ocean Service (25 March 2008).

"Surface Ocean Currents" .

noaa.gov . National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

^ "2.5 Tides and Currents" (PDF) .

North Central Puget Sound Geographic Response Plan . Washington Department of Ecology. December 2012. pp.

2– 4 . Retrieved 23 March 2016 .

^ Queeny, Tim (25 April 2014).

"Square sail handling" .

Ocean Navigator . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ a b deNoble, Paul (17 January 2020).

"Square-Rigged Sailing Ship Innovations – by Paul deNoble" .

EcoClipper . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ a b Schweer, Peter (2006).

How to Trim Sails . Sheridan House, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-57409-220-2 .

^ a b Holmes, Rupert (11 June 2020).

"How-to: Mainsail Trim 101" .

Sail Magazine . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ a b Mason, Charles (July 2007).

The Best of Sail Trim . Sheridan House, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-57409-119-9 .

^ Snook, Graham.

"How to: A Trouble-free Furling Main" .

Sail Magazine . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ Rousmaniere, John (7 January 2014).

The Annapolis Book of Seamanship: Fourth Edition . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4516-5024-2 .

^ Rousmaniere, John (June 1998).

The Illustrated Dictionary of Boating Terms: 2000 Essential Terms for Sailors and Powerboaters (Paperback).

W. W. Norton & Company . p. 174.

ISBN 978-0-393-33918-5 .

^ Snyder, Paul. (2002).

Nautical knots illustrated . Snyder, Arthur. (Rev. ed.). Camden, Me.: International Marine.

ISBN 978-0-07-170890-6 .

OCLC 1124534665 .

^ Moreau, Patrick; Heron, Jean-Benoit (2018).

Marine Knots : How to Tie 40 Essential Knots . New York: Harper Design.

ISBN 978-0-06-279776-6 .

OCLC 1030579528 .

^ Competent Crew: Practical Course Notes . Eastleigh, Hampshire: Royal Yachting Association. 1990. pp.

32– 43.

ISBN 978-0-901501-35-6 .

^ Batchelor, G.K.

(1967), An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics , Cambridge University Press, pp.

14– 15, ISBN 978-0-521-66396-0 ^ Klaus Weltner A comparison of explanations of the aerodynamic lifting force Am. J. Phys. 55(1), January 1987 pg 52 ^ Clancy, L.J. (1975), Aerodynamics , London: Pitman Publishing Limited, p. 638, ISBN 978-0-273-01120-0 ^ Collie, S. J.; Jackson, P. S.; Jackson, M.; Gerritsen; Fallow, J.B. (2006), "Two-dimensional CFD-based parametric analysis of down-wind sail designs" (PDF) , The University of Auckland , archived from the original (PDF) on 28 July 2010 , retrieved 4 April 2015 ^ Textor, Ken (1995).

The New Book of Sail Trim . Sheridan House, Inc. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0-924486-81-4 .

^ Deacon, E. L.; Sheppard, P. A.; Webb, E. K. (December 1956), "Wind Profiles over the Sea and the Drag at the Sea Surface", Australian Journal of Physics , 9 (4): 511, Bibcode : 1956AuJPh...9..511D , doi : 10.1071/PH560511 ^ Hsu, S. A. (January 2006).

"Measurements of Overwater Gust Factor From NDBC Buoys During Hurricanes" (PDF) . Louisiana State University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .

^ Zasso, A.; Fossati, F.; Viola, I. (2005), Twisted flow wind tunnel design for yacht aerodynamic studies (PDF) , 4th European and African Conference on Wind Engineering, Prague, pp.

350– 351 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Hsu, S. A. (April 2008).

"An Overwater Relationship Between the Gust Factor and the Exponent of Power-Law Wind Profile" .

Mariners Weather Log . National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .

^ a b c d Garrett, Ross (1996).

The Symmetry of Sailing: The Physics of Sailing for Yachtsmen . Sheridan House, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-57409-000-0 .

^ Bethwaite, Frank (4 August 2013).

Higher Performance Sailing: Faster Handling Techniques . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4729-0130-9 .

Bibliography [ edit ] "Transportation and Maps" in Virtual Vault Archived 2 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine , an online exhibition of Canadian historical art at Library and Archives Canada Rousmaniere, John, The Annapolis Book of Seamanship , Simon & Schuster, 1999 Chapman Book of Piloting (various contributors), Hearst Corporation, 1999 Herreshoff, Halsey (consulting editor), The Sailor's Handbook , Little Brown and Company, 1983 Seidman, David, The Complete Sailor , International Marine, 1995 Jobson, Gary (2008).

Sailing Fundamentals (Revised ed.). Simon and Schuster. p. 224.

ISBN 9781439136782 .

Further reading [ edit ] Rousmaniere, John (June 1998).

The Illustrated Dictionary of Boating Terms: 2000 Essential Terms for Sailors and Powerboaters (Paperback).

W. W. Norton & Company . p. 174.

ISBN 978-0-393-33918-5 .

v t e Sailing dinghies Dinghies under 10 ft Cape Cod Frosty Flipper (US) Frog El Toro Fatty Knees Fly Holdfast Trainer Manly Junior Minto Montgomery 7-11 Naples Sabot O'PEN Skiff Optimist P Class Pelican Sabot Shrimp Starling Tadpole Topaz Taz US Sabot Zoom 8 Dinghies under 15 ft 0–K 10ft Skiff 12 foot dinghy 125 145 12ft Skiff 29er 29erXX skiff 2000 3000 420 470 American 14.6 ASC B14 Banshee Beetle Cat Beneteau First 14 Beneteau Wizz Bermuda Fitted Dinghy Beverly Dinghy Barnett 1400 Blaze Blue Crab 11 Blue Jay Bombardier 3.8 Bombardier Invitation Bosun British Moth Bullet 14 Buzz Byte Cadet Capri Cyclone Cherub C-Lark Comet (UK) Coypu Dabchick Dart Designers Choice Dolphin 15 Senior Echo 12 Enterprise Europe Envy Farr 3.7 Finn Firefly Flying Ant Flying Eleven Force 5 GP14 Graduate Griffon Gull Howmar 12 Heron Houdini Idle-along Impulse Interclub Dinghy International 14 International FJ Javelin (NZ) Javelin (US) Jet 14 Jollyboat (NZ) Kite L–Z Lark Laser Standard Laser 2 Laser 3000 Laser 4.7 Laser 5000 Laser Pico Laser Radial Laser Vago Laser Vortex Lehman 12 Lehman Interclub Lido 14 Mark Marlin Melges 14 Merlin Rocket Metaf Metcalf MG14 Minisail Miracle Mirror Montgomery 7-11 Montgomery 12 Moth Musto Skiff National 12 NS14 OK Dinghy Otter Pacer Pegasus Penguin Phantom 14 Phantom Precision 13 Precision 14 Puffer Rascal 14 RS Aero RS Feva RS Neo RS Quest RS Tera RS Vareo RS100 RS200 RS300 RS400 RS500 RS600 RS700 RS800 Sabre Scorpion Skimmer Skipjack 15 Skunk 11 Snark Snowbird Solo Speedball 14 Spindrift 13 Spiral Splash Streaker Sunburst Sunfish Surprise 15 Tanzer 14 Tasar Tech Dinghy Topper Topper Topaz Topaz Magno Topaz Vibe Transit 380 Twitchell 12 Vagabond Vaurien Wanderer Waszp Water Wag Widgeon 12 Woodpussy Zeddie Zephyr Dinghies under 20 ft 0–K 16ft Skiff 18 foot dinghy 18ft Skiff 470 49er 505 Albacore Apollo 16 Australian Sharpie Beaufort Bombardier 4.8 Buccaneer 18 Cape Cod Gemini Cape Cod Mercury 15 Caprice 15 CL 16 Comet (US) Contender Coronado 15 Corsair Day Sailer Flying Dutchman Flying Scot French National Monotype 1924 Geary 18 Gloucester 15 Hampton One-Design Holiday 20 Hornet Interlake International Canoe ISO Jacksnipe Javelin (Europe) Jersey Skiff Jollyboat (UK) Jolly Boat JY15 L–Z Laser 4000 Laser Stratos Leeward 16 Lelievlet Lightning Melges 15 Menger Cat 15 Mirror 16 Mistral 16 Mobjack Mud Hen 17 Mutineer 15 O-Jolle Paceship 20 Payne-Mortlock sailing canoe Picnic 17 Pirate Precision 15 CB Precision 16 Precision 185 CB Ranger 16 Rebel 16 Rhodes 18 Rhodes 19 RS Vision RS700 RS800 RS Venture S2 5.5 Salcombe Yawl Sea Bright Sea Scout Standard Boat (BP18) Snipe Tanzer 16 12m 2 Sharpie Thistle Topaz Omega US1 Vanguard 15 Wayfarer Windmill Windy Winkle Brig X Boat Dinghies 20 ft or over Dovekie 21 Highlander Norfolk Punt Sea Pearl 21 Scows A Scow Butterfly C Scow E Scow Fireball Flipper (Danish) I-20 Melges 17 M Scow MC Scow Puddle Duck Racer Thames A-class rater Y Flyer Multihulls Catamarans A-Class Catalina Catamaran Cheshire 14 Dart 16 Dart 18 DC-14 Phantom Flying Phantom Elite Flying Phantom Essentiel Formula 16 Formula 18 G-Cat 5.0 G-Cat 5.7 Hobie 14 Hobie 16 Hobie 17 Hobie Bravo Hobie Dragoon Hobie Tiger Hobie Wave Hobie Wildcat Isotope Kona 14 Nacra 5.2 Nacra 15 Nacra F16 Nacra 17 Nacra F18 Infusion Nacra 20 Carbon M32 Phantom 14 Phantom 16 Phoenix 18 Prindle 18 Prindle 18-2 Shearwater III SL 16 Topcat K1 Tornado Trac 14 Trac 16 Viper F16 Trimarans Astus 14.1 Wētā v t e Seamanship (seafaring) topics Seamanship Navigation Watchkeeping Ice navigation Pilotage Maritime studies Sailing Nautical terms A–L M–Z Naval architecture Ship stability Hydrodynamics Ship-to-ship cargo transfer Propeller walk Passage planning Maritime law Dry-docking Ropework Knots Man overboard rescue turn Buoyage Mooring Anchoring Sea anchor v t e Classes of trailer sailers and trailer yachts A-D 11:Metre One Design Aero 20 Adventurer 17 Alacrity 19 Albin 57 Alize 20 Allegra 24 Alerion Express 19 Alberg 22 Arcachonnais Alberg 23 Albin Express AMF 2100 Amphibi-Con 25 Antares 17 Antrim 20 Aquarius 7.0 Aquarius 21 Aquarius 23 Aquarius 24 Pilot Cutter Austral 20 Archambault Bagheera Bahia 22 Balboa 16 Balboa 20 Balboa 21 Balboa 22 Balboa 23 Balboa 24 Balboa 26 Balboa 27 8.2 Bay Hen 21 Baymaster 18 Beachcomber 25 Beneteau First 18 Beneteau First 18 SE Beneteau First 20 Beneteau First 210 Beniguet Blazer 23 Bluejacket 23 Bluejacket MS 23 Blue Water 24 Boomerang 20 Bremer 25 Bridges Point 24 Brio Bristol Caravel 22 Bristol Corsair 24 Buccaneer 200 Buccaneer 210 Buccaneer 220 Buccaneer 240 Buccaneer 245 Buccaneer 250 Buccaneer 255 Bull's Eye Cabochard Cal 21 Cal 22 Cal 24 Cal 25 Cal 2-24 Cal 3-24 Cal T/4 California 4.70 California 5.20 California 5.50 California 6.60 CAP 450 CAP 540 Cape Breton Cape Cod Cat Cape Cod Mercury 15 Cape Dory 25 Cape Dory 25D Capelan Capri 14 Capri 16 Capri 22 Capri 25 Capri 26 Captain Captiva 240 Careel 18 Catalina 18 Catalina 22 Catalina 25 Catalina 250 Cherry 16 Chrysler 20 Chrysler 22 Chrysler 26 Classic 22 Classic 22 (Windley) Clipper 21 Clipper 23 Colgate 26 Columbia 7.6 Columbia 22 Columbia T-23 Columbia 24 Challenger Columbia 24 Contender Companion 21 Crystal 23 Commodore 17 Com-Pac 16 Com-Pac 23 Com-Pac 25 Com-Pac Eclipse Com-Pac Horizon Cat Com-Pac Legacy Com-Pac Sun Cat Com-Pac Sunday Cat Contest 25 OC Corinthian 19 Cornish Crabber 17 Cornish Crabber 24 Cornish Shrimper 19 Coronado 23 Coronado 25 Corsair 24 Corsair Cruze 970 CS 22 Cygnus 20 Dana 24 D&M 22 Dawson 26 Dehler 22 Dehler 25 Dolphin 17 Dolphin 24 Drascombe Drascombe Lugger Drascombe Scaffie DS-16 DS-22 Dufour 24 Dufour 1800 E-K Eastsail 25 Eastward Ho 24 Eclipse 6.7 Elite 25 Endeavor 26 Ensenada 20 Eolia 25 Ericson 23-1 Ericson 23-2 Ericson 25 Ericson 25+ Espace 620 Esse 850 Esse 990 ETAP 20 ETAP 21i ETAP 22 ETAP 22i ETAP 23 ETAP 23i ETAP 23iL ETAP 24i ETAP 26 ETAP 26s Evelyn 25 Express 27 F-24 Sport Cruiser F-27 Sport Cruiser F-31 Sport Cruiser Farrier F-22 Farrier F-24 Fisher 25 Flirt Flying Tiger 7.5 Flying Tiger 10 M Freedom 21 Freedom 24 Fun 23 Gladiator 24 Gloucester 16 Gloucester 18 (Whitecap) Gloucester 19 Gloucester 20 Gloucester 22 Gloucester 23 Golif 21 Gougeon 32 Grampian 23 Greenwich 24 Halcyon 23 Halman 20 Harbor 14 Harbor 20 Harbor 25 Harmony 22 Harpoon 6.2 Hartley TS16 Helms 24 Helsen 20 Helsen 22 Heritage 20 Hermann 19 Hermann 22 Herreshoff America Herreshoff Eagle Herreshoff Goldeneye Herreshoff Prudence Hilbre One Design Hobie 33 Hobie Magic 25 Holder 17 Holder 20 Hughes 22 Hughes 24 Hughes 25 Hunter 18.5 Hunter 19-1 Hunter 19-2 Hunter 20 Hunter 22 Hunter 23 Hunter 23.5 Hunter 25 Hunter 25-2 Hunter 26 Hunter 27 Edge Hunter 212 Hunter 216 Hunter 240 Hunter 260 Hunter Medina Ideal 18 Imperial 23 Impulse 21 Independence 20 Irwin 10/4 Irwin 23 Irwin 25 Islander 21 Islander 24 Bahama J/22 J/24 J/70 J/80 JOD 24 Kaiser 25 Kelt 7.6 Kittiwake 23 Kirby 23 Kirby 25 L-R Laguna 16 Laguna 18 Laguna 22 Laguna 24S Lancer 25 Lancer 25 Mark V Lancer 25 PS Lancer 28 Lancer 28T Mark V La Paz 25 Lapworth 24 Lockley-Newport LN-23 Jeanneau Love Love Lynx 16 MacGregor 19 MacGregor 21 MacGregor 22 MacGregor 24 MacGregor 25 MacGregor 26 Mariner 19 Mark 25 Marlin 23 Marlow-Hunter 22 Marshall 22 Marsh Hen Martin 16 Matilda 20 Melges 20 Melges 24 Menger Cat 17 Menger Cat 19 Menger Cat 23 Menger Oysterman 23 Meridian 25 Merit 22 Merit 25 Microsail Mini JOD Mirage 5.5 Mistral T-21 Montego 19 Montego 20 Montego 25 Montgomery 15 Montgomery 17 Montgomery 23 Moore 24 Morgan 22 Morgan 24/25 Mustang 22 Mystic Catboat 20 Mystic Mini-Ton Naiad 18 Neptune 24 New Horizons 26 Neptune 16 Newport 16 Newport 17 Newport 212 Newport 214 Nimble 20 Nimble 25 Arctic Nomad 22 Nonsuch 22 Nordica 16 Nordica 20 Nor'Sea 27 North 26 North American 23 North Star 500 Nutmeg 24 O'Day 19 O'Day 20 O'Day 22 O'Day 23 O'Day 25 O'Day 26 O'Day 192 O'Day 222 O'Day 240 Olson 25 Pacific Seacraft 25 Parker Dawson 26 Pearson 21 Pearson 22 Pearson 23 Pearson 23C Pearson 24 Pearson Electra Pearson Ensign Pearson Lark Peep Hen 14 Pierce Arrow 18 Poacher 21 Polaris 26 Precision 15 Precision 18 Precision 21 Precision 23 Precision 165 Precision 185 Paceship PY 23 Quickstep 19 Quickstep 21 Quickstep 24 Ranger 22 Ranger 23 Ranger 24 Ranger 26-2 Raven RK 20 RK 21 RL 24 Rhodes 18 Rhodes 19 Rhodes 22 Rhodes Ranger 29 Rob Roy 23 Rocket 22 S-Z S2 6.7 S2 6.8 S2 6.9 S2 7.0 S2 7.3 S2 8.0 A S2 8.0 B S2 8.0 C S2 22 Sage 17 Sailmaster 22 Sanderling 18 Sandpiper 565 San Juan 21 San Juan 23 San Juan 24 Sanibel 17 Sanibel 18 Santana 21 Santana 22 Santana 23 Santana 25 Santana 26 Santana 2023 Seafarer 22 Seafarer 23 Seafarer 23 Challenger Seafarer 23 Kestrel Seafarer 24 Seaforth 24 Seagull Seamew Sea Pearl 21 Sea Sprite 23 Seaward 22 Seaward 23 Seaward 24 Seaward 25 Seaward 26RK Seaward Fox Seaway 25 Seidelmann 24 Seidelmann 25 Seidelmann 245 Schock 22 Schock 23 Schock 25 Shields Signet 20 Silhouette Siren 17 Sirius 22 Sirocco 15 Skipper 20 Skipper's Mate 17 Slipper 17 Snapdragon 747 Sonar Sonata 8 Sonata 26 Sonata 6.7 Sonic 23 Snug Harbor 18 South Coast 21 South Coast 22 South Coast 23 South Coast 25 South Coast 26 Sovereign 7.0 Sovereign 17 Sovereign 20 Sovereign 23 Sovereign Princess 24 Sovereign 26 Sovereign 30 Spindrift 19 Storm Spindrift 22 Spirit 21 Spirit 23 Sprinto Starwind 19 Starwind 22 Starwind 223 Stiletto 27 Stone Horse Stuart Knockabout Sun 2000 Sun Fast 17 Sun Fast 20 Sun Odyssey 24.2 Sun Way 21 Surprise 25 Swiftcraft Swift 18 Tanzer 7.5 Tanzer 22 Tanzer 25 Tartan 27 Tartan 27 Yawl Tartan 27-2 Tempest Tempest 23 Terrapin 24 TES 28 Magnam Tiger 25 Tonic 23 Triangle 20 Triton 21 Triton 22 Triton 25 Tylercraft 24 Typhoon 18 Typhoon Senior Ultimate 20 US Yachts US 18 US Yachts US 21 US Yachts US 22 US Yachts US 25 Vagabond 17 Vancouver 25 Venture 21 Venture 22 Venture 222 Venture of Newport 23 Victoria 18 Viggen 23 Viper 640 Vivacity 20 Vivacity 24 Walton 25 Watkins 17 Watkins 23 Watkins 25 Wavelength 24 Weekender 24 Westerly 22 West Wight Potter 15 West Wight Potter 19 Westwind 24 Windrose 5.5 Windrose 18 Windrose 20 Windrose 22 Windrose 24 Wild Wind 20 Wylie Wabbit 24 Yankee 26 v t e Sailing and manoeuvres sport , racing , cruising Sailing Center of lateral resistance ( Lee helm , Weather helm ) Point of sail Forces on sails Hiking Racing Rules of Sailing Rounding up Sail twist Manoeuvres Close-hauled Heaving to Heeling In irons Jibe Reaching Running Reefing Tacking Wing on wing Accidents Broach Capsizing Chinese gybe Death roll Turtling Planing v t e Water sports and activities Activities in water Aquajogging Diving synchronized Flyboarding Freediving Scuba diving Snorkeling Swimming Synchronized swimming Water aerobics Activities on water Boating Bodyboarding Bodysurfing Cable skiing Canoeing Fishing Kayaking Kiteboarding Kiteboating Kneeboarding Paddleboarding Standup paddleboarding Parasailing Rafting Riverboarding Rowing Sailing Skimboarding Skurfing Stone skipping Surfing Tubing Wakeboarding Wakeskating Wakesurfing Water skiing barefoot Windsurfing Yachting Team sports Canoe polo Dinghy racing Dragon boat racing Outrigger canoe racing Synchronized diving Synchronized swimming Waboba Water basketball Water polo Water volleyball Competitions Boat racing Modern pentathlon Sailing races Triathlon Yacht racing Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bq96l
Cached time: 20250816161252
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.203 seconds
Real time usage: 1.488 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10512/1000000
Revision size: 77892/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 299195/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5074/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 376039/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.654/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10363943/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1117.765      1 -total
 46.86%  523.800      2 Template:Reflist
 30.19%  337.484     60 Template:Cite_book
  8.34%   93.243      8 Template:Navbox
  6.85%   76.611     16 Template:R/superscript
  6.81%   76.065      1 Template:Recreational_yacht
  6.71%   75.012     13 Template:Rp
  6.21%   69.400      1 Template:Sailing_Dinghies_and_Skiffs
  6.04%   67.551     17 Template:LinkedLabel
  5.79%   64.681     17 Template:Wikidata Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27672:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816161252 and revision id 1305811170. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sailing&oldid=1305811170 " Category : Sailing Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 06:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sailing 54 languages Add topic

