Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Mai Bhago 1.2 Caste system 2 Issues Toggle Issues subsection 2.1 Equality in the temple (Gurdwara) 2.2 Abortion in India 3 Hair politics Toggle Hair politics subsection 3.1 History of the turban 3.1.1 Turbaned woman 3.1.1.1 Palbinder Kaur Shergill 3.1.1.2 Wearing a turban in the RCMP 4 Sikh Feminist Research Institute 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sikh feminism 2 languages বাংলা Ελληνικά Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feminism and the Sikh religion Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Part of a series on Sikhism People Topics Outline History Glossary Sikh gurus Guru Nanak Guru Angad Guru Amar Das Guru Ram Das Guru Arjan Guru Hargobind Guru Har Rai Guru Har Krishan Guru Tegh Bahadur Guru Gobind Singh Guru Granth Sahib Selected revered saints Bhagat Kabir Bhagat Ravidas Bhagat Farid Bhagat Ramanand Bhagat Beni Bhagat Namdev Bhagat Sadhana Bhagat Bhikhan Bhagat Parmanand Bhagat Sain Bhagat Dhanna Bhagat Pipa Bhagat Surdas Bhagat Jaidev Bhagat Trilochan Bhatt Kalshar Bhatt Balh Bhatt Bhalh Bhatt Bhika Bhatt Gayand Bhatt Harbans Bhatt Jalap Bhatt Kirat Bhatt Mathura Bhatt Nalh Bhatt Salh Baba Sundar Satta Doom Balvand Rai Philosophy Naam Japo Kirat Karō Vand Chakkō Charhdi Kalā Guru Maneyo Granth Five Thieves Five Virtues Practices Sikh Rehat Maryada Prohibitions Ardās Kirtan Amrit Velā Dasvand The Five Ks Langar Sewa Simran Nitnem Dastaar (Turban) Naam Karan Amrit Sanskar Anand Karaj Antam Sanskar Scripture Guru Granth Sahib Dasam Granth Sarbloh Granth Five Banis Places and Takhts Gurdwara Harmandir Sahib Akal Takht Keshgarh Sahib Damdama Sahib Patna Sahib Hazur Sahib Culture Literature Music Names Khanda Khalsa General topics Ik Onkar Waheguru Panj Pyare Nirgun and Sargun Nanakshahi calendar Criticism Jathedar of Akal Takht War Sects Sikhism and other religions Sikhism and Hinduism Sikhism and Islam Sikhism and Jainism Religion portal v t e Sikhism was founded in Punjab in 1469 by Guru Nanak on the foundations that everyone is equal, regardless of caste, age, or gender.

[ 1 ] Both men and women are supposed to follow the Five Ks : Kesh (uncut hair), Kangha (comb), Kara (iron bracelet), Kachera (cotton undergarment) and Kirpan (iron dagger), and there was never a distinction between what a woman should be allowed to do versus a man at theological level. Men and women are treated equally in the temple ( gurdwara ), and everyone eats and prays side-by-side.

[ 2 ] Both men and women are meant to carry the Kirpan with them as they are responsible for their own physical protection, and should not depend on others. Sikhs are strictly against the caste system and many chose to use Kaur or Singh as a last name to push against the problematic caste system in India. There is only one god ( Waheguru ) in Sikhism and they are without form or gender, and everyone is equal in the eyes of God. Many Sikh women believe that this absence of assignment of code of conduct for a woman versus a man proves that their religion is historically committed to gender equality.

[ 3 ] Presently, the culture does not always follow these traditions and equality is often more true in ideals rather than daily practice.

[ 4 ] According to Kiman Kaur: "It is essential to take into account the diverse Kaur (Sikh women's) narratives in order to critically understand the violence Sikh women experience due to religious, ethnic, and gender minoritization through enabling more intersectional conversations." [ 5 ] In North America the Five Ks are mostly just followed by men; however, many religiously devoted women also choose to commit to Sikh rehni , the Sikh way of life. Many Sikh women also choose to wear a turban as a socio-political move to fight inequality in the religion and show their Sikh essentialism.

[ 3 ] There are also groups which have been formed by Sikhs, like SAFAR, which are committed to uncovering and challenging oppression within the Sikh community, as well as re-establishing equity in the Sikh culture.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Painting of Mai Bhago leading Sikh warriors into battle Mai Bhago [ edit ] Mai Bhago , also known as Mata Bhag Kaur, was a female Sikh warrior of the early 18th century who led forty men into battle against the Mughal Empire and was the personal bodyguard to Guru Gobind Singh .

[ 7 ] Bhago is often pictured as a graceful, strong, turbaned woman on a horse, leading in battle. As the story goes, Guru Gobind Singh's army was being hunted down by the Mughal Army. The forty soldiers who were meant to protect the guru were given the option by the Mughal Army to abandon him or be killed. The soldiers told Guru Gobind Singh that they were not his Sikhs and he was not their guru, and went back to their village. One of the soldiers, Nidhan Singh Patti, told his wife, Mai Bhago, what he had done. She became infuriated and told him to do the housework while she went to fight in battle. When the men heard the news that she had gathered all the women in the village to go to the battlefield, they became ashamed and promised to join the battle. Mai Bhago and the soldiers knew it was a suicide mission but wanted to protect their guru, who was hiding in the jungle nearby. Mai Bhago survived, but all of the Sikh soldiers were killed and many from the Mughal Army had also fallen. The remaining Mughal Army assumed that Guru Gobind Singh had been killed and stopped pursuing him. For her faithfulness and gallantry, Mai Bhago then became appointed the guru's bodyguard. As a symbol of her bravery and courage, her spear is now kept alongside Guru Gobind Singh's armour in a gurdwara in Nanded , India.

[ 8 ] Caste system [ edit ] The caste system is a hierarchical system which distinguishes groups based on social status, rank, wealth, and occupation. Most of India still follows the caste system despite some problematic implications it may have.

[ example needed ] Sikhs oppose the caste system as it breaks their religious principle of equality.

Guru Nanak believed the caste system to be evil and challenged the institution by saying manas ki jat sabhe eke paihcanbo – 'recognise all of mankind as a single caste of humanity.' [ 9 ] Many Sikhs have dropped their caste name and have chosen to take the surname of Kaur (middle name for all female Sikhs) or Singh (middle name for all male Sikhs). This dropping of the castes became problematic for some Sikhs who first tried to immigrate to Canada , as the immigration office did not legally recognize Singh or Kaur as last names because they were "too common".

[ 10 ] The World Sikh Organization was outraged by this law as it required Sikh families to take back their caste names, thereby going against their faith. The World Sikh Organization was able to prove that there were several other immigrants who had common last names but were not forced to change their name. The policy was immediately reversed and was ruled a misunderstanding.

[ 11 ] Issues [ edit ] Equality in the temple (Gurdwara) [ edit ] Nanaksar Gurdwara : Sikh Temple on Horsehills Road in Edmonton, Alberata, Canada.

Any man or woman is welcome in the temple and accepted in all prayers and recitations of the Guru Granth Sahib , the primary Sikh scripture. Every temple has a langar (kitchen) where people of any gender and from any faith, ethnicity or cultural background are welcome to a free vegetarian meal. Everyone eats on the floor together to show social equality.

[ 12 ] Despite the fact that it is not prohibited for men and women to sit together, traditionally they still sit on opposite sides of the congregation in the Darbar Sahib Hall (main hall), both equal distances from the Guru Granth Sahib.

Sikh scriptures are usually publicly recited by men and generally only men address the congregation.

[ 4 ] Though anyone can be a granthi (ceremonial reader), the long hours and social restrictions surrounding the job make it less conducive for a woman as she is generally also required to take care of her children. Women are often the caregivers or cooks, while men read from the Guru Granth Sahib. The lack of accessibility and encouragement for women to apply to be a granthi creates inequality within the temple and discourages the possibility for change.

[ 3 ] Homosexuality was never explicitly mentioned in the Guru Granth Sahib, but marriage between man and woman is repeatedly encouraged.  Sikhism has no specific teachings about homosexuality and the Sikh holy scripture, the Guru Granth Sahib, does not explicitly mention heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. Many have opened this up to interpretation, but it is argued that the guru's teachings were based on the ground of equality for all and homosexuality is no exception.

[ 13 ] Abortion in India [ edit ] All forms of sex selection are condemned by the majority of Sikhs based on the teachings of the Guru Granth Sahib, which was committed to the equality of all. The use of feticide is considered by most Sikhs to be an act of discrimination and violence. However, many people in India continue to use feticide and abort female fetuses as males are more desirable and favoured in Indian culture. Boys are more desirable for several reasons, including earning power, potential pensions and dowry .

[ 14 ] In Lohri , a Punjabi festival which marks winter solstice and celebrates life, only the birth of new sons is celebrated. In Canada, women born in India who have already given birth to two daughters, gave birth to 192 baby boys in Ontario for every 100 girls.

[ 15 ] In Punjab (the homeland of the Sikhs), in 2001, there were only 754 girls born for every 1000 boys. However, these discrepancies are improving and the ratios between men and women are becoming more even.

[ 16 ] Hair politics [ edit ] History of the turban [ edit ] When Sikhism was first founded in 1469, the turban was mostly worn by spiritual leaders and Gurus as a status symbol, and uncut hair was a symbol of holiness and spiritual power. During a time of turmoil and war in India, the 10th Guru, Guru Gobind Singh , brought his people together and formed Khalsa (the pure), a spiritually devoted, brother-and-sisterhood of baptized Sikhs, and from there asked his people to follow the Five Ks. The most distinctive and widely recognizable of the Five Ks is Kesh , which requires Sikh men and women to keep their hair uncut.

[ 17 ] The turban symbolized spiritual strength, military readiness and allowed Sikhs to be unified and differentiated from others. Guru Gobind Singh wanted to reinforce that in God's eyes, all Sikhs were notable and equal. This created an army of men and women committed to attaining spiritual and temporal liberation under God.

[ 3 ] Turbaned woman [ edit ] Historically, men and women were meant to follow Kesh and both committed to having uncut hair. However, culturally, mostly men wear turbans, while women traditionally leave their uncut hair down.

[ 18 ] In turn, the turban is considered to be a masculine symbol and if a woman chooses to wear a turban, it is misunderstood by the Sikh community as a rejection of feminine traditions.

[ 19 ] [ dubious – discuss ] Many turbaned Sikh women consider the wearing of the turban to be a post-colonial, feminist choice, which pushes against assimilation and allows them to show their Sikh essentialism. There is a sense of dignity, respect, power, and bravery which comes from gurus and Sikh warriors having historically worn the turban. By wearing the turban, Sikh women are able to present themselves as strong and faithfully proud. Wearing the turban allows Sikh women to be easily identified as Sikh and differentiates them from those of Hindu faith. The turban allows women to reclaim equality and respect within the Sikh religion.

Palbinder Kaur Shergill [ edit ] Palbinder Kaur Shergill is the first turbaned Sikh woman to be appointed as a judge in Canada. Shergill was born in Punjab , India and raised in Williams Lake, BC.

[ 20 ] She is a leading human-rights advocate and her extended family in Jalandhar, India, runs a non-profit computer and stitching centre for the poor.

[ 21 ] Shergill has provided pro-bono legal council to the World Sikh Organization (WSO) and has represented the WSO for several cases, including the right for Sikh youth to wear the Kirpan in schools. Previously to being appointed judge, Shergill ran her own boutique law firm in Surrey , BC. Shergill is an advisory board member on the Sikh Feminist Research Institute (SAFAR), and in 2012, was appointed Queen's Counsel for her community services.

[ 21 ] Jody Wilson-Raybould , the minister of justice and attorney general in Canada, appointed Shergill as judge for her human rights advocacy and leadership positions.

[ 22 ] Wearing a turban in the RCMP [ edit ] In 1988, a young Sikh man, Baltej Singh Dhillon , was recruited by the RCMP but was told if he wanted to work for them, he had to remove his turban. Dhillon refused, but the RCMP refused to change their rules, and in return denied him a post. In 1990, the government decided the ban was against the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , and enabled Dhillon to join the forces, which eventually turned into a long successful career for him. This sparked a political turmoil and groups like Alberta's Defenders of RCMP Tradition appeared, collecting more than 150,000 signatures opposing turbans in the RCMP. There were several failed right-winged attempts to change the law, and eventually the movement faded over time.

[ 23 ] Sikh Feminist Research Institute [ edit ] The Sikh Feminist Research Institute (SAFAR) is a non-profit organization based in North America committed to Sikh feminist research and activism. It was started in 2010 in Toronto , Canada, by Sikh women devoted to equality and education . Currently, they have programs all over Canada and hold conferences all over North America. They have four different programs which are committed to creating social equity through active conversation; these programs are: Our Journey Conference Series: This conference series explores several topics, relationships and practices through the viewpoint of Sikh feminists. The series is intended to create critical dialogue and engaging conversation about Sikhism and feminism.

Young Women's Leadership Conference Series: SAFAR teams up with schools to create a space for conversation and networking between young Sikh women and Sikh women leaders.

Kaurs Talk Politics: Kaurs Talk Politics (KTP) provides a space for Sikh women ( Kaurs ) to challenge Sikh history, and empower themselves through reclamation of socio-political agency and Sikh commitment to equality.

Book Club: the book club creates an online space for Sikh feminists to read, reflect and discuss the revolution of the Vasaikhi [ definition needed ] and its continued implications to equality, gender, and social and humanitarian justice.

[ 6 ] These programs create safe spaces for people to have conversations about politics and religion through a Sikh feminist perspective.

[ 24 ] Through their website, they also provide a valuable list of Sikh feminist reading material, as well as articles written by them and about them. Their articles are intended to challenge oppression and provide valuable information about Sikh movements, people, and history.

See also [ edit ] Sophia Duleep Singh Sikh feminists References [ edit ] ^ "BBC - Religions - Sikhism: Guru Nanak" . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "BBC - Religions - Sikhism: The Gurdwara" . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ a b c d Mahmood, Cynthia; Brady, Stacy (1999-12-31).

The Guru's Gift: An Ethnography Exploring Gender Equality with North American Sikh Women (1st ed.). Mountain View, Calif. u.a.: McGraw-Hill Humanities/Social Sciences/Languages.

ISBN 9780767417815 .

^ a b "Feminist Sikh claims religion ready for women leaders" .

Vancouver Sun . 2012-04-09 . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ Kaur Editorial, Kiman (August 5, 2015).

"Editorial: Fighting to End the War Against Womxn While Fighting for the Rights of Sikhs" .

www.india.com . Retrieved 2021-12-30 .

^ a b "SAFAR – The Sikh Feminist Research Institute – Research | Analysis | Praxis" .

www.sikhfeministresearch.org . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "Mai Bhago" .

The Female Soldier . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "Mai Bhago | Discover Sikhism" .

www.discoversikhism.com . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "Caste System In Sikh Community | SikhNet" .

SikhNet . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "Common Sikh names banned under Canada's immigration policy | CBC News" .

CBC . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ " 'Singh' ban denounced | Toronto Star" .

thestar.com . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "BBC - GCSE Bitesize: The langar and equality" . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "BBC - GCSE Bitesize: Homosexuality" . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "BBC - Ethics - Abortion: Female infanticide" . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "Study finds gender imbalance in children born to Indo-Canadian women" . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ "Sex Ratio at Birth Begins to Improve in India – Population Reference Bureau" .

www.prb.org . Retrieved 2018-04-09 .

^ Chaudhary, Vivek (2017-09-13).

"Why do Sikhs wear turbans? You asked Google – here's the answer | Vivek Chaudhary" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ Gupta, Rajeev (2016-02-14).

"Why are some Sikh women now wearing the turban?" .

BBC News . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ "Sikh Women And The Politics Of Hair | Feminism in India" .

Feminism in India . 2017-07-24 . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ "Sikhs celebrate B.C. woman's 'inspiring' appointment as first turbaned judge in Canada | CBC News" .

CBC . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ a b "Impressive Facts About Canada's 1st Turbaned Judge" .

HuffPost Canada . 2017-06-26 . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ "Palbinder Kaur Shergill becomes first turbaned Sikh woman to be appointed as SC judge in Canada" .

Hindustan Times . 2017-06-24 . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ "Turbans In The RCMP - Parli" .

Parli . 2015-10-15 . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

^ "UBC conference highlights feminism in Sikhism" .

Georgia Straight Vancouver's News & Entertainment Weekly . 2012-10-24 . Retrieved 2018-04-10 .

External links [ edit ] SAFAR - The Sikh Feminist Research Institute Portal : Feminism v t e Sikhism Glossary and History Gurus Guru Nanak Guru Angad Guru Amar Das Guru Ram Das Guru Arjan Guru Hargobind Guru Har Rai Guru Har Krishan Guru Tegh Bahadur Guru Gobind Singh Guru Granth Sahib (Sikh holy book) Philosophy Beliefs and principles Guru Maneyo Granth Sikh Rehat Maryada The 52 Hukams Prohibitions Cannabis and Sikhism Diet in Sikhism Practices Khalsa Sikh practices Sikh rites Ardās Kirtan Langar Naam Karan Anand Karaj Amrit Sanchar Amrit Velā Antam Sanskar Three Pillars Kirat Karo Naam Japo Vand Chhako The Five Ks Simran Sewa Charhdi Kala Dasvand Jhatka Scripture Guru Granth Sahib Dasam Granth Sarbloh Granth Gurbani Mul Mantar Japji Sahib Chaupai Jaap Sahib Rehras Sukhmani Sahib Tav-Prasad Savaiye Architecture Gurdwara Harmandir Sahib Janam Asthan Darbar Sahib Kartarpur List Africa Asia Europe North America Bahadurgarh Fort Fateh Burj Hazuri Bagh Baradari Kesgarh Qila Khanda museum Moti Bagh Palace Nanak Shahi bricks Pul Kanjri Qila Mubarak, Patiala Ramgarhia Bunga Samadhi of Ranjit Singh Well of Dina Nath By country Diaspora Afghanistan Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Canada Vancouver China Denmark Fiji Finland France Germany Greece India Jammu and Kashmir Kochi Punjab Indonesia Iran Iraq Italy Japan Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Niue Norway Pakistan Panama Poland Singapore South Africa South Korea Sweden Switzerland Thailand United Arab Emirates United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern Ireland United States U.S. Military Groups, sects and communities Sects of Sikhism Khalsa Mina Namdhari Nanakpanthi Nihang Nirankari Sewapanthi Nirmala Ramraiya Udasi Mazhabi Sikh Piara Singh Bhaniara Agrahari Sikh Jatha Damdami Taksal Akhand Kirtani Jatha Singh Sabha Contemporary Sant Mat movements 3HO Sikh Empire v t e Sikh Empire Rulers Ranjit Singh Kharak Singh Nau Nihal Singh Chand Kaur Sher Singh Jind Kaur Duleep Singh Military conflicts Mughal-Sikh Wars Battle of Bhangani Nadaun Basoli 1st Anandpur 2nd Anandpur Chamkaur Sarsa Muktsar Sonepat Samana Sirhind Sadhaura Chappar Chiri Rahon Lohgarh Jalalabad Jammu Gurdas Nangal Delhi Afghan–Sikh wars Battle of Attock Battle of Multan Battle of Shopian Battle of Nowshera Battle of Peshawar Battle of Jamrud First Anglo-Sikh War Battle of Mudki Battle of Ferozeshah Battle of Aliwal Battle of Sobraon Second Anglo-Sikh War Battle of Ramnagar Battle of Chillianwala Siege of Multan Battle of Gujrat Others Nepal–Sikh War , Sino-Sikh war , Katoch–Sikh War, Hill States–Sikh Wars, Panchayati Revolution , List of battles involving the Sikh Empire Military forces Sikh Khalsa Army Fauj-i-Khas Fauj-i-Ain Kampu-i-mu'alla Adversaries Mughal Empire Durrani Empire Emirate of Afghanistan British East India Company Kingdom of Nepal Qing Empire Hill States Alliance Kingdom of Mankera Namgyal dynasty Barakzai dynasty Sudhans of Poonch Maqpon Dynasty Forts Jamrud Fort Multan Fort Harkishangarh Lahore Fort Zorawar Fort Bahu Fort Gobindgarh Fort Phillaur Fort Firozpur Fort Officials and warriors Natives Dhian Singh Diwan Dina Nath Diwan Bhawani Das Diwan Buta Singh Pratap Singh Misr Diwan Chand Diwan Mulraj Hari Singh Nalwa Mahan Singh Mirpuri Dewan Mokham Chand Khushal Singh Jamadar Zorawar Singh Tej Singh Lal Singh Gulab Singh Balbhadra Kunwar Jawahar Singh Mehta Basti Ram Sham Singh Attariwalla Sher Singh Attariwalla Chattar Singh Attariwalla Desa Singh Majithia Amar Singh Majithia Lehna Singh Majithia Ranjodh Singh Majithia Surat Singh Majithia Mangal Singh Ramgarhia Akali Phula Singh Chandu Lal Ajit Singh Sandhawalia Kahan Singh Nakai Sangat Singh Saini Hukma Singh Veer Singh Jarnail Ghaus Khan Ilahi Bakhsh Fakir Azizuddin Sultan Mahmud Khan Malik Fateh Khan Tiwana Sohan Lal Suri Moti Ram Diwan Ram Dayal Diwan Kirpa Ram Foreigners Jean-François Allard Jean-Baptiste Ventura Claude Auguste Court François Henri Mouton Alexander Gardner Paolo Avitabile Josiah Harlan Johann Martin Honigberger Henry Lawrence Influential families Sandhawalia family Majithia family Tiwana family Mian family Treaties Treaty of Amritsar (1809) Tripartite Treaty (1838) Treaty of Chushul (1842) Treaty of Lahore (1846) Treaty of Amritsar (1846) Miscellaneous Khalsa Darbar records Festivals Bandi Chhor Divas Hola Mohalla Maghi Mela Maghi Vaisakhi Culture Art Music Films Literature Music Names Other topics History Ik Onkar Waheguru Khanda Panj Pyare Places Politics Sikhs in the British Indian Army 11th Sikh Regiment Sikh Regiment Sikh Light Infantry Nanakshahi calendar Ramananda Fariduddin Ganjshakar Kabir Sardar Dastar Dharamyudh Islam Jainism Hinduism Rama Sikhs Ravidassia Women in Sikhism Sikhism and sexual orientation In Fiction Idolatry in Sikhism Criticism Punjab History Punjabis Punjabi language ( Gurmukhī ) Sacred trees Takht Akal Takht Damdama Sahib Kesgarh Sahib Hazur Sahib Patna Sahib Outline Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sikh_feminism&oldid=1297966753 " Categories : Feminism and spirituality Sikhism and women Sikh feminists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from August 2021 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from June 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2021 This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 17:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sikh feminism 2 languages Add topic

