Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Zij-i Ilkhani 11 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша 日本語 Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval astronomical tables Zīj-i Īlkhānī ( Persian : زیجِ ایلخانی ) or Ilkhanic Tables (literal translation: "The Ilkhan Stars", after ilkhan Hulagu , who was the patron of the author at that time) is a Zij book with astronomical tables of planetary movements. It was compiled by the Muslim astronomer Nasir al-Din al-Tusi in collaboration with his research team of astronomers at the Maragha observatory . It was written in Persian and later translated into Arabic .

The book contains tables for calculating the positions of the planets and the names of the stars. It included data derived from the observations made over the course of 12 years in the Maragha observatory, completed in 1272.  The planetary positions of the Zij-i Ilkhani, derived from the zijs of Ibn al-A'lam and Ibn Yunus (10/11th cent. AD), were so faulty that later astronomers, such as al-Wabkanawi and Rukn al-Din al-Amuli , criticized it severely.

The Zīj-i Īlkhānī set the precession of the equinoxes at 51 arcseconds per year, which is very close to the modern value of 50.2 arcseconds.

[ 1 ] The book also describes a method of interpolation between the observed positions, which in modern terms may be described as a second-order interpolation scheme.

History [ edit ] Hulagu Khan believed that many of his military successes were due to the advice of astronomers (who were also astrologers ), especially of al-Tusi. Therefore, when al-Tusi complained that his astronomical tables were 250 years old, Hulagu gave permission to build a new observatory in a place of al-Tusi's choice (he chose Maragheh ). A number of other prominent astronomers worked with al-Tusi there, including Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi , Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi , Mu'ayyid al-Din al-'Urdi from Damascus . Furthermore, the influence of Chinese astronomy was brought by Fao Munji , whose astronomical experience brought improvements to Ptolemaic system used by al-Tusi; traces of the Chinese system may be seen in Zij-i Ilkhani . The tables were published during the reign of Abaqa Khan , Hulagu's son, and named after the patron of the observatory. They were popular until the 15th century.

Some Islamic astronomical tables such as the Zij-i Al-`Ala'i of Abd-Al-Karim al-Fahhad and the Zij al-Sanjari of al-Khazini were translated into Byzantine Greek by Gregory Chioniades and studied in the Byzantine Empire . Chioniades himself had studied under Shams ad-Din al-Bukhari , who had worked at the famous Maragheh observatory after the death of al-Tusi.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Zij Astronomy in medieval Islam Notes [ edit ] ^ Rufus, W. Carl (May 1939), "The Influence of Islamic Astronomy in Europe and the Far East", Popular Astronomy , 47 (5): 233–238 [236], Bibcode : 1939PA.....47..233R [1] ^ Joseph Leichter (June 27, 2009).

"The Zij as-Sanjari of Gregory Chioniades" .

Internet Archive . Retrieved 2009-10-02 .

References [ edit ] Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1272) Zij-i Ilkhani , British Museum , MS Or.7464.

J. A. Boyle (1963) "The Longer Introduction to the Zij-i Ilkhani of Nasir ad-Din Tusi", Journal of Semitic Studies 8(2), pp.244-254 Edward Stewart Kennedy (1956) "A Survey of Islamic Astronomical Tables", Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 46(2), pp. 3, 39-40.

Javad H. Zadeh (1985) "A Second Order Interpolation Scheme Described in the Zij-i Ilkhani ", Historia Mathematica 12: 56–59.

External links [ edit ] The Zij-i Ilkhani held by the Wellcome Collection in London v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zij-i_Ilkhani&oldid=1255525410 " Categories : 1272 books Astronomical tables Astronomical works of the medieval Islamic world 13th century in science 1270s in the Mongol Empire Ilkhanate 13th-century Persian books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 5 November 2024, at 11:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zij-i Ilkhani 11 languages Add topic

