Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Ideas Toggle Ideas subsection 2.1 Being of essence 2.2 Intentional distinction 2.3 Illumination 2.4 Scientific knowledge 3 Works Toggle Works subsection 3.1 Translations 4 Notes 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Henry of Ghent 20 languages Asturianu Български Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scholastic philosopher Henry of Ghent Born c.

1217 Died 29 June 1293 Philosophical work Era Ancient philosophy Region Western philosophy School Scholasticism Neoplatonism Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Henry of Ghent ( c.

1217 – 29 June 1293), also known as Henricus de Gandavo and Henricus Gandavensis , was a scholastic philosopher who acquired the nickname of Doctor Solemnis (the "Solemn Doctor").

Life [ edit ] Henry was born in the district of Mude, near Ghent . He is supposed to have belonged to an Italian family named Bonicolli, in Dutch Goethals , but the question of his name has been much discussed (see authorities below). He studied at Ghent and then at Cologne under Albertus Magnus . After obtaining the degree of doctor he returned to Ghent, and is said to have been the first to lecture there publicly on philosophy and theology .

[ 1 ] Attracted to Paris by the fame of the university , he took part in the many disputes between the orders and the secular priests, on the side of the latter.

[ 1 ] While Henry was a regent master at the University of Paris, the Condemnations of 1277 took place. The bishop of Paris, Stephen Tempier , promulgated a condemnation of some 219 propositions put forth by the masters of the Faculty of Theology.  Henry had a hand in the creation of these propositions and because of that he was summoned to the papal legate after a fellow Augustinian, Giles of Rome . The summons was supposed to change Henry's mind concerning Thomas Aquinas and his unicity thesis (which stated that the human soul, the substantial form of the body, is the undivided principle of the individual's life, sensitivity and rationality).

[ 2 ] Following the publication of the papal bull Ad fructus uberes by Pope Martin IV in 1281, Henry supported the secular clergy against the Mendicant Orders over the question of the 'reiteration of confession' (the obligation to confess to their parish priest, at least once a year, sins already confessed to a friar). Henry was engaged in this violent controversy for the rest of his life.  He died at Tournai (or Paris ).

Ideas [ edit ] Being of essence [ edit ] Henry argued that not only do individual creatures have a being corresponding to their essence - the being of essence or esse essentiae , they also have a 'somethingness' ( aliquitas ). The being created by God is not the being of actual existence , but the being of essence, also called esse latissimum (being in the widest sense), or esse communissimum , the most general form of being. The determination of essence respecting its being made actual is a delimitation, or specification, of that being. Thus, esse essentiae comes first, then comes esse aliquid per essentiam , being a something through essence, finally the whole essence thus made up is put into actuality.

Intentional distinction [ edit ] An intentional distinction is where the very same thing is expressed by different concepts in different ways ( Quodl . V, q. 12). Unlike a purely logical distinction, an intentional distinction always implies a sort of composition, although it is minor with regard to that implied by a distinction in reality.

For example, rational and animal , as they are found in man, is not a distinction of reason, since one is not a definition of the other. Nor is a real distinction, otherwise the conjunction of 'animal' and 'rational' in some particular person would be purely accidental ( per accidens ). Therefore, there must be some intermediate distinction, which Henry defines as 'intentional'. This principle was later developed by Scotus into the formal distinction .

Illumination [ edit ] Henry's doctrines are infused by a strong Platonism . He distinguished between knowledge of actual objects and the divine inspiration by which we cognize the being and existence of God. The first throws no light upon the second. Individuals are constituted not by the material element but by their independent existence, i.e. ultimately by the fact that they are created as separate entities.

Universals must be distinguished according as they have reference to our minds or to the divine mind. In the divine intelligence exist exemplars or types of the genera and species of natural objects.

[ 1 ] On this subject Henry is far from clear; but he defends Plato against the current Aristotelian criticism, and endeavours to show that the two views are in harmony. In psychology, his view of the intimate union of soul and body is remarkable. The body he regards as forming part of the substance of the soul, which through this union is more perfect and complete.

[ 1 ] Scientific knowledge [ edit ] Henry's standards for truth exceeded what is now commonly accepted in science . Following closely Aristotle's Posterior Analytics , he demanded that "First, it must be certain, i.e. exclusive of deception and doubt; secondly, it must be of a necessary object; thirdly, it must be produced by a cause that is evident to the intellect; fourthly, it must be applied to the object by a syllogistic reasoning process". He thus excluded from the realm of the knowable anything about contingent objects. In this respect he was contradicted by his younger contemporary Duns Scotus .

[ 3 ] Works [ edit ] Works by Henry of Ghent include: Quodlibeta Theologica (Paris, 1518; Venice, 1608 and 1613), a quodlibeta .

Summae quaestionum ordinarium (Paris, 1520; Ferrara, 1646).

Henrici de Gandavo Opera Omnia Leuven: Leuven University Press, 1979 sqq.

Syncategoremata Henrico de Gandavo adscripta edited by H.A.G. Braakhuis , Girard J. Etzkorn, Gordon Wilson. With an introduction by H.A.G. Braakhuis; Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2010.

A work mistakenly attributed to Henry of Ghent is the Affligem Catalogus virorum illustrium , first published in De scriptoribus ecclesiasticis (ed. Suffridus Petri) (Cologne, 1580).

Translations [ edit ] Henry of Ghent's Summa of Ordinary Questions. Article One: On the Possibility of Knowing Translation with an introduction and notes by Roland J. Teske , S.J. South Bend, St. Augustine Press, 2008.

ISBN 1-58731-359-6 .

Henry of Ghent's Summa: The Questions on Human Knowledge: (Articles 2-5) . Translation, introduction and notes by Juan Carlos Flores, Louvain and Paris: Peeters, 2021.

ISBN 978-90-429-4557-9 .

Henry of Ghent's "Summa": The Questions on God's Existence and Essence (Articles 21-24) . Translation by Jos Decorte (†) and Roland J. Teske, S.J. Latin Text, Introduction, and Notes by Roland J. Teske, S.J. ( Dallas Medieval Texts and Translations 5). Louvain/Paris: Peeters, 2005.

ISBN 978-90-429-1590-9 .

Henry of Ghent's "Summa": The Questions on God's Unity and Simplicity (Articles 25-30) . Latin Text, Introduction, Translation, and Notes by Roland J. Teske, S.J. ( Dallas Medieval Texts and Translations 6). Louvain and Paris: Peeters, 2006.

ISBN 978-90-429-1811-5 .

Juan Carlos Flores, Henry of Ghent: Metaphysics and the Trinity; with a Critical Edition of Question Six of Article Fifty-Five of the Summa Quaestionum Ordinariarum , Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2006.

Henry of Ghent, Quodlibetal Questions on Free Will.

translated by Roland J. Teske, Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1993.

ISBN 9780585141206 Henry of Ghent, Quodlibetal Questions on Moral Problems , translated by Roland J. Teske, Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 2005.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Henry of Ghent ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 13 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 298.

^ Wilson, Gordon A. (2011).

A Companion to Henry of Ghent . The Netherlands: Brill. pp.

25– 32.

ISBN 978-90-04-18349-0 .

^ Hugh G. Gauch (2003).

Scientific method in practice . Cambridge University Press. pp. 52 and 57.

ISBN 978-0-521-01708-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Flores J. C., Henry of Ghent: Metaphysics and the Trinity , Leuven: Leuven University Press 2006.

Gracia, J.E. & Noone, T., A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages , Malden: Blackwell, 2003.

Marrone S.

Truth and Scientific Knowledge in the Thought of Henry of Ghent , Cambridge: Medieval Academy of America, 1985.

Wilson G. A., (ed.) A Companion to Henry of Ghent , Leiden: Brill 2011.

External links [ edit ] Porro, Pasquale.

"Henry of Ghent" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Henry of Ghent" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Henry of Ghent , Website of the University of North Carolina with the plan of the Critical Edition and many works available in PDF format.

Friedrich Wilhelm Bautz (1990). "Heinrich von Gent". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 2. Hamm: Bautz. cols. 675–676.

ISBN 3-88309-032-8 .

v t e Medieval philosophers Christian Early " Church Fathers " Augustine of Hippo Boethius Cassiodorus Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Isidore of Seville John Scotus Eriugena Alcuin 11–12th century " Scholasticism " Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard Anselm of Laon Hugh of Saint Victor Richard of Saint Victor Roscelin Peter Lombard Alexander of Hales Bernard of Chartres Dominicus Gundissalinus Gilbert de la Porrée Alain de Lille 13–14th century Robert Grosseteste Michael Scot Albertus Magnus Henry of Ghent Roger Bacon Bonaventure Thomas Aquinas Vitello John Peckham Ramon Llull Siger of Brabant Boetius of Dacia Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt Meister Eckhart Giles of Rome Godfrey of Fontaines Duns Scotus Durandus Petrus Aureolus William of Ockham Late Jean Buridan Marsilius of Inghen Nicole Oresme Albert of Saxony Francesc Eiximenis Nicholas of Cusa Vincent Ferrer Paul of Venice Lambertus de Monte John Hennon Jewish Medieval Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Saadia Gaon Solomon ibn Gabirol Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Maimonides Nachmanides Gersonides Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Islamic Early Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber) al-Nazzam Al-Kindi (Alkindus) Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity) Matta ibn Yunus Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ibn Masarra Abd al-Jabbar Al-Amiri Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani Miskawayh Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) al-Biruni al-Kirmani High Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Ibn Hazm Al-Ghazali (Algazel) Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Rushd (Averroes) Late Ibn Sab'in Shahab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Rashid al-Din Ibn Arabi al-Qazwini Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Athir al-Din al-Abhari Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Nafis Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Khaldun See also Renaissance philosophy v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Spain 2 Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_of_Ghent&oldid=1300173649 " Categories : 1217 births 1293 deaths 13th-century people from the county of Flanders Flemish philosophers Writers from Ghent Catholic philosophers Scholastic philosophers 13th-century philosophers 13th-century Roman Catholic priests 13th-century Roman Catholic theologians Roman Catholic writers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 17:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henry of Ghent 20 languages Add topic

