Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 History 3 Alternatives 4 Ice bridging 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Deicing boot 5 languages فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ice protection system installed on aircraft The black rubber deicing boot on the wing of a Bombardier Dash 8 Q400 passenger aircraft is inflated with air, producing ridges to crack and dislodge any accumulated ice.

Operation of deicing boots De-icing rubber boots on the wing leading edge of a Beechcraft 350 A deicing boot is a type of ice protection system installed on aircraft surfaces to permit a mechanical deicing in flight. Such boots are generally installed on the leading edges of wings and control surfaces (e.g.

horizontal and vertical stabilizer ) as these areas are most likely to accumulate ice which could severely affect the aircraft's performance.

Design [ edit ] A deicing boot consists of a thick rubber membrane that is installed over the surface to be deiced. As atmospheric icing occurs and ice builds up, a pneumatic system inflates the boot with compressed air. This expansion in size cracks any ice that has accumulated, and this ice is blown away into the airflow. The boots are then deflated to return the wing or surface to its optimal shape.

Boots require proper care. Holes in the boot may create air leaks that will decrease the effectiveness of the boots. As such, boots must be carefully inspected before each flight and any holes or cuts must be patched.

History [ edit ] Deicing boots were invented by the B.F. Goodrich Corporation in about 1929–1930 in Akron, Ohio . The work was begun by retired Ph.D chemist, William C. Geer .  In its quest to develop deicing boots, the company built a large indoor facility in Akron to replicate bad weather and icing on aircraft wings.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Alternatives [ edit ] The use of deicing boots may enable an aircraft to be certified for flight into known icing conditions. However, they may not be sufficient to handle extremely severe icing, where ice can accumulate faster than the boots can shed it, or it accumulates on non-booted surfaces to the point where there is a dangerous loss of lift or control, or increase in weight.

Deicing boots are most commonly seen on medium-sized airliners and utility aircraft. Larger airliners and military jets tend to use heating systems within the wing, keeping it constantly warm and preventing ice from forming. Sources of heat include: Bleed air systems use high-temperature, compressed air from the engine compressor sections, and duct it towards the sections to be de-iced where it delivers its heat before being released into the airflow.

Electrothermal systems pass electric current through resistive parts, usually the leading edges themselves. These systems require substantial electrical power and are generally used on large aircraft, such as the 787 . Resistive deicing may also be applied to propeller and helicopter rotor blades.

Ice bridging [ edit ] 'Ice bridging' is the theory that activating deicing boots early may lead to a condition where slushy ice is pushed into a hollow shell around the inflated boot, then freezes in place. This shell can then no longer be dislodged by any further operation of the boot. Bridging was described by the aviation writer Ernest Gann in his memoir Fate Is the Hunter .

The bridging theory is now disputed. In 2008 the NTSB issued an alert [ 4 ] that pilots should, "activate boots as soon as the airplane enters icing conditions".

[ 5 ] Their claim was that bridging was "extremely rare, if it exists at all" and that there were no instances where it had led to an accident. Unwarranted fear of ice bridging contributed to the fatal crash of Comair Flight 3272 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Artificial Blizzards Help To Protect Planes" .

Popular Mechanics . February 1931. p. 234 – via Google Books.

Illustration of blizzard machine and how de-icing boots work.

^ "Overshoes For Planes End Ice Danger" .

Popular Science . November 1931. p. 28 – via Google Books.

^ Leary, William M. (2002).

We Freeze to Please: A History of NASA's Icing Research Tunnel and the Quest for Flight Safety . Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration. p. 10.

OCLC 49558649 .

^ "Activate Leading Edge Deice Boots As Soon as Airplane Enters Icing Conditions" (PDF) .

National Transportation Safety Board . SA-014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 April 2021.

^ Thurber, Matt (28 January 2009).

"De-icing:NTSB: 'ice bridging' is a myth" .

AIN online .

External links [ edit ] Investigations of Performance of Pneumatic Deicing Boots, Surface Ice Detectors, and Scaling of Intercycle Ice , FAA report, November 2006 NTSB Warns Pilots To Use De-Icing Boots Early, AVWeb,  Dec 2008 Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine v t e Aircraft components and systems Airframe structure Aft pressure bulkhead Cabane strut Canopy Crack arrestor Cruciform tail Dope Empennage Fabric covering Fairing Flying wires Former Fuselage Hardpoint Interplane strut Jury strut Leading edge Lift strut Longeron Nacelle Rib Spar Stabilizer Stressed skin Strut T-tail Tailplane Trailing edge Triple tail Twin tail V-tail Vertical stabilizer Wing root Wing tip Wingbox Flight controls Aileron Airbrake Artificial feel Autopilot Canard Centre stick Deceleron Dive brake Dual control Electro-hydraulic actuator Elevator Elevon Flaperon Flight control modes Fly-by-wire Gust lock HOTAS Rudder Rudder pedals Servo tab Side-stick Spoiler Spoileron Stabilator Stick pusher Stick shaker Trim tab Wing warping Yaw damper Yoke Aerodynamic and high-lift devices Active Aeroelastic Wing Adaptive compliant wing Anti-shock body Blown flap Channel wing Dog-tooth Drag-reducing aerospike Flap Gouge flap Gurney flap Krueger flap Leading-edge cuff Leading-edge droop flap LEX Slats Slot Stall strips Strake Variable-sweep wing Vortex generator Vortilon Wing fence Winglet Avionic and flight instrument systems ACAS Air data boom Air data computer Aircraft periscope Airspeed indicator Altimeter Annunciator panel Astrodome Attitude indicator Compass Course deviation indicator EFIS EICAS Flight management system Glass cockpit GPS Head-up display Heading indicator Horizontal situation indicator INS ISIS Multi-function display Pitot–static system Radar altimeter TCAS Transponder Turn and slip indicator Variometer Yaw string Propulsion controls, devices and fuel systems Autothrottle Drop tank FADEC Fuel tank Gascolator Inlet cone Intake ramp NACA cowling NACA duct Self-sealing fuel tank Splitter plate Throttle Thrust lever Thrust reversal Townend ring War emergency power Wet wing Landing and arresting gear Aircraft tire Arrestor hook Autobrake Conventional landing gear Drogue parachute Landing gear Landing gear extender Oleo strut Tricycle landing gear Tundra tire Escape systems Ejection seat Escape crew capsule Other systems Aircraft lavatory Auxiliary power unit Bleed air system Deicing boot Emergency oxygen system Environmental control system Flight recorder Hydraulic system Ice protection system In-flight entertainment system Landing lights Navigation light Passenger service unit Ram air turbine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deicing_boot&oldid=1204945081 " Category : Aircraft ice protection systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 8 February 2024, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deicing boot 5 languages Add topic

