Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Decline in use 3 Possum skin cloaks today 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Possum-skin cloak 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Clothing worn by Aboriginal people in the south-east of Australia Sewn and incised possum-skin cloak of Gunditjmara origin (Melbourne Museum) Possum-skin cloaks were a form of clothing worn by Aboriginal people in the south-east of Australia – present-day Victoria , South Australia and New South Wales . In Western Australia , Buka cloak was worn. They are made from pelts of various possum species.

The cloaks were made from numerous possum pelts sewn together with kangaroo sinew , and often decorated with significant incisions on the inside such as clan insignias. They were rubbed with mixture of resin, ochre and fat to both decorate and protect them.

As well as being a significant means of keeping warm in this often chilly part of Australia, there was much importance around the making of the cloaks and their wearing. They were handed down through generations as heirlooms . As with most Australian Aboriginal belongings, there were many uses for the one thing – the cloaks were also used as blankets, mattresses and to wrap babies.

History [ edit ] Aboriginal men in Victoria with war implements (c. 1883) by Fred Kruger A group of Aboriginal men in possum skin cloaks and blankets in 1858 at Penshurst in Victoria In the 1800s Governor Lachlan Macquarie , after inspecting the recently forged road across the Blue Mountains west of Sydney , wrote about meeting some members of the Wiradjuri at the Bathurst camp: They were all clothed with Mantles made of the skins of o'possums which were very neatly sewn together and the outside of the skins were carved in a remarkably neat manner. They appear to be very inoffensive and cleanly in their persons.

[ 1 ] The warm and weather-proof possum skin cloaks were also recognised and appreciated by European settlers in the outback, where they became a highly regarded personal item.  Alexander Harris describes one as follows from his personal knowledge in the early 1830s: ... the opossum [of a large species] trapped by the wandering shepherd for amusement, as he follows his flock along by the woodside, furnish the material for a blanket [or cloak, to use the phrase of the country]  of the most luxurious, furry softness.  Sixty-three [9 x 7] of these skins are the stated complement for one blanket or cloak; when made it is large enough doubled to envelope a tall man completely beyond head and feet. As a bed and blanket in one, there is, I suppose, nothing on earth that surpasses it, whilst as a protection against a day's rain it is as efficacious as a roof of a house.

[ 2 ] They are also reasonably common in accounts of the gold rush period of the mid-19th century, but gradually became rarities, and restricted to observations of Aboriginal people encountered on the margins of white settlement.

Decline in use [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) As Aboriginal people were dispossessed of their land, the making and wearing of cloaks became rarer. In addition, white missionaries and others were very efficient in the distribution of clothing and blankets to Aboriginal communities which, over a few generations, caused the tradition of possum skin cloak making to die out.

Possum skin cloaks today [ edit ] Figures in possum-skin cloaks, 1898 by Aboriginal artist William Barak Two possum-skin cloaks are in Museum Victoria 's collection. One, which dates from 1853, is made from 83 possum skins. There are also cloaks at the National Museum of Australia in Canberra , as well as four in overseas collections.

[ 3 ] The Krowathunkooloong Keeping Place , a museum of the Gunaikurnai nation in Bairnsdale in regional Victoria, also has possum skin cloaks on display; in the Gunai language they were called batha maruk .

[ 4 ] A recent book, Wrapped in a Possum Skin Cloak , by Amanda Reynolds, Debra Couzens, Vicki Couzens, Lee Darroch and Treahna Hamm, tells the story of some south-eastern Aboriginal people, two Gunditjmara women and two Yorta Yorta women, who set out in 1999 to relearn the lost craft of possum-skin cloak-making.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Buka cloak References [ edit ] ^ Elder, Bruce , Blood on the Wattle: Massacres and maltreatment of Aboriginal Australians since 1788 , New Holland Publishers (Australia) Pty Ltd, Frenchs Forest, 1988, ISBN 1-86436-410-6 p 51 ^ Harris 1961 pp. 129-30 ^ "ISX Forums: Indigenous Business focusing on Arts and Culture: Wrapped in a Possum Skin Cloak" . Archived from the original on 21 October 2009 . Retrieved 30 November 2006 .

^ "Krowathunkooloong, Brabawooloong Country, The Keeping Place (Bairnsdale)" .

Bataluk Cultural Trail website . Gippsland and East Gippsland Aboriginal Co-operative . Retrieved 27 February 2013 .

^ Reynolds, Amanda Jane, Wrapped in a Possum Skin Cloak , National Museum of Australia, 2005 Archived 2011-02-25 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 1-876944-36-6 Further reading [ edit ] Harris, Alexander. The secrets of Alexander Harris: a frank autobiography by the author of Settlers and Convicts, Angus + Robertson, Sydney (1961) "Possum skin cloak" .

AIATSIS . 9 July 2022.

External links [ edit ] Reproduction of a possum skin cloak collected in 1872 from Lake Condah, National Museum of Australia National Quilt Register National Gallery of Victoria exhibition, including a large painting of Wurundjeri in possum-skin cloaks John So, Lord Mayor of Melbourne in a traditional Wurundjeri possum-skin cloak (Jiawei Shen, 2005 Archibald Prize Finalist) Culture Victoria: a series of video interviews and portraits of Elders in Victoria wearing possum skin cloaks Making an Aboriginal possum skin cloak, ABC Newcastle Cloaking the Aboriginal Past, NY Times, June 5, 2012 Ancient Traditions, New Stories: Reviving the Aboriginal Possum Skin Cloak, Aviva Shen, Smithsonian.com, June 27, 2012 Smithsonian NMNH Department of Anthropology possum cloak v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Possum-skin_cloak&oldid=1283339295 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal clothing Robes and cloaks Bedding Quilting Australian inventions History of Oceanian clothing Fur Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2018 Articles needing additional references from June 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 31 March 2025, at 22:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Possum-skin cloak 1 language Add topic

