Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Italic script 4 languages Català Deutsch Íslenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of handwriting and calligraphy developed in Italy This article is about the calligraphic and handwriting style. For other uses, see Old Italic scripts and Italic type .

Example page of the "Italique Hande" from a copy of A booke containing diuers sortes of hands...

first published in 1570.

Italic script , also known as chancery cursive and Italic hand , is a semi- cursive , slightly sloped style of handwriting and calligraphy that was developed during the Renaissance in Italy . It is one of the most popular styles used in contemporary Western calligraphy.

History [ edit ] One of the innovations of Niccoli's Italic script was the major change to the Humanist minuscule a .

Italic script is based largely on Humanist minuscule , which itself draws on Carolingian minuscule . The capital letters are the same as the Humanist capitals, modeled on Roman square capitals . The Italian scholar Niccolò de' Niccoli was dissatisfied with the lowercase forms of Humanist minuscule, finding it too slow to write. In response, he created the Italic script, which incorporates features and techniques characteristic of a quickly written hand: oblique forms, fewer strokes per character, and the joining of letters. Perhaps the most significant change to any single character was to the form of the a , which he simplified from the two-story form to the one-story form ⟨ɑ⟩ now common to most handwriting styles.

Under the influence of Italic movable type used with printing presses , the style of handwritten Italic script moved toward disjoined, more mannered characters. By the 1550s the Italic script had become so laborious that it fell out of use with scribes.

The style became increasingly influenced by the development of Copperplate writing styles in the eighteenth century. The style of Italic script used today is often heavily influenced by developments made as late as the early 20th century. In the past few decades, the italic script has been promoted in English-speaking countries as an easier-to-learn alternative to traditional styles of cursive handwriting.

In the UK this revival was due in part to the 19th-century artist William Morris .

[ citation needed ] In 1905 Monica Bridges ’ book, A New Handwriting for Teachers was published.

[ 1 ] She was a skilled calligrapher and this book is credited with making italic handwriting fashionable in British schools.

[ 2 ] Edward Johnston 's book Writing & Illumination & Lettering was published in 1906, Alfred Fairbank 's book A Handwriting Manual in 1932 and the Dryad Writing Cards in 1935. These Dryad cards were used for teaching young school children to write an italic hand.

[ citation needed ] Italics script is considered one of the best examples of Latin cursive writing, and had a great influence on the calligraphic styles that followed throughout Europe. It was developed at a time when the spread of printing technology had already decreed the fall into disuse of manuscript books, consequently shifting the calligraphic attention from the books to the production of single papers and documents, for which handwriting remained an irreplaceable tool. For these needs, it was necessary to write faster than how humanistic script originally allowed, yet just as elegantly, hence the birth of the Italic script with a thinner and slightly inclined style that made it adaptable to more rapid execution. This period also gave birth to the first treatises on calligraphy: among them stands out "La Operina" by Ludovico Vicentino degli Arrighi (c.1475-c.1527).

A modern version called Getty-Dubay Italic was introduced in 1976.

See also [ edit ] Writing portal Asemic writing Bastarda Blackletter Book hand Calligraphy Chancery hand Court hand (also known as common law hand, Anglicana, cursiva antiquior, or charter hand) Cursive Hand (writing style) Handwriting History of writing Law hand Palaeography Penmanship Ronde script (calligraphy) Rotunda (script) Round hand Secretary hand References [ edit ] ^ "A New Handwriting for Teachers. by M. M. [Mary Monica] Bridges: Good Hardcover (1905) Signed by Author(s) | Book Alley" .

www.abebooks.co.uk . Retrieved 2023-03-17 .

^ Phillips, Catherine (2004-09-23).

"Bridges, Robert Seymour (1844–1930), poet" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 1 (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/32066 .

ISBN 978-0-19-861412-8 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) Further reading [ edit ] Harris, David (1995).

The Art of Calligraphy .

DK Publishing, Inc .

ISBN 0-670-86270-3 .

Mehigan, Janet; Mary Noble (1999).

Beginner's Guide to Calligraphy . Quarto Publishing plc.

ISBN 0-7858-1934-7 .

External links [ edit ] Latin-alphabet handwriting at Encyclopædia Britannica v t e Types of handwritten European scripts Ancient and medieval Roman Rustic Uncial Visigothic Merovingian Carolingian Insular script Beneventan Blackletter Rotunda Bastarda Georgian Greek Early Cyrillic Ustav Poluustav Serbian Cyrillic Bosančica Glagolitic Angular Court hand Lombardic Modern Cursive Chancery Johannine Humanist Italic Round Secretary Library Technical lettering Copperplate Spencerian Ronde Kurrent Russian cursive Skoropis ( Ukrainian skoropys ) Shorthand Teaching scripts Barchowsky Fluent Handwriting D'Nealian Getty-Dubay Italic Grundschrift Palmer Sütterlin Vereinfachte Ausgangsschrift Zaner-Bloser Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Italic_script&oldid=1265546777 " Categories : Latin-script calligraphy Handwriting script Western calligraphy Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 27 December 2024, at 12:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Italic script 4 languages Add topic

