Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins 1.2 Interwar period and World War II 1.3 Cold War 1.4 Post Cold War 2 Reserve service today 3 Importance to the Active Army 4 Current active reserve formations and units Toggle Current active reserve formations and units subsection 4.1 Headquarters commands 4.2 Functional commands 4.3 Geographic commands 4.4 Training commands 5 Individual Ready Reserve 6 Retired Reserve 7 Other components 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Army Reserve 12 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Polski Português Simple English Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Officers Reserve Corps ) Reserve force of the United States Army United States Army Reserve Seal of the U.S. Army Reserve Founded 23 April 1908 ; 117 years ago ( 1908-04-23 ) (as Medical Reserve Corps) Country United States Branch United States Army Size 188,703 reserve members [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Part of United States Department of the Army Reserve components of the United States Armed Forces Garrison/HQ Fort Bragg , North Carolina , U.S.

Website www .usar .army .mil Commanders Chief LTG Robert Harter Deputy Chief MG Deborah Kotulich Command Chief Warrant Officer CW5 LaShon P. White Command Sergeant Major CSM Gregory Betty Military unit The United States Army Reserve ( USAR ) is a reserve force of the United States Army . Together, the Army Reserve and the Army National Guard constitute the Army element of the reserve components of the United States Armed Forces .

History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] On 23 April 1908 Congress created the Medical Reserve Corps, the official predecessor of the Army Reserve.

[ 3 ] After World War I , under the National Defense Act of 1920 , Congress reorganized the U.S. land forces by authorizing a Regular Army , a National Guard and an Organized Reserve (Officers Reserve Corps and Enlisted Reserve Corps) of unrestricted size, which later became the Army Reserve.

[ 4 ] This organization provided a peacetime pool of trained Reserve officers and enlisted men for use in war. The Organized Reserve included the Officers Reserve Corps, Enlisted Reserve Corps and Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC).

Interwar period and World War II [ edit ] The Organized Reserve infantry divisions raised immediately after World War I generally continued the lineage and geographic area distribution of National Army divisions that had served in the war. They were maintained on paper with a maximum of all of their officers and one-third of their enlisted men. Units in other arms of the Army besides infantry were also maintained, such as field artillery , coast artillery , cavalry , engineers , medical , signal , quartermaster , and ordnance . In March 1926, the War Department authorized the manning of Regular Army units being maintained in an "inactive" status with Organized Reserve officers, eliminating the previously used "Active Affiliate" program for these units. Nearly all "Regular Army Inactive" (RAI) infantry regiments and many other units were "affiliated" with Reserve Officers Training Corps (ROTC) units in their vicinity. The professor of military science and tactics at the school or the senior Regular Army officer of the unit's branch assigned to the ROTC program served as the unit commander, and the unit was populated with graduates of the program. By 1 October 1933, command of all RAI units had been turned over to Reserve officers. A number of the affiliations became defunct throughout the 1930s, but RAI units were among the most active in the Reserve.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The ultimate use of Organized Reserve units and personnel remained unclear in the interwar period. While Army regulations stated that "The ultimate objective in training units of the Organized Reserve in time of peace is to provide partially trained units which may be readily expanded to war strength and completely trained in time of emergency," historian William J. Woolley wrote that, "The question of whether reserve units were to be chiefly concerned with mobilizing and training a conscripted citizen army or were to be contingents of a nearly ready combat force was never resolved in the 1930s, and reforms in training efforts often shifted between one and the other of the two objectives." Service in the Organized Reserve during the interwar period was not as appealing as the Army expected, and suffered because of limited funding that restricted training opportunities. Weekly inactive training drills were unpaid, and the average Organized Reserve officer was ordered to active duty for two weeks of paid training only once every three or four years; some officers trained nearly every year, to the detriment of others who had to wait as long as seven years between training opportunities. Turnover in the Officers' Reserve Corps was high, as many men in mandatory ROTC had little interest in military affairs, and allowed their five-year commissions to expire without applying for reappointment. By the beginning of the 1930s, ROTC graduates became the single largest cohort of officers in the Officers' Reserve Corps.

[ 7 ] Enlisted Reserve Corps (ERC) identification, 1942.

The original Regular Army Reserve, established in 1916 but abolished in 1920, had chiefly been manned by the reenlistment of former Regular Army soldiers or National Guardsmen, but the small annual stipend as an incentive for joining was not included in the Enlisted Reserve Corps (ERC). Another problem with the Enlisted Reserve Corps was the few avenues through which someone could join. Enlistment in the ERC was restricted to those men "who have had such military or technical training as may be prescribed by regulations of the Secretary of War." One means to join the ERC was through the ROTC or Citizens Military Training Camps (CMTC). If a man had completed at least one year in ROTC, or had completed one 4-week CMTC camp, he could also enlist in the ERC. Each year of participation in ROTC and completion of each CMTC camp earned the participant promotions in the ERC. Some enlisted reservists went on to receive commissions in a few years, thus leaving the ranks of the ERC. The final way one could enter the ERC was if he (or she, in the case of nurses) possessed skills needed by the Army that required no prior military training, such as nursing, railroad occupations, certain communications fields, and music. Interestingly, a substantial number of enlisted reservists in the interwar period, at least into the early 1930s, were bandsmen. Because of these restrictions, the ERC maintained an average strength of only about 3,500 men and women, and never more than 6,000 at any time from 1919 to 1941; most divisions reached their full complement of officers but had less than 100 enlisted men.

[ 8 ] The extent of the U.S. Army's mobilization before its involvement in World War II—“a state neither of war nor of peace"—disrupted the Organized Reserve. Beginning in mid-1940, large numbers of Reserve officers began to be called to active duty individually and assigned to expanding Regular Army units, and to National Guard units after the mobilization of that component was authorized in August. On 30 June 1940, 2,710 Reserve officers were on active duty, but by 15 May 1941, the number was over 46,000, and by 30 June, 57,309. The need for young, qualified company-grade officers (lieutenants and captains) was acute, and by mid-1941, 75 to 90 percent of the officers in Regular Army units and 10 percent in National Guard units were Reserve officers. By December 1941, 80,000 Reserve officers were on active duty. By the end of 1942, 140,000 officers holding Reserve commissions through various paths were on active duty, but by that date, 12,100 who had been previously commissioned "had not received such orders," mainly for reasons like being over-age in grade, found medically disqualified for active service, deferred due to academics or civilian employment, or lack of vacancies.

On 6 February 1942, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9049, which ordered "into the active military service of the United States...for the duration of the present war and for six months after the termination thereof...each of the organizations and units and all of the personnel of the Organized Reserve not already in such service;" because most Reserve officers were already on sctive duty, this amounted to a “public relations” document. Because of the course of the mobilization of 1940–1941, "few of the Reserve officers originally assigned to...units were available for duty with them. Consequently, the units as activated bore small resemblance to those of peacetime." [ 9 ] The order and timetable in which Organized Reserve infantry divisions were ordered to active duty was based upon the number of World War I battle honors earned (if applicable), the location and availability of training sites, and the ability of the Army to furnish divisional cadres and filler replacements.

Division States Represented in Interwar Period Ordered Into Active Military Service Campaign Participation Credit 76th Infantry Division Connecticut , Rhode Island 15 June 1942, Fort George G. Meade, Maryland Rhineland , Ardennes-Alsace , Central Europe 77th Infantry Division New York 25 March 1942, Fort Jackson, South Carolina Western Pacific , Southern Philippines , Ryukyus 78th Infantry Division Delaware , New Jersey 15 August 1942, Camp Butner, North Carolina Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 79th Infantry Division Pennsylvania 15 June 1942, Camp Pickett, Virginia Normandy , Northern France , Rhineland , Central Europe 80th Infantry Division Maryland , Virginia , Washington, D.C.

15 July 1942, Camp Forrest, Tennessee Normandy, Northern France, Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace , Central Europe 81st Infantry Division North Carolina , Tennessee 15 June 1942, Camp Rucker, Alabama Western Pacific, Southern Philippines 82nd Airborne Division Florida , Georgia , South Carolina 25 March 1942, Camp Claiborne, Louisiana Sicily , Naples-Foggia , Normandy, Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 83rd Infantry Division Ohio 15 August 1942, Camp Atterbury, Indiana Normandy, Northern France, Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 84th Infantry Division Kentucky 15 August 1942, Camp Howze, Texas Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 85th Infantry Division Michigan 15 May 1942, Camp Shelby, Mississippi Rome-Arno , North Apennines , Po Valley 86th Infantry Division Illinois 15 December 1942, Camp Howze, Texas Central Europe 87th Infantry Division Alabama , Louisiana , Mississippi 15 December 1942, Camp McCain, Mississippi Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 88th Infantry Division Iowa , Minnesota , North Dakota 15 July 1942, Camp Gruber, Oklahoma Rome-Arno, North Apennines, Po Valley 89th Infantry Division Kansas , Nebraska , South Dakota 5 July 1942, Camp Carson, Colorado Rhineland, Central Europe 90th Infantry Division Texas 25 March 1942, Camp Barkeley, Texas Normandy, Northern France, Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 91st Infantry Division California 15 August 1942, Camp White, Oregon Rome-Arno, North Apennines, Po Valley 94th Infantry Division Massachusetts 15 September 1942, Camp Custer, Michigan Northern France, Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 95th Infantry Division Oklahoma 15 July 1942, Camp Swift, Texas Northern France, Rhineland, Central Europe 96th Infantry Division Oregon , Washington 15 August 1942, Camp Adair, Oregon Leyte , Southern Philippines, Ryukyus 97th Infantry Division Maine , New Hampshire , Vermont 25 February 1943, Camp Swift, Texas Central Europe 98th Infantry Division New York 15 September 1942, Camp Breckinridge, Kentucky No combat 99th Infantry Division Pennsylvania 15 November 1942, Camp Van Dorn, Mississippi Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 100th Infantry Division Kentucky , West Virginia 15 November 1942, Fort Jackson, South Carolina Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe 102nd Infantry Division Arkansas , Missouri 15 September 1942, Camp Maxey, Texas Rhineland, Central Europe 103rd Infantry Division Arizona , Colorado , New Mexico 15 November 1942, Camp Claiborne, Louisiana Ardennes-Alsace, Rhineland, Central Europe 104th Infantry Division Idaho , Montana , Nevada .

Utah , Wyoming 15 September 1942, Camp Adair, Oregon Rhineland, Ardennes-Alsace, Central Europe The 101st Infantry Division was designated a division of the Organized Reserve after World War I and assigned to the state of Wisconsin; unlike the 82nd Airborne Division , the Reserve division was disbanded when the 101st Airborne Division was raised in the Army of the United States on 15 August 1942.

Cold War [ edit ] A tentative troop basis for the Organized Reserve Corps (ORC), prepared in March 1946, outlined 25 divisions: three armored, five airborne, and 17 infantry.

[ 10 ] These divisions and all other Organized Reserve Corps units were to be maintained in one of three strength categories, labeled Class A, Class B, and Class C. Class A units were divided into two groups, one for combat and one for service, and units were to be at required table of organization strength; Class B units were to have their full complement of officers and enlisted cadre strength; and Class C were to have officers only. The troop basis listed nine divisions as Class A, nine as Class B, and seven as Class C.

Major General Ray E. Porter therefore proposed reclassification of all Class A divisions as Class B units. Eventually the War Department agreed and made the appropriate changes. Although the dispute over Class A units lasted several months, the War Department proceeded with the reorganization of the Organized Reserve Corps divisions during the summer of 1946. That all divisions were to begin as Class C (officers only) units, progressing to the other categories as men and equipment became available, undoubtedly influenced the decision. Also, the War Department wanted to take advantage of the pool of trained reserve officers and enlisted men from World War II. By that time Army Ground Forces had been reorganized as an army group headquarters that commanded six geographic armies. The armies replaced the nine corps areas of the prewar era, and the army commanders were tasked to organize and train both Regular Army and Organized Reserve Corps units.

The plan the army commanders received called for twenty-five Organized Reserve Corps divisions, but the divisions activated between September 1946 and November 1947 differed somewhat from the original plans. The First United States Army declined to support an airborne division, and the 98th Infantry Division replaced the 98th Airborne Division. After the change, the Organized Reserve Corps had four airborne, three armored, and eighteen infantry divisions. The Second Army insisted upon the number 80 for its airborne unit because the division was to be raised in the prewar 80th Division's area, not that of the 99th. Finally, the 103rd Infantry Division , organized in 1921 in New Mexico, Colorado, and Arizona, was moved to Iowa, Minnesota, South Dakota, and North Dakota in the Fifth United States Army area. The Seventh Army (later replaced by Third Army), allotted the 15th Airborne Division, refused the designation, and the adjutant general replaced it by constituting the 108th Airborne Division , which fell within that component's list of infantry and airborne divisional numbers. Thus the final tally of divisions formed after World War II appears to have been the 19th, 21st, and 22d Armored Divisions; the 80th , 84th, 100th and 108th Airborne Divisions ; and the 76th, 77th, 79th, 81st, 83rd, 85th , 87th, 89th , 90th , 91st, 94th , 95th, 96th, 97th, 98th, 102nd , 103rd, and 104th Infantry Divisions .

A major problem in forming divisions and other units in the Organized Reserve Corps was adequate housing.  While many National Guard units owned their own armories, some dating back to the nineteenth century, the Organized Reserve Corps had no facilities for storing equipment and for training.  Although the War Department requested funds for needed facilities, Congress moved slowly in response.  The Organized Reserve were redesignated 25 March 1948 as the Organized Reserve Corps. Recognizing the importance of the Organized Reserve to the World War II effort, Congress authorized retirement and drill pay for the first time in 1948.

During the summer and fall of 1951 the six army commanders in the United States, staff agencies, and the Section V Committee (created after World War I for the reserve components to have a voice in their affairs), evaluated Department of the Army reorganization plans for the ORC. The army commanders urged that all divisions in the Organized Reserve Corps be infantry divisions because they believed that the reserve could not adequately support armored and airborne training.

[ 11 ] They thought thirteen, rather than twelve, reserve divisions should be maintained to provide a better geographic distribution of the units. The Section V Committee opposed the reduction of the Organized Reserve Corps from twenty-five to thirteen divisions because it feared unfavorable publicity, particularly with the nation at war. On 20 December the Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General John E. Hull , directed the reorganization and redesignation of airborne and armored divisions as infantry as soon as practicable. In March 1952 the 80th, 84th, 100th, and 108th Airborne Divisions were reorganized and redesignated as infantry divisions, and the 63d , 70th , and 75th Infantry Divisions replaced the 13th, 21st, and 22d Armored Divisions.

Before the dust had settled on the reforms, the Army realized that it had failed to improve unit manning or meet reasonable mobilization requirements. In the fall of 1952 Army leaders thus proposed that the personnel from the thirteen inactivated Army Reserve divisions be assigned to strengthen the remaining twelve divisions. To keep the unneeded fifteen Army Reserve divisions active, they were to be reorganized as training divisions to staff training centers upon mobilization or man maneuver area commands for training troops. The continental army commanders implemented the new Army Reserve troop basis in 1955 piecemeal. They reorganized, without approved tables of organization, the 70th, 76th, 78th, 80th, 84th, 85th, 89th, 91st, 95th, 98th, 100th, and 108th Infantry Divisions as cadre for replacement training centers and organized the 75th "Maneuver Area Command" using the resources of the 75th Infantry Division. Two years later the 75th Infantry Division was inactivated along with 87th Infantry Division. Assets of the 87th were used to organize a maneuver area command; thus one unneeded division remained in the troop basis.

While the Korean War was still underway, Congress began making significant changes in the structure and role of the Army Reserve. These changes transformed the Organized Reserve into the United States Army Reserve, from 9 July 1952.

[ 12 ] This new organization was divided into a Ready Reserve, Standby Reserve, and Retired Reserve. Army Reserve units were authorized twenty-four inactive duty training days a year and up to seventeen days of active duty (called annual training).

In 1959 the Army decided to realign National Guard and Army Reserve divisions under Pentomic structures. Secretary of Defense Neil H. McElroy decided on 10 Army Reserve divisions. By October 1959 ten Army Reserve infantry divisions completed their transition, but at a reduced strength. The eleventh combat division in the Army Reserve, the 104th, was converted to training, for a total of thirteen training divisions, all of which were in the Army Reserve.

To reorganize the Army Reserve to the new Reorganization of Army Divisions (ROAD) structures in the early 1960s, the Army Staff decided to retain one Army Reserve division in each of the six Army areas and to eliminate four divisions. Army commanders selected the 63d, 77th, 81st, 83d, 90th, and 102d Infantry Divisions for retention and reorganized them under ROAD by the end of April 1963. Each division had two tank and six infantry battalions.

With the elimination of the 79th , 94th, 96th, and 103d Infantry Divisions, the Army decided to retain their headquarters as a way to preserve spaces for general and field grade officers. It reorganized the units as operational headquarters (subsequently called command headquarters [division]) and directed them to supervise the training of combat and support units located in the former divisional areas and to provide for their administrative support. Some former divisional units assigned to the four divisions were used to organize four brigades, which added flexibility to the force as well as provided four general officer reserve billets. In January and February 1963 the 157th , 187th , 191st , and 205th Infantry Brigades were organized with headquarters in Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Montana, and Minnesota, respectively.

[ 13 ] The designation of each brigade was derived from the lowest numbered infantry brigade associated with the division under the square structure. As with the Regular Army brigades, the number and type of maneuver elements in each Army Reserve brigade varied.

In November 1965, a long-standing controversial goal of the Defense Department, a reduction of the reserve troop basis, was achieved. Those reserve units that were judged unnecessary and others that were undermanned and underequipped were deleted and their assets used to field contingency forces. Among the units inactivated were the last six combat divisions in the Army Reserve, the 63d, 77th, 81st, 83d, 90th, and 102d Infantry Divisions, and the 79th, 94th, and 96th Command Headquarters (Division). The 103d Command Headquarters (Division) was converted to a support brigade headquarters.

A number of U.S. Army Reserve corps headquarters were disestablished on 31 March 1968. They were reorganized as Army Reserve Commands.

In 1980, the peacetime USAR chain of command was overlaid with a wartime trace. In an expansion of the roundout and affiliation programs begun ten years earlier, CAPSTONE purported to align every Army Reserve unit with the active and reserve component units with which they were anticipated to deploy.

[ 14 ] Units maintained lines of communication with the units – often hundreds or thousands of miles away in peacetime – who would presumably serve above or below them in the event of mobilization. This communication, in some cases, extended to coordinated annual training opportunities.

Despite the commonly held belief that CAPSTONE traces were set in stone, the process of selecting units to mobilize and deploy in 1990 and 1991 in support of Operation Desert Shield and Desert Storm frequently ignored CAPSTONE.

[ 15 ] Post Cold War [ edit ] In the post- Cold War draw-down, all of the Army Reserve's combat units were disbanded, except the 100th Battalion , 442nd Infantry Regiment. This meant the disestablishment of the three remaining Army Reserve fighting brigades: the 157th Infantry Brigade (Mechanized) (Separate) of Pennsylvania , the 187th Infantry Brigade (Separate) of Massachusetts , and the 205th Infantry Brigade (Separate) (Light) of Minnesota . Many of the Army Reserve training divisions were realigned as institutional training divisions.

With the Army National Guard providing reserve component combat formations and related combat support units, the Army Reserve is configured to provide combat support, combat service support, peacekeeping, nation-building and civil support capability. With roughly twenty percent of the Army's organized units and 5.3 percent of the Army's budget, the Army Reserve provides about half of the Army's combat support and a quarter of the Army's mobilization base expansion capability.

Reserve service today [ edit ] See also: Battle Assembly U.S. Army Reserve Sgt. Maj., left, instructs U.S. Navy Midshipman on proper body positioning during live-fire marksmanship training in June 2005 Reserve Component (RC) Soldiers mainly perform part-time duties as opposed to the full-time (active duty) Soldiers, but rotate through mobilizations to full-time duty. When not on active duty, RC Soldiers typically perform training and service one weekend per month, currently referred to as Battle Assembly , and for two continuous weeks at a time during the year referred to as Annual Training (AT). Many RC Soldiers are organized into Army Reserve Troop Program Units (TPUs), while others serve in active Army units as Individual Mobilization Augmentees (IMAs), or are in non-drilling control groups of the Individual Ready Reserve (IRR). Soldiers may also serve on active duty in an Active Guard Reserve (AGR) status in support of the United States Army Reserve (USAR) mission or through Active Duty Operational Support (ADOS) and Contingency Operations-Active Duty Operational Support (CO-ADOS) missions.

All United States Army soldiers sign an initial eight-year service contract upon entry into the military. Occasionally, the contract specifies that some of the service will be in the Regular Army (also called Active Component (AC)) for two, three, or four-year periods; with the remaining obligation served in the RC. Though typically, soldiers sign contracts specifying that all eight years be served in the RC, with the first six years in drilling status and the last two years in a non-drilling IRR status.

Soldiers entering directly into the U.S. Army Reserve nevertheless encompasses a period of initial entry training (IET). The amount of time begins with approximately nine weeks of Basic Combat Training (BCT), but total IET time varies according to the enlistee's elected Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) which dictates Advanced Individual Training (AIT). All U.S. Army Reserve Soldiers are subject to mobilization throughout the term of their enlistment. Soldiers who, after completing the AC portion of their enlistment contract choose not to re-enlist on active duty, are automatically transferred to the RC to complete the remainder of their Statutory Obligation (eight-year service total) and may be served in a drilling Troop Program Unit (TPU), Individual Mobilization Augmentee (IMA), or Individual Ready Reserve (IRR) status.

Non-commissioned officers of the rank of staff sergeant (E-6) and above will reenlist for an indefinite status after they have served for 12 years of service or more.

The United States Army Reserve was composed of 188,703 soldiers as of late 2020.

[ 1 ] Importance to the Active Army [ edit ] A significant portion of many unit types and specializations exist in the Army Reserve.  Some unique enabling units only exist in the Army Reserve.

Percent of Unit Types 2020 1980s Civil Affairs 87% PSYOP 83% Chaplain 81% Military History 76% Quartermaster 59% Transportation 54% Medical 53% Adjutant General (Personnel) 42% Chemical 41% Information Ops 40% Public Affairs 38% Engineers 35% Military Intelligence 31% Military Police 26% Space 24% JAG 20% Only in the Army Reserve: Theater Engineer Commands Civil Affairs Commands Petroleum Operations Biological-Agent Defense Medical Minimal Care Detachments 100% of training divisions, brigades, and railway units 97% of civil affairs units 89% of psychological operations units 85% of smoke generator companies 78% of Petrol/Oil/Lubricant (POL) supply companies 62% of Army hospitals 61% of terminal companies 59% of the supply and service capability of the Army 51% of ammunition companies 43% of airborne pathfinder units 43% of watercraft companies 42% of chemical decontamination units 38% of combat support aviation companies 26% of combat engineer battalions 25% of Special Forces Groups Current active reserve formations and units [ edit ] Headquarters commands [ edit ] Army Reserve Headquarters - Fort Bragg (formerly United States Army Reserve Command (USARC)) located at Fort Bragg , North Carolina Through USARC, the CAR commands all Army Reserve units. USARC is responsible for the staffing, training, management, and deployment of units to ensure readiness for Army missions. The Army Reserve consists of three main categories of units: operational and functional, support, and training. Due to Base Realignment and Closure Act, the headquarters of USAR moved to Fort Bragg.

Army Reserve Staff - National Capital Region (NCR) (formerly Office of the Chief of Army Reserve (OCAR)) located at both Fort Belvoir , Virginia and The Pentagon OCAR provides the Chief of Army Reserve (CAR) with a staff of functional advisors who develop and execute Army Reserve plans, policies and programs, plus administer Army Reserve personnel, operations, and funding.

[ 16 ] The CAR is responsible for plans, policies and programs affecting all Army Reserve Soldiers, including those who report directly to the Army. OCAR is composed of specialized groups that advise and support the CAR on a wide variety of issues.

Functional commands [ edit ] 3rd Medical Command (Deployment Support) , in Forest Park , GA 75th Innovation Command , in Houston , TX 76th Operational Response Command , in Fort Douglas , UT 79th Sustainment Support Command , in Los Alamitos , CA 85th Support Command , in Arlington Heights , IL 200th Military Police Command , at Fort Meade , MD 311th Signal Command (Theater) , at Fort Shafter , HI 335th Signal Command (Theater) , in East Point , GA 377th Sustainment Command (Theater) , in Belle Chasse , LA Army Reserve Sustainment Command , in Birmingham, Alabama Deployment Support Command, in Birmingham, Alabama 412th Theater Engineer Command , in Vicksburg, Mississippi 416th Theater Engineer Command , in Darien , IL 807th Medical Command (Deployment Support) , at Fort Douglas , UT U.S. Army Reserve Support Command, First Army , at Rock Island , IL Army Reserve Aviation Command at Fort Knox , KY Army Reserve Careers Group at Fort Knox , KY Army Reserve Medical Command at Pinellas Park, Florida AMEDD Army Professional Medical Command, at Forest Park, Georgia Medical Readiness and Training Command, at Fort Sam Houston , TX U.S. Army Reserve Legal Command , in Gaithersburg , MD Military Intelligence Readiness Command , at Fort Belvoir , VA Military Intelligence Training Support Command, at Fort Belvoir , VA Army Civil Affairs and Psychological Operations Command (Airborne) , at Fort Bragg , NC Geographic commands [ edit ] 1st Mission Support Command , at Fort Buchanan , Puerto Rico - providing support in Puerto Rico and United States Virgin Islands 7th Mission Support Command , in Kaiserslautern , Germany 9th Mission Support Command , at Fort Shafter , HI, under operational control of Army Pacific - providing support in Hawaii , Alaska , American Samoa , Japan , South Korea , Guam and Saipan .

63rd Readiness Division , in Mountain View , CA - providing support in California , Nevada , New Mexico , Arizona , Texas , Oklahoma and Arkansas 81st Readiness Division , at Fort Jackson , SC - providing support in Florida , Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama , Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina , Kentucky , Tennessee and Puerto Rico 88th Readiness Division , at Fort McCoy , WI - providing support in Washington , Oregon , Idaho , Montana , Wyoming , North Dakota , South Dakota , Utah , Colorado , Nebraska , Kansas , Wisconsin , Michigan , Illinois , Indiana , Minnesota , Iowa , Missouri and Ohio 99th Readiness Division , at Joint Base McGuire–Dix–Lakehurst , NJ - providing support in New Jersey , New York , New Hampshire , Pennsylvania , Massachusetts , Vermont , Rhode Island , West Virginia , Maryland , Delaware , Maine , Connecticut and Virginia Training commands [ edit ] 80th Training Command (The Army School System), in Richmond , VA 94th Training Division (Force Sustainment), at Fort Gregg-Adams , VA 100th Training Division (Operational Support), at Fort Knox , KY 102nd Training Division (Maneuver Support), at Fort Leonard Wood , MO 84th Training Command (Combat Support Training), at Fort Knox , KY 78th Training Division (Operations), at Joint Base McGuire–Dix–Lakehurst , NJ 86th Training Division (Decisive Action), at Fort McCoy , WI 87th Training Division , at Birmingham , AL 91st Training Division (Operations), in Jolon , CA 108th Training Command ( Initial Entry Training ), in Charlotte , NC, under operational control of Training and Doctrine Command 95th Training Division (Initial Entry Training), at Fort Sill , OK 98th Training Division (Initial Entry Training), at Fort Moore , GA 104th Training Division (Leader Training), at Joint Base Lewis–McChord , WA Individual Ready Reserve [ edit ] The Individual Ready Reserve (IRR) consists of individuals who are active reservists but not assigned to a particular Active Reserve Unit.  Members of the IRR are encouraged to take advantage of training opportunities and are eligible for promotion provided all requirements are met.

Retired Reserve [ edit ] The Retired Reserve, by law, consists of soldiers who have retired from the reserve component of the Army, regardless whether the reserve soldier has qualified for: (1) an active duty “Regular” retirement (20+ years cumulative active duty) with retired generally beginning immediately, (2) for a reserve “non-Regular” retirement (20+ cumulative federally creditable qualifying years) with retired pay generally starting at age 60, or (3) for a disability retirement as a result of an unfitting, line of duty injury or illness with retired pay generally beginning immediately upon retirement.

Until 1995, Army Regulations directed that enlisted Regular Army soldiers with 20 to 30 years of active service upon retirement were to be transferred upon retirement to the Retired Reserve, and remained there until they had served a total of 30 years combined active service and Retired Reserve service, at which point they would be fully retired and transferred back to the Regular Army for placement on the Retired List. Congress repealed those provisions in 1995 and since then, all Regular Army enlisted soldiers who retire remain in the Regular Component and are placed on the appropriate Retired List (Regular, Permanent Disability, or Temporary Disability).

National Guard soldiers who retire are discharged from their State’s National Guard, and transferred to the Army Reserve in toto and are placed on the Retired Reserve List. As such, they no longer hold the statutory dual-status defined in the National Guard Act of 1934, as members of both their State’s militia and the federal reserve component. However, some States have chosen to enact laws that provide for placement of retired or former members of the National Guard, or even Regular components, onto State Militia Retired Lists; such provisions do not affect federal retirement eligibility or benefits, and are solely a matter between that State and the individual.

Other components [ edit ] The Army of the United States (AUS) is the official name for the conscripted force of the Army that may be raised at the discretion of the United States Congress , often at time of war or mobilization for war. The Army of the United States was first established in 1940 and its last use of the AUS was in 1974. The predecessors of the AUS were the National Army during World War I and the Volunteer Army during the American Civil War and Spanish–American War .

See also [ edit ] Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act Comparable organizations Army National Guard (U.S. Army) United States Marine Corps Reserve United States Navy Reserve United States Coast Guard Reserve Air National Guard (U.S. Air Force) Air Force Reserve Command (U.S. Air Force) Militia (China) References [ edit ] ^ a b "H. Rept. 115-952 - DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDING SEPTEMBER 30, 2019, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES" .

www.congress.gov .

^ "Army Reserve Posture Statement" (PDF) .

www.usar.army.mil . 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2016 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

^ The Army Reserve at 100: An Emerging Operational Force .

Army Logistician , volume 40, issue 6; Army Reserve: A Concise History , 2012, p. 4. Exact date for OR-ORC from Army Lineage and Honors.

^ "Chapter IV: The Aftermath of World War I" . Archived from the original on 1 January 2014 . Retrieved 24 February 2008 .

^ Clay, Steven E. (2010).

U.S. Army Order of Battle, 1919-1941, Volume 1. The Arms: Major Commands and Infantry Organizations, 1919-41 . Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press. p. 199.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Clay, Steven E. (2010).

U.S. Army Order of Battle, 1919-1941, Volume 4. The Arms: Quartermaster, Medical, Military Police, Signal Corps, Chemical Warfare, and Miscellaneous Organizations, 1919-41 . Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press. p. 2,630, 2,712.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Woolley, William J. (2022).

Creating the Modern Army: Citizen Soldiers and the American Way of War, 1919-1939 . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. pp.

198– 99.

^ Clay, Steven E. (2010).

U.S. Army Order of Battle, 1919-1941, Volume 1. The Arms: Major Commands and Infantry Organizations, 1919-41 . Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press. pp.

4– 5.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Crossland, Richard; Currie, James (1984).

Twice the Citizen: A History of the United States Army Reserve, 1908-1983 . Washington, D.C.: Office of the Chief, Army Reserve. pp.

65– 67.

^ John B. Wilson, Maneuver and Firepower: The Evolution of Divisions and Separate Brigades , chapter 8 ^ "Chapter IX: The Korean War and its Aftermath" . Archived from the original on 4 April 2008.

^ Army Reserve: A Concise History , 2012, pp. 8–9. Exact date from Army Lineage and Honors.

^ Wilson, "Reorganization of Army Reserve" .

Army Reserve Magazine (12 (Jul-Aug 66): 4-5). Army Reservist: 7. Archived from the original on 17 January 2010 . Retrieved 19 December 2012 .

; 157th Infantry Brigade; Historical Data Card, 187th Inf Bde, GO 1, Sixth U.S. Army, 1962; 191st Inf Bde file, GO 1, XIV U.S. Army Corps, 1963; 205th Inf Bde file; all DAMHHSO.

^ James T. Currie and Richard B. Crossland, Twice The Citizen: A History of the United States Army Reserve, 1908–1995 (2nd revised & expanded edition), Washington, DC: Office of the Chief, Army Reserve (1997), pp. 254–255.

^ See Thomas D. Dinackus, Order of Battle: Allied Ground Forces of Operation Desert Storm, Hellgate Press, Central Point, Oregon, 2000.

^ "Army Reserve: Organized for Success" . Archived from the original on 29 May 2010 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

Sources [ edit ] Isby, David, and Charles Kamps (1985).

Armies of NATO's Central Front .

Jane's Publishing Company .

ISBN 0-7106-0341-X .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Wilson, John B.

Maneuver and Firepower: The Evolution of Divisions and Separate Brigades . Washington, D.C.: Center of Military History (1997).

Further reading [ edit ] Army Reserve - A Concise History (PDF) . United States Department of Army. 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2025.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Army Reserve .

Army Reserve News U.S. Army Reserve Full listings of Reserve units Army Reserve US Army Reserve Shooting Team v t e United States Army Leadership Secretary of the Army Under Secretary of the Army Chief of Staff Vice Chief of Staff 4-star generals 3-star generals 1798–1959 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–present Army Staff Senior Warrant Officer Sergeant Major of the Army House Armed Services Committee ( House Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces ) Senate Committee on Armed Services ( Senate Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces ) Components and commands Regular Army Army Reserve Army National Guard Active Units Reorganization plan of United States Army Commands Forces Futures Materiel Training and Doctrine Service components Central Europe and Africa Pacific North South Special Operations Surface Deployment and Distribution Space and Missile Defense Cyber Command Direct reporting units Second Army Medical Intelligence and Security Criminal Investigation Division Corps of Engineers Military District of Washington Test and Evaluation Military Academy Reserve Acquisition Support Center Installation Management War College Field armies First Third Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Ninth Branches Acquisition Corps Adjutant General's Corps Air Defense Artillery Branch Armor Branch Aviation Branch Army Band Chaplain Corps Chemical Corps Civil Affairs Corps Corps of Engineers Cyber Corps Dental Corps Field Artillery Branch Finance Corps Infantry Branch Inspector General's Corps Judge Advocate General's Corps Logistics Branch Medical Corps Medical Service Corps Medical Specialist Corps Military Intelligence Corps Military Police Corps Nurse Corps Ordnance Corps Psychological operations Quartermaster Corps Signal Corps Special Forces Transportation Corps Veterinary Corps Installations United States and overseas Germany Japan Kuwait South Korea Training Basic Training BOLC ROTC ( ECP ) OCS WOBC WOCS Military Academy (West Point) MOS Uniforms and insignia Awards and decorations Badges Branch Officer Warrant Enlisted World War I World War II Uniforms Equipment Crew-served weapons Individual weapons Vehicles Premier ensembles Army Band Army Field Band Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps West Point Band History and traditions History Continental Army Union army National Army Army of the United States Center of Military History Institute of Heraldry America's Army Army Art Program Flag National Museum West Point Museum Rangers U.S. Army Regimental System Soldier's Creed " The Army Goes Rolling Along " Division nicknames Draft Service numbers Seventh Army Symphony Orchestra Historical Buffalo Soldiers Army Air Forces Army Service Forces Women's Army Corps Rough Riders U.S. Cavalry United States Colored Troops United States Army Hospital Corps U.S. Sanitary Commission 250th Anniversary Parade Category v t e United States Armed Forces Legend A = Army MC = Marine Corps N = Navy AF = Air Force SF = Space Force CG = Coast Guard Leadership President of the United States Secretary of Defense Deputy Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Vice Chairman Committees on Armed Services Senate House Active duty four-star officers Active duty three-star officers United States military seniority National Security Act of 1947 Goldwater–Nichols Act Components Military departments Department of Defense Secretary Department of the Army Secretary Department of the Navy Secretary Department of the Air Force Secretary Department of Homeland Security Secretary Service branches and heads Chief of Staff of the United States Army Commandant of the Marine Corps Chief of Naval Operations Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Chief of Space Operations Commandant of the Coast Guard Reserve components Reserves: A MC N AF CG National Guard : A AF Civilian auxiliaries Military Auxiliary Radio System Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Merchant Marine Civil Air Patrol Coast Guard Auxiliary Unified combatant command Africa Central European Indo-Pacific Northern Southern Space Cyber Special Operations Strategic Transportation Structure United States Code Title 10 Title 14 Title 32 Title 50 The Pentagon Installations Units: A MC N AF SF CG Logistics Media Unit mottoes Operations and history Budget Current deployments Conflicts Wars Civil affairs History A MC N AF SF CG Timeline Colonial World War II Demographics African Americans Asian Americans Buddhist Americans Jewish Americans Muslim Americans Sikh Americans Hispanic Americans Civil War Air Force Coast Guard Marine Corps Navy Academy History centers Army Center of Military History Marine Corps History Division Naval History and Heritage Command Air Force Historical Research Agency War artists Army Art Program Air Force Art Program Personnel Training Service academies : A ( prep ) MC/N ( prep ) AF/SF ( prep ) CG Merchant Marine ROTC A MC/N AF/SF Officer candidate/training school: A MC N AF/SF Warrant officer : A MEPS ASVAB The Basic School (MC) Enlisted recruit training: A MC N AF/SF CG Other education Uniforms Uniforms : A MC N AF SF CG Awards & decorations : Inter-service A MC/N AF/SF CG Foreign International Devices Badges : Identification A MC N AF SF CG Ranks Officer: A MC N AF SF CG Warrant officers Enlisted: A MC N AF SF CG Other Oath: Enlistment Officer Creeds & Codes: Code of Conduct NCO A MC N AF CG Service numbers : A MC N AF CG Military Occupational Specialty / Rating / Air Force Specialty Code Pay Uniform Code of Military Justice Judge Advocate General's Corps Military Health System / Tricare Separation Veterans Affairs Conscription Chiefs of Chaplains : A MC N AF CG Equipment A ( Designations ) MC: vehicles weapons other N AF CG Land Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles ( active ) Sea All watercraft Ships: A N active future AF CG MSC Weapons: N Reactors Air Aircraft World War I active future Aircraft designation Helicopter arms Other WWII equipment Nuclear football Electronics ( designations ) Flags : A MC N AF SF CG Ensign Jack Guidons Food WMDs : Nuclear Biological Chemical Category A MC N AF SF CG Navboxes A MC N AF SF CG Authority control databases International ISNI Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Army_Reserve&oldid=1305041656 " Categories : United States Army Reserve United States Army Direct Reporting Units 1908 establishments in the United States Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from May 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from September 2020 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 18:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Army Reserve 12 languages Add topic

