Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early usage 2 Heidegger 3 Sartre and de Beauvoir 4 Recent usage 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Facticity 7 languages العربية Français Íslenska Norsk bokmål Português Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical concept with multiple meanings "Factitious" redirects here. For the mental disorder, see Factitious disorder .

In philosophy , facticity ( French : facticité , German : Faktizität ) [ 1 ] has multiple meanings — from "factuality" and " contingency " to the intractable conditions of human existence .

[ 2 ] Early usage [ edit ] The term was first used by German philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762–1814) and has a variety of meanings. It can refer to facts and factuality, as in nineteenth-century positivism , but comes to mean that which resists explanation and interpretation in Wilhelm Dilthey and Neo-Kantianism . The Neo-Kantians contrasted facticity with ideality, as does Jürgen Habermas in Between Facts and Norms ( Faktizität und Geltung ).

Heidegger [ edit ] German philosopher Martin Heidegger (1889–1976) discusses "facticity" [ 1 ] as the " thrownness " ( Geworfenheit ) of individual existence, which is to say individuals are "thrown into the world." By this, he does not only refer to a brute fact, or the factuality of a concrete historical situation, e.g. "born in the '80s." Facticity is something that already informs and has been taken up in existence, even if it is unnoticed or left unattended. As such, facticity is not something individuals come across and directly behold. In moods, for example, facticity has an enigmatic appearance, which involves both turning toward and away from it . For Heidegger, moods are conditions of thinking and willing to which they must in some way respond. The thrownness of human existence (or Dasein ) is accordingly disclosed through moods.

Sartre and de Beauvoir [ edit ] In the mid-20th century works of French existentialists Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir , facticity signifies all of the concrete details against the background of which human freedom exists and is limited. For example, these may include the time and place of birth, a language, an environment, an individual's previous choices, as well as the inevitable prospect of their death. For example: currently, the situation of a person who is born without legs precludes their freedom to walk on the beach; if future medicine were to develop a method of growing new legs for that person, their facticity might no longer exclude this activity.

Recent usage [ edit ] Facticity is a term that takes on a more specialized meaning in 20th century continental philosophy , especially in phenomenology and existentialism , including Edmund Husserl , Martin Heidegger , Jean-Paul Sartre , Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Theodor Adorno . Recent philosophers such as Giorgio Agamben , Jean-Luc Nancy , Byung-Chul Han and François Raffoul have taken up the notion of facticity in new ways.

[ citation needed ] Facticity plays a key part in Quentin Meillassoux 's philosophical project to challenge the thought-world relationship of correlationism . Meillassoux defines it as "the absence of reason for any reality; in other words, the impossibility of providing an ultimate ground for the existence of any being." [ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Being for itself References [ edit ] ^ a b Dahlstrom, Daniel O. (2013).

The Heidegger Dictionary . London: Bloomsbury. pp.

71–2 .

ISBN 978-1-847-06514-8 .

^ Sartre, Jean-Paul.

Being and Nothingness .

^ Meillassoux, Quentin (8 May 2008).

"Time Without Becoming" (PDF) . Retrieved 29 December 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] J. Van Buren (Trans.), Martin Heidegger.

Ontology--The Hermeneutics of Facticity .

Heidegger, Martin (1962).

Being And Time . New York, Harper.

ISBN 9780060638504 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Sartre, Jean-Paul.

Essays in Existentialism .

Sartre, Jean-Paul.

Existentialism Is a Humanism .

Sartre, Jean-Paul (1956).

Being and Nothingness . New York, Philosophical Library.

Raffoul, François; Sean Nelson, Eric (eds.).

Rethinking Facticity .

Meillassoux, Quentin.

After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of Contingency .

Look up facticity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Johann Gottlieb Fichte Books An Attempt at a Critique of All Revelation (1792) Foundations of the Science of Knowledge (1794/1795) Foundations of Natural Right (1797) The Vocation of Man (1799) Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Miscellaneous Atheism dispute Facticity v t e Martin Heidegger Philosophy Aletheia Dasein Ekstase Fundamental ontology Gestell Hermeneutic circle " Language speaks " Metaphysics of presence Ontic Terminology Thrownness World disclosure Works Being and Time (1927) " What Is Metaphysics?

" (1929) Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics (1929) " Introduction to Metaphysics " (1935) Black Notebooks (1931–41) " The Age of the World Picture " (1938) Contributions to Philosophy (1936–1938) " Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister" " (1942) " Letter on Humanism " (1947) The Question Concerning Technology (1949) " The Origin of the Work of Art " (1950) What Is Called Thinking?

(1951–2) What Is Philosophy?

(1955) " Only a God Can Save Us " (1966) Heidegger Gesamtausgabe Film and TV Der Zauberer von Meßkirch (1989) Human, All Too Human (1999) The Ister (2004) Being in the World (2010) Related topics Heidegger scholars Heidegger Studies Studia Heideggeriana Relationship with Nazism Cassirer–Heidegger debate Thing theory v t e Existentialism Variants Atheistic Christian Jewish Islamic Nihilist Phenomenological Concepts Abandonment Absurdism Angst Authenticity Bad faith Being in itself Dasein Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Leap of faith Meaning Nihilism Other Ressentiment Thrownness People Artists Beckett Buzzati Camus Cioran Dostoevsky Ellison Fondane Giacometti Ionesco Kafka Mahfouz Marcel Sartre Unamuno Wilson Wright Philosophers Abbagnano Arendt Barth Berdyaev Buber Bultmann Camus Carlyle Cioran Beauvoir Fanon Flusser Fondane Heidegger Husserl James Jaspers Kaufmann Kierkegaard Levinas Marcel May Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rosenzweig Sartre Shestov Soloveitchik Tillich Unamuno Wilson Wright Zapffe Related Continental philosophy German idealism Marxist humanism Phenomenology Transcendentalism Western Marxism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Facticity&oldid=1285263798 " Categories : Existentialist concepts Hermeneutics Jean-Paul Sartre Philosophy of Martin Heidegger Ontology Phenomenology Simone de Beauvoir Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Facticity 7 languages Add topic

