Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Binary vs multi-class classification 2 Evaluation of accuracy 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Classification 16 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português سنڌي Slovenščina Svenska తెలుగు Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Putting things into categories This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Classification" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Classification is the activity of assigning objects to some pre-existing classes or categories. This is distinct from the task of establishing the classes themselves (for example through cluster analysis ).

[ 1 ] Examples include diagnostic tests, identifying spam emails and deciding whether to give someone a driving license.

As well as 'category', synonyms or near-synonyms for 'class' include 'type', 'species', 'forms', 'order', 'concept', 'taxon', 'group', 'identification' and 'division'.

The meaning of the word 'classification' (and its synonyms) may take on one of several related meanings. It may encompass both classification and the creation of classes, as for example in 'the task of categorizing pages in Wikipedia'; this overall activity is listed under taxonomy . It may refer exclusively to the underlying scheme of classes (which otherwise may be called a taxonomy). Or it may refer to the label given to an object by the classifier.

Classification is a part of many different kinds of activities and is studied from many different points of view including medicine , philosophy , [ 2 ] law , anthropology , biology , taxonomy , cognition , communications , knowledge organization , psychology , statistics , machine learning , economics and mathematics .

Binary vs multi-class classification [ edit ] Methodological work aimed at improving the accuracy of a classifier is commonly divided between cases where there are exactly two classes ( binary classification ) and cases where there are three or more classes ( multiclass classification ).

Evaluation of accuracy [ edit ] Unlike in decision theory , it is assumed that a classifier repeats the classification task over and over. And unlike a lottery , it is assumed that each classification can be either right or wrong; in the theory of measurement, classification is understood as measurement against a nominal scale. Thus it is possible to try to measure the accuracy of a classifier.

Measuring the accuracy of a classifier allows a choice to be made between two alternative classifiers. This is important both when developing a classifier and in choosing which classifier to deploy. There are however many different methods for evaluating the accuracy of a classifier and no general method for determining which method should be used in which circumstances. Different fields have taken different approaches, even in binary classification (see Evaluation of binary classifiers ). In pattern recognition , error rate is popular. The Gini coefficient and KS statistic are widely used in the credit scoring industry.

Sensitivity and specificity are widely used in epidemiology and medicine.

Precision and recall are widely used in information retrieval.

[ 3 ] Classifier accuracy depends greatly on the characteristics of the data to be classified. There is no single classifier that works best on all given problems (a phenomenon that may be explained by the no-free-lunch theorem ).

See also [ edit ] Help:Category , for information about Wikipedia's categories Class (disambiguation) Classified (disambiguation) Classifier (disambiguation) Cognitive categorization Data classification (disambiguation) Classification theorem Folk taxonomy Fuzzy classification References [ edit ] ^ "The Classification Society | Scientific Classification Organization" .

^ "Classification" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 10 January 2025 .

^ David Hand (2012). "Assessing the Performance of Classification Methods".

International Statistical Review .

80 (3): 400– 414.

doi : 10.1111/j.1751-5823.2012.00183.x .

External links [ edit ] Look up classification , classifications , classifies , classify , or classifying in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Classification at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classification&oldid=1302168723 " Categories : Theories Classification systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is the pagename Former disambiguation pages converted to set index articles This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 20:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classification 16 languages Add topic

