Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 First-wave feminism 1.1.1 First-wave feminism use of media 1.2 Second-wave feminism 1.2.1 Second-wave feminism use of media 1.3 Third-wave feminism 1.3.1 Third-wave feminism use of media 2 Mass media 3 On screen media Toggle On screen media subsection 3.1 Social media 3.1.1 Feminist use of Twitter 3.1.2 #MeToo movement 3.1.3 Emma Watson 3.2 Film 3.3 Video games 4 Print publications Toggle Print publications subsection 4.1 La Voix des Femmes 4.2 La Fronde 4.3 Courage 4.4 The Revolution 4.5 Media Directory of Women Experts 5 References Toggle the table of contents Feminism and media 5 languages العربية অসমীয়া فارسی 한국어 தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Use of media by feminist movements The socio-political movements and ideologies of feminism have found expression in various media . These media include newspaper, literature, radio, television, social media, film, and video games. They have been essential to the success of many feminist movements.

Susan B. Anthony , one of the authors of The Revolution Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e History [ edit ] The history of feminism dates back to the 19th century and continues through present day. Feminism can be broken down into three distinct sections: first-wave, second-wave, and third-wave.

The terms "suffragette" and "feminist" refer to different movements, particularly in the early 1900s. Suffragists aimed to make it possible for women to vote in elections, but reinforced the notion that women should remain domestic (caring for the home, family, and community). Feminists, on the other hand, not only supported suffrage, but also were advocates for women to be entitled to the "same level of participation, economic independence, and social and sexual freedoms as men" (Finn, 2012).

[ 1 ] First-wave feminism [ edit ] First-wave feminism refers to the feminist movement of the 19th and early 20th century. At this time, women had little control over their lives. Generally, they were housewives who were uneducated and possessed no property or economic rights. Their lives were overwhelmingly limited creating discontent in the context of being limited to roles such as motherhood or wife-hood.

[ 2 ] Feminists of the time (mostly middle-class white women) focused on the legal disabilities of women, especially women's suffrage. The first wave began at the Seneca Falls Convention of 1848, in which Elizabeth Cady Stanton drafted the Seneca Falls Declaration. The Declaration outlined the feminist's political strategies and philosophies. Suffragists worked together to attract more women to their cause, they went against traditional methods such as propaganda and lobbying that were previously learned during Radical Reconstruction and the abolitionist movements .

[ 2 ] The first-wave was fueled by The Second Great Awakening , which allowed women to have more leadership roles in society, and the abolition and temperance movements. Women were generally excluded from these movements, prompting suffragists to demand women's suffrage. However, not all suffragists considered themselves feminists; they were eager for the right to vote, but not in favor of gender equality. Suffragists and feminists had their first success when New York passed the Married Women's Property Act in 1860, which legalized property ownership for women. They also had success when Congress ratified the 19th Amendment in 1920, allowing women the right to vote.

First-wave feminism use of media [ edit ] The feminists' message during first-wave feminism was primarily spread through newspaper and other printed media such as pamphlets and bulletins.

Second-wave feminism [ edit ] Feminists attempted to draw attention by forming women-only organizations, such as the National Organization for Women (NOW), and publishing papers that advocated women's equality, such as "The BITCH Manifesto". Radical feminists promoted the idea that "gender is an absolute rather than a relative category".

[ 3 ] An early depiction of this view includes Valerie Solanas's, S.C.U.M Manifesto written in 1967.

[ 3 ] The major legislative focus of the wave was on the passage of the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), which guaranteed social equality regardless of sex. The ERA made it to Congress for ratification, but failed to be ratified. The second-wave is said to have ended in the early 1980s with the discussion of sexuality and pornography, issues that were discussed during the third wave. With more advanced technology in the second wave, feminists used newspapers, television, radio, and published papers to spread their message.

Prior to 1960, both men and women accepted the reality of traditional gender and family roles. But, when the second-wave feminism began, women challenged these roles both at home and at work. (Beck, 1998).

[ 4 ] Betty Friedan's 1963 book, The Feminine Mystique , has been said to have spurred the second-wave movement due to its discussion of the unhappiness of (white, middle-class) women "with their limited gender roles and their sense of isolation in the suburban nuclear family" (Mendes, 2011).

[ 5 ] Second-wave feminism use of media [ edit ] It was also during this period (around the 1960s and 1970s) that women's portrayal on television was changing, in part due to the eventual release of "female sexual and political energy" (Douglas, 1994).

[ 6 ] Before this time, women's sexuality could be considered a "taboo" topic, creating for a revolutionary change in the portrayal of women on television. Examples of these different female roles include but are not limited to: Morticia Addams ( The Addams Family ), Samantha Stevens ( Bewitched ), and Mary Richards ( The Mary Tyler Moore Show ). All of the aforementioned women were either magical in some way and/or a strong female character, which differed from the more stereotypical-housewife roles from the 1950s. In addition, many roles in this era portrayed the woman as independent, thus not needing or seeking out a man.

Third-wave feminism [ edit ] Third-wave feminism started beginning in the early 1990s and continues into the present. This movement grew as a response of the supposed failures and criticism of the second-wave movement. The goals of the movement were broadened from the second wave to focus on ideas such as lesbian theory, abolishing gender roles and stereotypes, and defending sex work, pornography, and sex-positivity. The movement has a focus on lesbian and African American women as distinct from traditional feminists, and it has weakened many traditional concepts, such as those notions of gender, heteronormativity, and "universal womanhood". This conversation on social media on womanhood has strengthened the understanding of the "economy of the celebrity". (Keller) Third-wave feminism use of media [ edit ] Third-wave feminism depends mostly on social media to spread its goals. Social media outlets such as Twitter and Facebook are consistently covered in feminist messages, and hashtag campaigns are steadily spread to convey feminist ideas ( #heforshe , #yesallwomen , #whyistayed). Many television shows also feature dominant, strong women and encourage the idea that women are equal to men ( Nashville , Orange Is the New Black , and Buffy the Vampire Slayer ).

[ 7 ] Press (2011) [ 8 ] wrote that third-wave feminism focuses more on women's sexual freedom, which has come a long way since the time of second-wave feminism. Disparities such as the "orgasm gap" still exist (Armstrong, England & Fogarty, 2010), [ 9 ] which describes the sexual inequalities between men and women involving sexual gratification. The media also continues to oppose the existence of women's sexual freedom, noted with the continued use of the word "slut" as well as the emphasized importance of virginity, which is often displayed in popular culture.

Mass media [ edit ] Though most journalists aim to create an objective view of their subjects, feminism has long been portrayed in a negative light. Feminism's portrayal is fueled by the idea that the media seems to lean toward opposition; pinning women again men creates the mostly negative roles women become portrayed by.

[ 10 ] A study by Lind and Saio (2006) [ 11 ] revealed that feminists rarely appear in the media and are often demonized. They are often portrayed as different from "regular" women, and are not associated with day-to-day activities, but rather, public activities and events. Feminists are also not often portrayed as victims and are more frequently associated with the women's movement and their goals compared to regular women (meaning if a woman isn't a labeled "feminist" she often isn't associated with the movement, despite being female). Creedon (1993) [ 12 ] wrote, "feminists are constantly framed as deviant sexually, a bunch of man-haters out to destroy 'family values.'" In the media, the term "feminism" is often opposed to the term "family", leading to the idea that feminists can't be family women. This negative portrayal over the decades has led many young women rejecting the idea of feminism, in part due to feminists being labeled as "man bashers". Other labels associated with feminism include: "bubblehead", "Amazons", "angries", "radical", and "hairy" (Jones, 1992).

[ 13 ] Most media decision-makers are male, although women are beginning to enter the field of journalism.

[ 10 ] The contemporary women's movement has predominantly been ignored through mainstream media, leaving only room for a few high-profile exceptions.

[ 10 ] The Miss America pageant of 1968 was one of the first high-profile cases to be publicized. Although to the feminist movement's dismay, the coverage was both distorted and sensationalized.

[ 10 ] During the occurrence of the event, the term "bra-burner" label for women unearthed itself.

[ 10 ] The practice of labeling feminists with derogatory terms has been a method to silence its supporters and promote fear of speaking out.

Flora Davis (1991) [ 14 ] wrote in her book, Moving the Mountain: The Women's Movement in America , that the media coverage on the feminist movement wasn't necessarily negative, as it was the media that spotlighted the movement in 1969. In addition, Davis notes that the media is the source that publicized the movement's issues, heroines, and activities and allowed the movement to reach individuals it may have not otherwise.

On screen media [ edit ] Social media [ edit ] In recent years, social media platforms like Twitter and Facebook have led to widespread discussion on issues ranging from domestic abuse to street harassment, catcalling, and abortion.

[ 15 ] In 2012, feminists in Turkey created Facebook groups to organize and mobilize protests and marches against legislation of a nationwide abortion ban. Feminists in other parts of the European Union began to take notice and promoted the issue in their respective Facebook groups and the legislation was eventually dropped from the legislative agenda.

[ 16 ] In the wake of the Ray Rice domestic abuse scandal, in which video evidence showed the Baltimore Ravens running back knocking his then fiancée, Janay Palmer, unconscious, writer Beverly Gooden started the Twitter hashtag #WhyIStayed. This hashtag highlighted personal experiences of herself and other women who stayed in abusive relationships. This quickly spawned subsequent hashtags including #WhyILeft which many used to describe the final incident of abuse or reason for leaving.

[ 17 ] Feminist use of Twitter [ edit ] In 2013, the Representation Project created a mobile app called #NotBuyingIt which allows users to connect with each other and quickly tweet or otherwise engage sexist media ranging from advertisements to soundbites and quotes from public figures. It is often used during football season where Super Bowl ads are notoriously deemed sexist.
In the aftermath of the University of California-Santa Barbara shootings, thousands of women across the internet began tweeting experiences of sexism experienced in their daily lives with the hashtag #YesAllWomen. In June 2014, as a response to the US Supreme court's decision in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby , there were thousands of tweets containing #HobbyLobby, #JoinTheDissent and #NotMyBossBusiness expressing emotions ranging from disdain to rage at the Supreme Court's decision to allow employers not to cover certain contraceptives on a religious basis.

[ 18 ] According to Matthew Slutsky at Change.org, social media has opened the forums on these issues to not only feminists and other activists, but to anyone who wants to discuss them.

[ 19 ] #MeToo movement [ edit ] Sign from the 2019 Women's March supporting the #MeToo movement.

In 2017, actress Alyssa Milano brought the # MeToo movement to light when she asked her Twitter followers to reply with #metoo if they had experienced sexual assault.

[ 20 ] While Milano's actions have received backlash for taking credit for a movement that was started by an African American women the movement has stood to expose sexual harassment and assault within the work place. Following the social media popularity it was reported that 30% of women and 4% of men reported experiencing sexual assault within the U.S. academic medical field.

[ 21 ] While Milano brought popularity to the movement following allegations against Harvey Weinstein she did not create the movement or the phrase. Activist Tarana Burke originally started the movement in 2007.

[ 20 ] She started using the term "me too" to show solidarity with girls and women who had and were experiencing sexual assault.

[ 20 ] This movement reached all aspects of life in the United States including Hollywood, politics, education, news outlets, and even agriculture. The #MeToo movement has allowed not only a shift or norms but a shift in policies, education, and trainings in order to create better reporting systems and prevent sexual misconduct from occurring.

Emma Watson [ edit ] In addition, celebrities such as Emma Watson have also taken a pro-feminist stance through social media.  In 2014, the UN Women's Ambassador stated, "I am from Britain and think it is right that as a woman I am paid the same as my male counterparts. I think it is right that I should be able to make decisions about my own body. I think it is right that women be involved on my behalf in the policies and decision-making of my country. I think it is right that socially I am afforded the same respect as men. But sadly I can say that there is no one country in the world where all women can expect to receive these rights." [ 22 ] Her speech also goes into depth about the negative connotation the word feminist has because of social media and how we as a society can take a stand for gender equality.

Studies into political campaigning have proven that women tweet more aggressively than their male counterparts, as platforms such as Twitter allow women to bypass traditional media and bring attention to their own raw narrative.

[ 23 ] In 2018 the use of feminist social media came to the forefront in the referendum to appeal the abortion laws in Ireland. Grassroots campaign groups, like TogetherForYes , strategized their social media to campaign and influence a positive "yes" vote to amend abortion laws.

[ 24 ] When tackling these feminist issues, social media can bring somewhat traditional private issues into the public, an exposure that can encourage positive change as emotions are mobilized across an online network, reaching people who can not only vote, but also those who can encourage voters, to support their women counterparts.

[ 25 ] Film [ edit ] Film is an aspect of media that contributes to the socialization of citizens.

[ 26 ] Feminist themes in film have become more commonplace within modern history and feminist film theory was born out of several disciplines of psychoanalysis conjoining with the emerging film industry and the views of sexuality and gender roles.

[ 27 ] In her 1970 essay " Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema ", Laura Mulvey diagnosed two major issues within Hollywood that she felt allowed for an inaccurate portrayal of the feminine experience up until that time.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Her first claim, that "men and women are differentially positioned by cinema", [ 30 ] states that women are positioned in roles as inferior or subservient to men. The lead roles or main action roles are normally held by men. She argued that this perpetuates the stereotypes that females are incapable and that males are dominating and the leaders of the group. The second claim is that women are portrayed in film as "objects for masculine desire and fetishistic gazing", [ 30 ] writing that this relates directly to the sexuality of females and that the prevalence of a romantic element to a female's role shows that beyond a romantic or sexual element, women in the plot line are essentially worthless.

[ 30 ] Sophie Mayer's 2016 publication Political Animals: The New Feminist Cinema focuses on feminist film theory in the 21st century and argues that many of the same issues pointed out in Mulvey's essay continue.

[ 27 ] Mayer focuses instead on other elements of film beside plot to view through a feminist lens.

[ 27 ] She also looks at other cinematic elements such as costuming that expand the volume of works that can be reviewed with feminist film theory.

[ 27 ] Video games [ edit ] Video games have become a new form of media that derives from other media, such as books, films, and music. It is a new model that can interact with old forms of media and then create new contents or means of entertainment and interaction.

[ 31 ] With the development of video games, female characters play a significant role in the gaming world. However, most of the female characters are usually being objectified by video games. Especially, there are a large number of female characters who are objectified as sex workers in commercial video games.

[ 32 ] Yao et al. state that female heroines in action-based video games often wear sexy outfits barely covering their bodies.

[ 33 ] Moreover, Yao et al. also indicate that sexualized female characters may prime males' thoughts about sex and encourage them to view women as objects , fueling belief in negative female stereotypes.

[ 33 ] As a result, objectifying females has severely affected gender equality, and it also becomes a method that game companies use to attract male players. Through the development of video games, males have always been the main customers, so game companies do not intend to consider the feelings of female players. Bonnie Ruberg states that the reason for having discrimination against female characters is not because of the erotic labor but the devaluation behavior that presents in the games.

[ 32 ] Moreover, in her article "Representing sex workers in video games: feminisms, fantasies of exceptionalism, and the value of erotic labor", she criticizes the game's description and portrayal of female characters, and she also promotes that video games need a diversity of feminisms.

Ms.

is a feminist focused magazine Print publications [ edit ] Though hardcopy newspapers do not carry the readership they once did, they played a historically important role in the circulation of feminist ideas within Western societies. Newspapers were the dominant form of mass media throughout the 1800s and early 1900s, beginning to decline only after the proliferation of radio and television news. Feminist newspapers allowed women and their group interests to voice their opinion to a larger audience with more consistency and accuracy than word of mouth, helping lay the groundwork for organized movements to take hold. Throughout the 1800s, several feminist newspapers were started with varying degrees of success.

[ 34 ] The German feminist newspaper founded by Mathilde Franziska Anneke , Frauenzeitung , managed to produce a single issue. In contrast, Louise Otto-Peters 's Frauen-Zeitung , a weekly German feminist newspaper, lasted from April 1849 to at least the middle of 1852.  The readership and lifespan of feminist newspapers varies widely, but there are several examples that are known for their contributions to the cause of feminism through this form of mass media.

[ citation needed ] La Voix des Femmes [ edit ] La Voix des Femmes (English: The Voice of Women ) was founded by Eugénie Niboyet and remained in print from 1848 to 1852. It was the first French feminist daily newspaper and enjoyed great success. Its decline was due to the rise of conservatism under Napoleon III .

[ 35 ] In 1917, Colette Reynaud and Louise Bodin launched a weekly French feminist newspaper reusing the name, La Voix des femmes ; [ 36 ] it ceased publication in 1937.

[ 37 ] La Fronde [ edit ] La Fronde (English: The Sling ) was another French feminist daily newspaper created by Marguerite Durand . It ran from 9 December 1897, to March 1905. It was run and written solely by women. It notably achieved a readership of 50,000 in Paris, before financial problems led to its closure.

Courage [ edit ] A group of women from the Kreuzberg Women's Centre created the German feminist newspaper Courage in 1976. The paper published many articles on taboo subjects that were issues for feminists, such as abortion, sexual violence, and forced prostitution. The newspaper declared bankruptcy in 1984 because of the loss of readership due to negative coverage from male press and competing feminist papers.

The Revolution [ edit ] The Revolution was an American weekly newspaper created by Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton as a reaction to the National Woman Suffrage Association's call to put women's suffrage on hold, to deal with the issue of African American male suffrage.

[ 38 ] The establishment of the newspaper in January 1868 helped keep the women's suffrage movement alive during the post-civil war era. However, Anthony's ideological commitments, including her opposition to " quack medicine " and " Restellism " (a reference to Madame Restell, a 19th-century British-born American abortionist), limited available income for the newspaper.

[ 39 ] Bankruptcy was declared in 1870, and Anthony shouldered the $10,000 debt.

Media Directory of Women Experts [ edit ] The Independent Women's Forum published the Media Directory of Women Experts as a way of providing journalists with names of women that could give conservative opinions on topics.

References [ edit ] ^ Finn, M. (2012).

A Modern Necessity: Feminism, Popular Culture, and American Womanhood, 1920–1948 . Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertation Publishing.

^ a b DuBois, Ellen (1975). "The Radicalism of the Woman Suffrage Movement: Notes toward the Reconstruction of Nineteenth-Century Feminism".

Feminist Studies .

3 (1/2): 63– 71.

doi : 10.2307/3518956 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0003.107 .

JSTOR 3518956 .

^ a b Echols, Alice (1983). "Cultural Feminism: Feminist Capitalism and the Anti-Pornography Movement".

Social Text .

7 (7): 34– 53.

doi : 10.2307/466453 .

JSTOR 466453 .

^ Beck, D. (1998). The 'f' word: How the media frame feminism.

NWSA Journal, 10, 139–153.

^ Mendes, K. (2011). Framing feminism: News coverage of the women's movement in British and American newspapers, 1968–1982.

Social Movement Studies: Journal of Social, Cultural, and Political Protest, 10, 81–98.

doi : 10.1080/14742837.2011.545228 ^ Douglas, Susan J. (1994). Where the girls are: Growing up female with the mass media. New York: Random House.

^ Press, Andrea L. (March 2011).

"Feminism and Media in the Post-feminist Era" .

Feminist Media Studies .

11 (1): 107– 113.

doi : 10.1080/14680777.2011.537039 .

ISSN 1468-0777 .

S2CID 148893209 .

^ Press, A. (2011). Feminism and Media in the post-feminist era.

Feminist Media Studies , 11 , 107-113.

doi : 10.1080/14680777.2011.537039 ^ Armstrong, Elizabeth A., England, Paula and Fogarty, Alison C. K. (2010) “Orgasm in college hookups and relationships”. In Families As They Really Are, Edited by: Risman, B. J. 362–377. New York: Norton.

^ a b c d e Baker Beck, Debra (1998). "The "F" Word: How the Media Frame Feminism".

NWSA Journal .

10 (1): 139– 153.

JSTOR 4316558 .

^ Lind, R., Saio, C. (2006). The framing of feminists and feminism in news and public affairs programs in U.S. electronic media.

Journal of Communication, 52, 211-228.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2002.tb02540.x ^ Creedon, Pamela J. (1993). Framing feminism—A feminist primer for the mass media.

Media Studies Journal , 7 (1/2) , 69–80.

^ Jones, Ann (1992, January/February). "Backlash and beyond".

Ms.

, 58–60.

^ Davis, Flora (1991).

Moving the Mountain: The Women's Movement in America Since 1960 . New York: Simon & Schuster.

^ Smith, Stacy (2013). "If Dr.Martin Luthur, Jr. had a Twitter Account: A Look at Collective Action, Social Media, and Social Change".

Seattle Journal for Social Justice .

12 : 165.

^ Eslen-Ziya, Hande (2013). "Social Media and Turkish Feminism: New Resources for Social Activism".

Feminist Media Studies .

13 (5): 860– 870.

doi : 10.1080/14680777.2013.838369 .

S2CID 145673889 .

^ Grinburg, Emanuella (9 September 2014).

"Meredith Vieira explains #WhyIStayed" .

CNN . Retrieved 25 February 2015 .

^ Springer, Aisha.

"#HobbyLobby: Feminist Twitter Responds to Hobby Lobby Ruling" .

HashtagFeminism.com . Archived from the original on 9 October 2014 . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

^ Bennett, Jessica.

"Behold the Power of #Hashtag Feminism" .

Time . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

^ a b c Tippett, E. (2018). The Legal Implications of the MeToo Movement.

Minnesota Law Review.

^ Lee, Bun-Hee (16 May 2018). "#Me Too Movement; It Is Time That We All Act and Participate in Transformation".

Psychiatry Investigation .

15 (5): 433-433.

doi : 10.30773/pi.2018.04.30 ^ "Emma Watson: Gender equality is your issue too" .

headQuarters . 20 September 2014 . Retrieved 30 October 2015 .

^ Evans and Clark, Heather and Jennifer (2016). " 'You Tweet Like a Girl!': How Female Candidates Campaign on Twitter".

American Politics Research .

44 (2): 326.

doi : 10.1177/1532673X15597747 .

S2CID 155159860 .

^ Drazkiewicz and Strong, Elia and Thomas (2020).

"Repealing Ireland's Eighth Amendment: abortion rights and democracy today" (PDF) .

Social Anthropology .

28 (3): 561– 584.

doi : 10.1111/1469-8676.12914 .

S2CID 225319044 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 June 2022 . Retrieved 21 June 2022 .

^ Fischer, Clara (2020).

"Feminists Redraw Public and Private Spheres: Abortion, Vulnerability, and the Affective Campaign to Repeal the Eighth Amendment" (PDF) .

Journal of Women in Culture & Society .

45 (4): 985– 1010.

doi : 10.1086/707999 .

S2CID 225086418 .

^ Pautz, Michelle C. (12 March 2015).

"Films can have a major influence on how people view government" .

American Politics and Policy Blog . USAPP . Retrieved 16 November 2021 .

^ a b c d Mayne, Judith (Fall 2016). "Feminisms: Diversity, Difference and Multiplicity in Contemporary Film Cultures".

Film Quarterly .

70 (4): 120– 123.

doi : 10.1177/1350506816665724 .

S2CID 151725963 .

^ Mulvey, Laura (1975). "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema".

Feminisms . pp.

438– 448.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-14428-0_27 (inactive 12 July 2025).

ISBN 978-0-333-69099-4 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Freeland, Cynthia A.

Feminist Film Theory . Encyclopedia of Aesthetics: Oxford University Press.

^ a b c d Freeland, Cynthia A. (3 April 2018).

"Feminist Film Theory" .

Encyclopedia of Aesthetics . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ "10.4 The Impact of Video Games on Culture | Media and Culture" .

courses.lumenlearning.com . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ a b Ruberg, Bonnie (3 April 2019).

"Representing sex workers in video games: feminisms, fantasies of exceptionalism, and the value of erotic labor" .

Feminist Media Studies .

19 (3): 313– 330.

doi : 10.1080/14680777.2018.1477815 .

ISSN 1468-0777 .

S2CID 149668572 .

^ a b Yao, Mike Z.; Mahood, Chad; Linz, Daniel (2010).

"Sexual Priming, Gender Stereotyping, and Likelihood to Sexually Harass: Examining the Cognitive Effects of Playing a Sexually-Explicit Video Game" .

Sex Roles .

62 (1): 77– 88.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-009-9695-4 .

ISSN 0360-0025 .

PMC 2807025 .

PMID 20098511 .

^ Joeres, Ruth-Ellen.

"Frauen-Zeitung" .

Encyclopedia of 1848 Revolutions . Ohio University . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

^ Moon, Joan.

"The Feminist Press in France" .

Encyclopedia of 1848 Revolutions . Ohio University . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

^ Zweig, Stefan; Rolland, Romain (1 July 2014).

Correspondance 1910-1919 . Albin Michel.

ISBN 978-2-226-30233-5 .

OCLC 937861267 .

^ Schallwig, Julien Chuzeville, Noémie (21 October 2022).

"REYNAUD Colette" .

Eliza, Colette (in French). Maitron/Editions de l'Atelier . Retrieved 10 January 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "The Revolution" .

Accessible Archives . Accessible Archives Inc. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017 . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

^ Clark, Cat.

"Susan B. Anthony's Revolution" .

Feminists For Life . Feminists for Life of America . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Media culture Media 24-hour news cycle Alternative media Digital media Electronic media Independent media Lost media Mass media Mainstream media Media economics Mobile media New media News broadcasting News media Old media Physical media Social media Influencers State media Streaming media Principles Media development Media policy Media independence Freedom of information Freedom of speech Media pluralism Media transparency Marketplace of ideas Ideology Advanced capitalism American Dream Bipartisanship Consumerism Pensée unique Deception Forms Advertising Propaganda Fake news Public relations Spin Tabloid journalism Techniques Cult of personality Dumbing down Framing Media circus Media event Narcotizing dysfunction Recuperation Sensationalism Viral phenomenon Others Catch and kill Crowd manipulation Managing the news Media manipulation Philosophers Theodor W. Adorno Jean Baudrillard Edward Bernays Noam Chomsky Guy Debord Walter Lippmann Marshall McLuhan Jacques Rancière Counterculture Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstration Graffiti Occupation Political satire Protest Punk Review bomb Strike action In academia Influence of mass media Media studies Mediatization Semiotic democracy The Lonely Crowd Issues Agenda-setting theory Anonymity Concentration of media ownership Exploitation of women Freedom of speech Media bias Privacy Social influence Transparency Violence Synonyms Advanced capitalism Culture industry Mass society Media franchise Post-Fordism Society of the Spectacle Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminism_and_media&oldid=1305162450 " Categories : Feminism and society Social media campaigns Mass media about Internet culture Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2022 Use American English from February 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 12:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminism and media 5 languages Add topic

