Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Influence of literary critics 3 Subjects of the paintings 4 Landscape as the most popular genre of Peredvizhniki 5 Reproduction of works 6 Decline of creativity 7 Gallery 8 Members 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Peredvizhniki 43 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Kotava Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of Russian realist artists This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Peredvizhniki" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ilya Repin , Barge Haulers on the Volga , 1870–1873 Ivan Shishkin and Konstantin Savitsky , Morning in a Pine Forest , 1878 Peredvizhniki ( Russian : передви́жники , IPA: [pɪrɪˈdviʐnɪkɪ] ), often called The Wanderers or The Itinerants in English, were a group of Russian realist artists who formed an artists' cooperative in protest of academic restrictions; it evolved into the Society for Travelling Art Exhibitions , in short Peredvizhniks , in 1870.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] In 1863 a group of fourteen students decided to leave the Imperial Academy of Arts in Saint Petersburg. The students found the rules of the Academy constraining; the teachers were conservative and there was a strict separation between high and low art. In an effort to bring art to the people, the students formed an independent artistic society; The Petersburg Cooperative of Artists (Artel) . In 1870, this organization was largely succeeded by the Association of Travelling Art Exhibits (Peredvizhniki) to give people from the provinces a chance to follow the achievements of Russian Art, and to teach people to appreciate art. The society maintained independence from state support and brought the art, which illustrated the contemporary life of the people from Moscow and Saint Petersburg , to the provinces.

From 1871 to 1923, the society arranged 48 mobile exhibitions in St. Petersburg and Moscow, after which they were shown in Kiev , Kharkov , Kazan , Oryol , Riga , Odessa and other cities.

[ 2 ] Influence of literary critics [ edit ] Peredvizhniki were influenced by the public views of the literary critics Vissarion Belinsky and Nikolai Chernyshevsky , both of whom espoused liberal ideas. Belinsky thought that literature and art should attribute a social and moral responsibility. Like  most Slavophiles, Chernyshevsky ardently supported the emancipation of serfs , which was finally realized in the reform of 1861 . He viewed press censorship, serfdom, and capital punishment as Western influences. Because of his political activism, officials prohibited publication of any of his writing, including his dissertation; but it eventually found its way to the art world of nineteenth-century Russia. In 1863, almost immediately after the emancipation of serfs, Chernyshevsky's goals were realized with the help of Peredvizhniki, who took the pervasive Slavophile-populist idea that Russia had a distinguishable, modest, inner beauty of its own and worked out how to display it on canvas.

[ 3 ] Subjects of the paintings [ edit ] External videos Newcomer at School by Emily Shanks An introduction to Peredvizhniki , 12:20, in Swedish with English subtitles.

Interview with guest curator David Jackson , 3:30, in English with Swedish subtitles.

Interview with Galina Tjurak , 2:30, in Russian with English subtitles.

Nationalmuseum (Stockholm), 2011 Peredvizhniki portrayed the many-sided aspects of social life, often critical of inequities and injustices. But their art showed not only poverty but also the beauty of the folk way of life; not only suffering but also fortitude and strength of characters. Peredvizhniki condemned the Russian aristocratic orders and autocratic government in their humanistic art. They portrayed the emancipation movement of Russian people with empathy (for example, The Arrest of a Propagandist , Refusal of Confession , and They Did Not Expect Him by Ilya Yefimovich Repin ). They portrayed social-urban life, and later used historic art to depict the common people ( The Morning of the Streltsy Execution by Vasily Surikov ).

During their blossoming (1870–1890), the Peredvizhniki society developed an increasingly wider scope, with more natural and free images. In contrast to the traditional dark palette of the time, they chose a lighter palette, with a freer manner in their technique. They worked for naturalness in their images, and the depiction of people's relationship with their surroundings. The society united most of the highly talented artists of the country. Among Peredvizhniki there were artists of Ukraine , Latvia , and Armenia . The society also showed the work of Mark Antokolski , Vasili Vereshchagin , and Andrei Ryabushkin . The work of the critic and democrat Vladimir Stasov was important for the development of Peredvizhniki's art.

[ 1 ] Pavel Mikhailovich Tretyakov showed the work of these artists in his gallery and gave them important material and moral support.

[ 4 ] Landscape as the most popular genre of Peredvizhniki [ edit ] Landscape painting flourished in the 1870s and 1880s. Peredvizhniki painted mainly landscapes; some, like Polenov, used plein air technique. Two painters, Ivan Shishkin and Isaak Levitan, painted only landscapes of Russia. Shishkin is still considered to be the Russian "Singer of forest", while Levitan's landscapes are famous for their intense moods. The Russian landscape gained importance as a national icon after Peredvizhniki.

[ 5 ] Peredvizhniki painted landscapes  to explore the beauty of their own country and encourage ordinary people to love and preserve it. Levitan once said, "I imagine such a gracefulness in our Russian land – overflowing rivers bringing everything back to life. There is no country more beautiful than Russia! There can be a true landscapist only in Russia".  Peredvizhniki gave a national character to landscapes, so people of other nations could recognize Russian landscape. The landscapes of Peredvizhniki are the symbolic embodiments of Russian nationality.

[ 2 ] Reproduction of works [ edit ] Even though the number of travelling exhibition visitors from the provinces was increasing during the years, the main audience was the urban elite. Local photographers created the first reproductions of Peredvizhniki's paintings, which helped popularize the works  and could be bought at exhibitions.

Niva magazine also published illustrated articles about the exhibitions. Since 1898, the landscapes of the society have been used in the postcard industry. Various books of poems were published with the illustrations of landscapes. Ordinary Russian people at that time could not afford to go to Moscow or Saint Petersburg, so popularization of Russian art made them familiar with a number of Russian art masterpieces. Even now publishers use the reproductions in textbooks as a visual icon of national identity.

[ 4 ] Decline of creativity [ edit ] As the authority and public influence of the society steadily grew, government officials had to stop their efforts to repress the members. Attempts were made to subordinate their activity, and raise the falling value of Academy of Arts-sanctioned works. By the 1890s, the Academy of Arts structure was including Peredvizhniki art in its classes and history, and the influence of the artists showed in national art schools.

[ 6 ] Gallery [ edit ] Social realism Konstantin Savitsky , Repairing the Railroad , 1874 Ilya Repin , Religious Procession in Kursk Province , 1880–1883 Vladimir Makovsky , Bankruptcy , 1881 Grigoriy Myasoyedov , Busy Time for the Mowers 1887 Landscapes Alexei Savrasov , The Rooks Have Returned , 1871 Ivan Shishkin , A Rye Field , 1878 Arkhip Kuindzhi , Moonlit Night on the Dnieper , 1882 Isaac Levitan , Over Eternal Peace , 1894 Portraits Vasily Perov , Portrait of Fyodor Dostoyevsky , 1872 Ivan Kramskoi , Portrait of an Unknown Woman , 1883 Valentin Serov , The girl with peaches , 1887 Nikolai Yaroshenko , Portrait of Vladimir Solovyov , 1892 Genre paintings Illarion Pryanishnikov , Jokers .

Gostiny Dvor in Moscow, 1865 Vasily Perov, The Hunters at Rest , 1871 Vasily Polenov , Moscow Courtyard , 1878 Vassily Maximov , Everything In the Past , 1889 History paintings Nikolai Ge , Peter the Great Interrogating the Tsarevich Alexei Petrovich at Peterhof , 1871 Vasily Surikov , The Morning of the Streltsy Execution , 1881 Ilya Repin, Reply of the Zaporozhian Cossacks , 1880–1891 Andrei Ryabushkin , Session of Tsar Michael I with Boyar Duma , 1893 Fantasy paintings Ivan Kramskoi, The Mermaids , 1871 Ilya Repin, Sadko , 1876 Viktor Vasnetsov , The Flying Carpet , 1890 Viktor Vasnetsov, The Bogatyrs , 1898 Religious paintings Ivan Kramskoi, Christ in the Desert , 1872 Nikolai Ge, What is Truth?

, 1890 Viktor Vasnetsov, Baptism of Saint Prince Vladimir , 1890 Mikhail Nesterov , The Vision to the Youth Bartholomew , 1890 Members [ edit ] Artel of Artists (1863–1864) (from left to right): Bogdan Wenig , Firs Zhuravlev , Alexander Ivanovich Morozov , Kirill Lemokh , Ivan Kramskoi , Alexander Litovchenko , Konstantin Makovsky , Nikolai Dmitriev-Orenburgsky , Nikolai Petrovich Petrov , Vasily Kreitan , Mikhail Peskov , Nikolay Shustov , Alexei Korzukhin , Alexander Konstantinovich Grigoryev [ ru ] The Peredvizhniki (1885) (from left to right): Grigoriy Myasoyedov , Konstantin Savitsky , Vasily Polenov , Sergey Ammosov [ ru ] , Alexander Kiselyov , Yefim Volkov , Nikolai Nevrev , Vasily Surikov , Vladimir Makovsky , Alexander Litovchenko , Ivan Shishkin , Kirill Lemokh , Ivan Kramskoi , Nikolai Yaroshenko , Ilya Repin , Pavel Brullov , Pavel Ivachyov [ ru ] (manager of Peredvizhniki cooperative), Nikolay Makovsky , Alexander Beggrov Peredvizhniki artists included: [ 6 ] Abram Arkhipov Ivan Bogdanov Nikolay Bogdanov-Belsky Alexey Bogolyubov [ 7 ] Pavel Brullov Nikolai Ge Kārlis Hūns Nikolay Kasatkin Alexander Kiselyov Ivan Kramskoi Arkhip Kuindzhi Nikolai Kuznetsov Isaac Levitan Rafail Levitsky Alexander Litovchenko Vladimir Makovsky Vassily Maximov Grigoriy Myasoyedov Leonid Pasternak Vasily Perov Konstantin Pervukhin Vasily Polenov Illarion Pryanishnikov Ilya Repin Andrei Ryabushkin Antonina Rzhevskaya Konstantin Savitsky Alexei Savrasov Valentin Serov Emily Shanks Ivan Shishkin Alexei Stepanov Vasily Surikov Vitaly Tikhov Apollinary Vasnetsov Viktor Vasnetsov Yefim Volkov Nikolai Yaroshenko Nikolai Zagorsky See also [ edit ] List of Russian artists List of 19th-century Russian painters List of 20th-century Russian painters References [ edit ] ^ a b Fedotova, Y. (2019-10-04).

"Who were the Peredvizhniki and why were they so important in Russian art?" . Russia Beyond The Headlines . Retrieved 2020-02-19 .

^ a b Ely, Christopher (2000). "Critics in the native soil: landscape and conflicting ideas of nationality in Imperial Russia".

Ecumene .

7 (3): 253– 270.

doi : 10.1177/096746080000700302 .

S2CID 143347828 .

^ Sartorti, Rosalinde (2010). "Pictures at an exhibition: Russian land in a global world".

Studies of East European Thought .

62 (3/4): 377– 399.

doi : 10.1007/s11212-010-9128-5 .

S2CID 145758189 .

^ a b Brooks, Jeffrey (2010). "The Russian nation imagined: the peoples of Russia as seen in popular imagery, 1860–1890s".

Journal of Social History .

43 (3): 535– 557.

doi : 10.1353/jsh.0.0292 .

S2CID 142053553 .

^ Edward Strachan, Roy Bolton (2008). Roy Bolton (ed.).

Russia & Europe in the Nineteenth Century (illustrated ed.). Sphinx Fine Art. p. 104.

ISBN 9781907200021 .

^ a b Donnelly, Michael E.

"The Immortal Itinerants (Peredvizhniki)" . Russian Paintings Gallery . Retrieved 30 June 2018 .

^ See Bogolyubov article Further reading [ edit ] Society of Wandering Art Exhibits. Letters and Documents. 1869–1899. Vol. 1, 2., Publisher ‘Iskusstvo’, Moscow, 1987. Text in Russian Evgeny Steiner. “The Battle for ‘The People’s Cause’ or for the Market Case?” // Cahiers du Monde Russe, 50:4, 2009; pp. 627–646.

Evgeny Steiner. “Pursuing Independence: Kramskoi and the Itinerants Vs. the Academy of Arts” // Russian Review, #70, 2011, pp. 252–271.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Peredvizhniki .

"A battle for the 'people's cause' or for the market case" – Cairn.info Peredvizhniki (Wanderers) , by Kristen M. Harkness, Smarthistory "The Seeds of Russia's Cultural Revolution: The Peredvizhniki (Wanderers) and The Society for Traveling Art Exhibitions" Society of Traveling Exhibitions Web Site (in Russian) v t e Russian art and literary movements Abramtsevo Colony Acmeist poetry Russian avant-garde Second Russian avant-garde Conceptualism Constructivism The Five Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Ego-Futurism Zaum Imaginism Lieutenant prose Metarealism Mir iskusstva Natural school New peasant poets Oberiu Peredvizhniki Rayonism Russian postmodernism Russian symbolism Socialist realism Soviet nonconformism Stroganov school Suprematism Village prose v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peredvizhniki&oldid=1285246971 " Categories : Peredvizhniki Russian landscape painters 1923 disestablishments Organizations established in 1863 Russian art movements Russian artist groups and collectives Social realism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 15:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peredvizhniki 43 languages Add topic

