Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Female students 1.3 New campuses 2 Academics 3 Athletics 4 Facilities Toggle Facilities subsection 4.1 Buildings 5 Notable alumni, faculty, and others 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Episcopal Academy 1 language مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°00′22″N 75°25′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.006°N 75.425°W ﻿ / 40.006; -75.425 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School in Newtown Square, Pennsylvania, US This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Episcopal Academy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Episcopal Academy Location 1785 Bishop White Drive Newtown Square , Pennsylvania 19073 United States Information Type Private Motto Esse Quam Videri ("To Be Rather than to Seem") Religious affiliation(s) Episcopal Church in the United States of America Established 1785 ; 240 years ago ( 1785 ) Headmaster Thomas Joseph (T. J.) Locke Faculty 180 Gender Coeducational Enrollment 1,272 Student to teacher ratio 7:1 Campus Suburban Color(s) Blue and white Athletics 29 varsity teams Athletics conference Inter-Academic League Nickname Churchmen Rival The Haverford School , Baldwin School and Agnes Irwin School Newspaper The Academy Scholium Website episcopalacademy .org The Episcopal Academy , founded in 1785, is a private, co-educational school for grades Pre-K through 12 based in Newtown Square, Pennsylvania . Prior to 2008, the main campus was located in Merion Station and the satellite campus was located in Devon . The Newtown Square facility is on a 123-acre (0.50 km 2 ) campus.

[ 1 ] The Academy is affiliated with the Episcopal Church .

History [ edit ] Episcopal Academy in Philadelphia, circa 1790 Early years [ edit ] The Episcopal Academy was founded in 1785 by the Rt. Rev.

William White at Old Christ Church in Philadelphia as an all-boys school, focusing on classical education in Greek, Latin, religion, mathematics, and business. It was also a pre-missionary school. Trustees included two signers of the Declaration of Independence, as well as bankers, merchants, and ministers. It was founded two years after American Revolutionary War ended.

The faculty was composed of notable figures such as Noah Webster Jr.

, who developed the Webster Dictionaries. Its first campus was located on the east side of Fourth Street and was directed by Rev.

John Andrews , D.D., the Academy's first headmaster.

[ 2 ] When Dr. Andrews and several of faculty members left in 1798 to teach at the University of Pennsylvania , The Episcopal Academy was reconstituted as a free school. In 1816 it became a Second Classical Academy, and a free school again in 1828. During some years, the Academy did not operate as an educational entity.

In 1846 the school was reconstituted, this time as a Third Classical Academy; it has operated continuously since. In 1850, the school moved to a building at Juniper and Locust streets. It operated there until 1921, when it moved to a new campus in suburban Merion, Pennsylvania , on the Main Line of the commuter railroad.

[ 3 ] Female students [ edit ] Female students attended the Academy between 1789 and 1818. It was not until 1974 that the academy implemented a gradual plan for permanent co-education at the school. In 1974, girls were admitted to kindergarten, and then to one higher grade each year thereafter. The class of 1984 was the first co-educational class to graduate from the Academy.

[ 3 ] New campuses [ edit ] Chapel at the Episcopal Academy Episcopal Academy was located in Merion, Pennsylvania , from 1921 until 2008, when it moved to Newtown Square, Pennsylvania .

[ 4 ] In June 1998, the Episcopal Academy Board of Trustees directed the "active pursuit of a large tract of land in the western suburbs to serve as a long-term asset and a means of preserving future options." [ 5 ] After receiving a $20 million donation, the Board purchased a 123-acre (0.50 km 2 ) tract of land in Newtown Square on Darby-Paoli Road ( Pennsylvania Route 252 ).

[ 4 ] The $212.5 million project was completed in 2008 and opened for the 2008–2009 school year.

[ 6 ] The new campus has academic, arts, athletic, and spiritual facilities. It features keepsakes from the Merion and Devon campuses: the original stained glass windows from the Class of 1944 Chapel, a clock (which was installed on the Clark Campus Green), and several artifacts in the Crawford Campus Center.

Brailsford & Dunlavey served as the Academy's on-site program manager throughout each phase of the campus development project.

[ 7 ] The architecture firms, including Venturi, Scott Brown and Associates , Gund Partnership, Bohlin Cywinski Jackson , and RMJM Hillier , "coordinated the materials used as well as the landscape layout of the campus, with its pastoral central quadrangle and collegiate-village scale".

[ 8 ] Academics [ edit ] The Academy is accredited by the Pennsylvania Association of Independent Schools. The Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools' "Accreditation for Growth" protocol governed accreditation until the current accreditation cycle.

[ 9 ] Athletics [ edit ] The Episcopal Academy is a member of the Inter-Academic League (Inter-Ac).

For boys, the Inter-Ac league includes the Haverford School , Malvern Preparatory School , Chestnut Hill Academy , Penn Charter , and Germantown Academy . For girls, this league includes Penn Charter , Germantown Academy , Notre Dame Academy , the Baldwin School , the Agnes Irwin School , and Springside School .

The sports requirement requires all students to participate in athletics during each of the three seasons. Freshman and sophomores are required to participate in at least two inter-scholastic sports with the option of participating in the "Fitness" option for one season. Juniors may elect to participate in the "Fitness" option for two seasons. "Fitness" consists of organized athletic activities three days a week and community service two days a week. There is also a theatre offering (both on the stage and in technical theatre) in the spring (a musical) and the fall. This counts as a "Fitness" option as well. Seniors are permitted to take a "Senior Cut", that is they do not have to participate in any athletics for one season so long as they never received an "unsatisfactory" effort grade in any sport during their four years in the upper school.

As a co-founder of the oldest High School sport's league in America, the Inter-Academic League, and in the second oldest school rivalry in the nation, (against the Haverford School , later adding Agnes Irwin School ) Episcopal Academy athletic teams have gained a national reputation. The boys basketball team, coached by Daniel Dougherty, gained national attention in 2005 and 2006, with full team effort including players Gerald Henderson '06 and Wayne Ellington '06. Both were nationally ranked high school basketball players. Henderson signed to play for Duke University while Ellington signed to play for the University of North Carolina .

Facilities [ edit ] Buildings [ edit ] This section is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this section , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( April 2019 ) Academic Center, with the Middle School, Upper School, and Science Center.

Lower School Building Crawford Campus Center, including the Annenberg Library Theater with Stadium Seating Chapel, at the Center of Campus Athletic Center, with a competition gymnasium and pool Stadium Football Field Black Box Theatre Head of School's House Chaplain's House Notable alumni, faculty, and others [ edit ] Main article: List of Episcopal Academy people References [ edit ] ^ "The Future of Episcopal Academy" . Retrieved December 19, 2007 .

^ EMINENT PHILADELPHIANS, NOW DECEASED. COLLECTED FROM ORIGINAL AND AUTHENTIC SOURCES, BY HENRY SIMPSON, MEMBER OF THE HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA. Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1859, p.15.

^ a b "US Handbook: History and Traditions" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2008 . Retrieved December 19, 2007 .

^ a b Gammage, Jeff (October 21, 2007).

"Episcopal Academy Prepped for Big Change" . Philadelphia, PA: The Philadelphia Inquirer . Retrieved December 19, 2007 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Architecture.yp: The Episcopal Academy Newtown Square campus" . June 20, 2007.

Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved May 4, 2012 .

^ "The Future of Episcopal Academy: About the Move" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2008 . Retrieved December 19, 2007 .

^ "Brailsford & Dunlavey: Program Management Firm (B&D)" .

Archived from the original on October 15, 2016 . Retrieved January 17, 2015 .

^ "AIArchitect This Week | at Episcopal Academy, Even the Halls and the Walls will be a New Edition" .

info.aia.org . Archived from the original on July 10, 2012 . Retrieved June 6, 2022 .

^ "Accreditation for Growth" .

inside.episcopalacademy.org . Archived from the original on January 6, 2014 . Retrieved June 6, 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Lyons, Robert S. (2010).

On Any Given Sunday, A Life of Bert Bell . Philadelphia:Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-1-59213-731-2 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Episcopal Academy (Pennsylvania) .

School Website v t e Education in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania Colleges and universities Arcadia University Bryn Athyn College Bryn Mawr College Gwynedd Mercy University Haverford College Manor College Montgomery County Community College Salus University Penn State Abington Rosemont College St. Charles Borromeo Seminary Temple University Ambler Ursinus College Westminster Theological Seminary Public school districts Abington School District Boyertown Area School District Bryn Athyn School District Cheltenham Township School District Colonial School District Hatboro-Horsham School District Jenkintown School District Lower Merion School District Lower Moreland Township School District Methacton School District Norristown Area School District North Penn School District Perkiomen Valley School District Pottsgrove School District Pottstown School District Souderton Area School District Springfield Township School District Spring-Ford Area School District Upper Dublin School District Upper Merion Area School District Upper Moreland School District Upper Perkiomen School District Wissahickon School District Private secondary schools Academy Of The New Church Boys School Academy Of The New Church Girls School Abington Friends School AIM Academy Bishop McDevitt High School Calvary Baptist School Coventry Christian Schools Dock Mennonite Academy Episcopal Academy Friends' Central School Germantown Academy Gwynedd Mercy Academy High School The Baldwin School The Haverford School The Hill School Huntingdon Valley Christian Academy Indian Creek Mennonite School Jack M. Barrack Hebrew Academy Kennedy-Kenrick Catholic High School Kohelet Yeshiva High School Lakeside School Lansdale Catholic High School La Salle College High School Lincoln Academy Main Line Academy Martin Luther School Mary, Mother of the Redeemer Catholic School Meadowbrook School Merion Mercy Academy Mount Saint Joseph Academy New Life Youth & Family Svcs The Pathway School The Perkiomen School Pope John Paul II Catholic High School Reformation Christian School Saint Aloysius School Saint Basil Academy Saint Katherine Day School Saint Pius X High School Stowe Lighthouse Christ Academy Shipley School Torah Academy of Greater Philadelphia Trinity Christian Academy Valley Forge Baptist Academy Wyncote Academy v t e Inter-Academic League Formerly the Interacademic Athletic Association Boys' schools Springside Chestnut Hill Academy Episcopal Academy Germantown Academy Haverford School Malvern Preparatory School William Penn Charter School Girls' schools Agnes Irwin School The Baldwin School Episcopal Academy Germantown Academy Academy of Notre Dame de Namur Springside Chestnut Hill Academy William Penn Charter School v t e Delaware County , Pennsylvania schools Main school districts Chester Upland Chester High School Science and Discovery High School Smedley Allied Health School Chichester Chichester High School Garnet Valley Garnet Valley High School Haverford Township Haverford High School Haverford Middle School Interboro Interboro High School Marple Newtown Marple Newtown High School Penn-Delco Sun Valley High School Radnor Township Radnor High School Radnor Middle School Ridley Ridley High School Rose Tree Media Penncrest High School Southeast Delco Academy Park High School Springfield Springfield High School Upper Darby Upper Darby High School Wallingford-Swarthmore Strath Haven High School William Penn Penn Wood High School Other schools Charter schools Chester Charter Scholars Academy Private schools Academy of Notre Dame de Namur Agnes Irwin School Christian Academy Delaware County Christian School Episcopal Academy Faith Temple Christian School George Crothers Memorial School Hill Top Preparatory School Media-Providence Friends School New Beginnings Academy Valley Forge Military Academy and College Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia Archbishop John Carroll High School Archbishop Prendergast High School Cardinal O'Hara High School Monsignor Bonner High School Closed St. James High School for Boys Unionville-Chadds Ford (partially located in Chester Co.) Unionville High School West Chester Area (partially located in Chester Co.) West Chester East High School West Chester Henderson High School West Chester Rustin High School Fugett Middle School Peirce Middle School v t e Montgomery County , Pennsylvania, schools Main school districts Abington Abington Senior High School Bryn Athyn Does not operate any schools Cheltenham Cheltenham High School Cedarbrook Middle School Colonial Plymouth Whitemarsh High School Colonial Middle School Hatboro-Horsham Hatboro-Horsham Senior High School Keith Valley Middle School Jenkintown Jenkintown Middle/High School Lower Merion Lower Merion High School Harriton High School Bala Cynwyd Middle School Welsh Valley Middle School Black Rock Middle School Lower Moreland Township Lower Moreland High School Methacton Methacton High School Norristown Area Norristown Area High School North Penn North Penn High School Perkiomen Valley Perkiomen Valley High School Pottsgrove Pottsgrove High School Pottstown Pottstown Senior High School Springfield Township Springfield Township High School Upper Dublin Upper Dublin High School Upper Merion Area Upper Merion Area High School Upper Moreland Upper Moreland High School Wissahickon Wissahickon High School Wissahickon Middle School Other schools Boyertown Area Boyertown Area Senior High School Other schools are in Berks County Private schools Abington Friends School Academy Of The New Church Boys School Academy Of The New Church Girls School AIM Academy Armenian Sisters Academy Calvary Baptist School Coventry Christian Schools Dock Mennonite Academy Episcopal Academy French International School of Philadelphia Friends' Central School Germantown Academy Huntingdon Valley Christian Academy Indian Creek Mennonite School Jack M. Barrack Hebrew Academy La Salle College High School Lakeside School Lincoln Academy Main Line Academy Martin Luther School Mary, Mother of the Redeemer Catholic School Meadowbrook School Merion Mercy Academy Mount Saint Joseph Academy New Life Youth & Family Svcs Reformation Christian School Saint Aloysius School Saint Basil Academy Saint Katherine Day School Shipley School Stowe Lighthouse Christ Academy The Baldwin School The Haverford School The Hill School The Pathway School The Perkiomen School Torah Academy of Greater Philadelphia Trinity Christian Academy Valley Forge Baptist Academy Wyncote Academy Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia Bishop McDevitt High School Country Day School of the Sacred Heart Gwynedd Mercy Academy High School Lansdale Catholic High School Pope John Paul II High School Souderton Area Souderton Area High School Other schools are in Bucks County Spring-Ford Area Spring-Ford Senior High School Other schools are in Chester County Upper Perkiomen Upper Perkiomen High School Other schools are in Berks County Sections of the Boyertown Area , Souderton Area , Spring-Ford Area , and Upper Perkiomen school districts extend into other counties; only schools in Montgomery County should be listed in this template Authority control databases ISNI 40°00′22″N 75°25′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.006°N 75.425°W ﻿ / 40.006; -75.425 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐26kt6
Cached time: 20250817055440
Cache expiry: 1274731
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.663 seconds
Real time usage: 0.838 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4100/1000000
Revision size: 12003/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 176667/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4300/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78446/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.393/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10268659/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  712.565      1 -total
 24.75%  176.370      1 Template:Infobox_school
 21.67%  154.393      1 Template:Infobox
 19.46%  138.649      1 Template:Reflist
 16.04%  114.319      9 Template:Navbox
 14.79%  105.421      7 Template:Cite_web
 11.10%   79.095      1 Template:Education_in_Montgomery_County,_Pennsylvania
  9.32%   66.429      1 Template:Short_description
  7.66%   54.561      2 Template:Ambox
  7.59%   54.080      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4282193:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817055440 and revision id 1305734892. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Episcopal_Academy&oldid=1305734892 " Categories : Private high schools in Pennsylvania Private elementary schools in Pennsylvania Private middle schools in Pennsylvania 1785 establishments in Pennsylvania Schools in Delaware County, Pennsylvania Educational institutions established in 1789 Episcopal schools in the United States Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2010 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2025 Articles needing additional references from April 2019 All articles needing additional references Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages using infobox school with a linked country Pages using infobox school with unsupported parameters Articles needing cleanup from April 2019 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from April 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 20:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Episcopal Academy 1 language Add topic

