Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Work 2 Personal life 3 Selected publications Toggle Selected publications subsection 3.1 Urban planning 3.2 Forestry 3.3 Railroad History 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Randal O'Toole Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American city planning commentator O'Toole speaks at the Sensible Land-Use Coalition in Minneapolis in 2014 Randal O'Toole (born 1952) is an American public policy analyst. The majority of O'Toole's work has focused on public lands, land-use regulation, and transportation, particularly light rail . He frequently criticizes proposals for passenger rail systems.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] He had been associated with the Cato Institute as an adjunct scholar since 1995 and a senior fellow from 2007 to 2021.

[ 4 ] O'Toole was the McCluskey Visiting Fellow for Conservation at Yale University in 1998, and has served as a visiting scholar at the University of California, Berkeley (1999) and Utah State University (2000). O'Toole studied economics at the University of Oregon at the graduate level for three years but did not receive a degree, he also holds a B.S. Degree in forest management and geology from the University of Oregon.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] O'Toole's private consultancy is known as the Thoreau Institute.

O'Toole usually refers to himself as "The Antiplanner".

[ 8 ] He was fired by the Cato Institute in December 2021.

[ 9 ] Work [ edit ] Early in his career, O'Toole worked with environmental groups to oppose the United States Forest Service 's subsidized sales of public forest timber to the timber industry.  His book Reforming the Forest Service built on his experience during this effort, and proposed a number of free-market solutions to management of U.S. public land and timber. He has written analyses of the usage and development plans of a number of U.S. national forests, working with state environmental agencies and other groups.

[ citation needed ] In the 1990s, O'Toole emerged as an outspoken critic of New Urbanist design and smart growth strategies [ 10 ] after learning in 1995 of a county plan to rezone his neighborhood to allow higher density and mixed use development.

[ 1 ] O'Toole contends that these development strategies—in which regulatory measures and tax incentives are employed to encourage denser development, more efficient land use, and greater use of public transportation—ignore the desires and preferences of most housing consumers and ultimately waste public funds. He has campaigned against smart growth policies and light rail systems in several U.S. states as well as in Winnipeg, Manitoba , and Ottawa, Ontario .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] His 2001 book, The Vanishing Automobile and Other Urban Myths , was written as a detailed critique of these styles of planning. He continues to advocate for free market solutions to urban planning and design in his writing and teaching.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] O'Toole has written four books published by the Cato Institute.

The Best-Laid Plans argues that long-range comprehensive government planning necessarily relies on fads and fails to account for current and future public desires and needs.

[ 2 ] Gridlock looks at the history of transportation in America and argues that the future is in autonomous personal vehicles, not rail transit or high-speed rail.

[ 16 ] American Nightmare examines the history of housing in America and argues that zoning and, more recently, growth-management planning represents efforts by the middle- and upper-classes to separate themselves from the working class.

[ 17 ] Romance of the Rails looks at the history of urban and intercity rail transit in the United States to argue that they once worked but no longer work today.

[ 18 ] Personal life [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) He moved from Bandon, Oregon [ 11 ] to Camp Sherman, Oregon , where he runs the "Thoreau Institute." [ 19 ] [ 20 ] While critical of government subsidies to all forms of transportation, O'Toole is a fan of passenger trains and an amateur rail historian.  He currently runs a web site, Streamliner Memories, to share scanned copies of his personal library of railroadiana.

[ 21 ] However, O'Toole believes trains are merely historical and too outdated to ever be useful after the invention of airplanes.

[ 22 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Urban planning [ edit ] The Vanishing Automobile and Other Urban Myths (Thoreau Institute, 2001) ISBN 0-9706439-0-X "A Desire Named Streetcar: How Federal Subsidies Encourage Wasteful Local Transit Systems" , Policy Analysis 559 : 1–16.

The Best-Laid Plans (Cato Institute 2007) ISBN 978-1933995076 Gridlock: Why We're Stuck in Traffic and What to Do About It (Cato Institute 2010) ISBN 978-1935308232 American Nightmare: How Government Undermines the Dream of Homeownership (Cato Institute 2012) ISBN 978-1937184896 .

Forestry [ edit ] Reforming the Forest Service (Island Press, 1988) ISBN 0-933280-49-1 The Citizens' Guide to the Forest Service Budget ( self-published/Thoreau Institute ) The Citizens' Guide to the Timber Industry ( self-published/Thoreau Institute ) Railroad History [ edit ] O'Toole, Randal.

"Mr. Budd's Historical Expeditions" (PDF) .

Minnesota History .

Romance of the Rails: Why the Passenger Trains We Love Are Not the Transportation We Need (Cato Institute 2018) ISBN 978-1944424947 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Randal O'Toole (2001).

The Vanishing Automobile and Other Urban Myths: How Smart Growth Will Harm American Cities . Thoreau Institute.

ISBN 978-0970643902 .

^ a b Randal O'Toole (2007).

The Best-Laid Plans: How Government Planning Harms Your Quality of Life, Your Pocketbook, and Your Future . Cato Institute.

ISBN 978-1933995076 .

^ scott.weiser@gazette.com, Scott Weiser (7 December 2021).

"Front Range rail system critics question how many commuters would actually use it" .

Colorado Springs Gazette . Retrieved 2021-12-24 .

^ "Goodbye, Cato – the Antiplanner" . 23 December 2021.

^ DeFusco, David (Winter 2003).

"Alumna gives $1 million to endow McCluskey visiting fellowship" (PDF) .

Yale Environmental News . Yale University. p. 44. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 August 2004.

^ "10.20.99 – Endangered Species Act Failing to Protect the Nation's Wildlife" .

berkeley.edu . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ "Biography – Randal O'Toole" .

prfamerica.org . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ "Randal O'Toole, The Anti-Planner: Fraud of Smart Growth and Sustainable Development" .

myemail.constantcontact.com . Retrieved 2021-12-24 .

^ "Goodbye, Cato – The Antiplanner" .

ti.org . 23 December 2021.

^ Lewyn, Michael.

"Debunking Cato: Why Portland Works Better Than the Analysis of Its Chief Neo-Libertarian Critic" (PDF) . Congress for the New Urbanism. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-06-20 . Retrieved 2021-11-10 .

^ a b Steigerwald, Bill.

"Meet the Anti-Planner" .

Townhall . Retrieved 2022-09-09 .

^ Stern, Ray (2010-04-30).

" 'Anti-Planner' Scholar Randal O'Toole Coming to Phoenix to Talk Up Gridlock Book" .

Phoenix New Times . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ "Randal O'Toole: Taking Liberties With the Facts" .

Streetsblog New York City . 2009-06-02 . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ "Randal O'Toole: Highway Funding and Urban Form" .

Strong Towns . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ "A Libertarian View of Urban Sprawl" .

Cato Institute . 2010-03-18 . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ Randal O'Toole, Gridlock: Why We're Stuck in Traffic and What to Do About It, https://store.cato.org/book/gridlock/ Archived 2018-04-01 at the Wayback Machine ^ Randal O'Toole, American Nightmare: How Government Undermines the Dream of Homeownership, https://store.cato.org/book/american-nightmare/ Archived 2017-04-07 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Randal O'Toole, Romance of the Rails: Why the Passenger Trains We Love Are Not the Transportation We Need, https://www.cato.org/events/romance-rails-why-passenger-trains-we-love-are-not-transportation-we-need .

^ "A Son of Portland, Ore., Tries to Puncture the Myth of 'Smart Growth' – NYTimes.com" .

www.nytimes.com . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ "About the Thoreau Institute" .

www.ti.org . Retrieved 2022-09-09 .

^ "Southern Pacific August 1940 Timetable" .

streamlinermemories.info . Retrieved 2021-11-10 .

^ https://ti.org/antiplanner/?p=21525 External links [ edit ] Website including "Antiplanner" Streamliner Memories Cato Institute profile for O'Toole Appearances on C-SPAN New York Times: A Son of Portland, Ore., Tries to Puncture the Myth of 'Smart Growth' v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Randal_O%27Toole&oldid=1304274693 " Categories : Living people American libertarians People from Bandon, Oregon 1952 births Cato Institute people Economists from Oregon 21st-century American economists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2009 Articles that may contain original research from October 2018 All articles that may contain original research People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 01:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Randal O'Toole Add languages Add topic

