Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 Europe 2.1.1 Germany 2.2 Israel 2.3 Republic of Korea (South Korea) 2.4 Republic of China (Taiwan) 2.5 Chile 3 See also 4 References 5 Literature Toggle the table of contents Defensive democracy 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prevention of anti-democratic principles You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(December 2020) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,844 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:streitbare Demokratie]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|streitbare Demokratie}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Defensive democracy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of the Politics series Democracy History Theory Indices Types Anticipatory Athenian Cellular Consensus Conservative Cosmopolitan Defensive Deliberative Direct Economic Electronic Empowered Ethnic Grassroots Guided Hybrid regime Inclusive Industrial Jacksonian Jeffersonian Liberal / Illiberal Liquid Majoritarian Media Monitory Multiparty Non-partisan Oral Participatory Pluralist Popular Procedural Radical Representative Religious Buddhist Christian Islamic Jewish Mormon Sectarian Semi Semi-direct Social Socialist Sociocracy Sovereign Soviet Substantive Supermajority Totalitarian Workplace Methods Campaign Consultation Demonstration Election By-election Direct / Indirect Primary Recall Snap Systems Legislature / Parliament Opinion poll Petition Popular assembly Participatory budgeting Referendum Deliberative Initiative Popular War Sortition Citizens' assembly Jury Voting Related topics Anarchism Criticism of democracy Democratic backsliding Democratic capitalism Democratic centralism Democratic confederalism Democratic peace theory Democratic republic Democratic socialism Democratic transition Democratization Democracy and economic growth Democracy promotion Electoral competition Kleroterion Liberalism Libertarianism Majoritarianism Majority rule Motion Ochlocracy Nomination rules Peaceful transition of power Political equality Polyarchy Populism Post-democracy Proportional representation Right to petition Right to protest Right to candidacy Right to vote Territorial peace theory Tyranny of the majority Wars between democracies Waves of democracy Wisdom of the crowd Region Africa Asia Europe Historical Americas Middle East and North Africa Politics portal v t e Defensive democracy is a term referring to the collection of laws , delegated legislation , and court rulings which limit certain rights and freedoms in a democratic society in order to protect the existence of the state, its democratic character and institutions, minority rights, or other aspects of the democratic system. The term is related to a conflict that may emerge in a democratic country between compliance with democratic values, particularly freedom of association and the right to be elected , and the goal of preventing anti-democratic groups and persons from abusing these principles.

In certain democratic states there are additional special distinctions, supported by a notable section of the population, which justify the use of defensive democracy. However, there are disputes on the question of which situations justify the use of defensive democracy without this being considered excessive repression of civil rights.

Methods [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The use of defensive democracy can be expressed via several actions applied to a person or group, such as: Surveillance by the security corps (especially military and police intelligence) of activists who are considered dangerous, or after entire associations outright; Restrictions on the freedom of movement or action over bodies suspected of endangering democracy; Deprival of the rights of individuals and parties from running for election (such as Meir Kahane , and subsequently the Kach party which he led, in Israel and Călin Georgescu in Romania); Outlawing of organizations considered a danger to democracy (such as the Communist Party in West Germany ); Cancellation of elections as a last resort (such as the 2024 Romanian presidential election ) As a rule, democratic countries try to not use the methods of defensive democracy too hastily or too severely, and seek alternative courses of action as much as possible, such as public information campaigns and condemnation of anti-democratic activates by respected public figures. However, there are situations where a state might recourse to defensive democratic methods (usually carried out by the court system or other state authorities).

The frequency and extent of use of defensive democratic methods varies from country to country. The United States , for example, is considered a country that uses defensive democratic tactics frequently, especially after the September 11 attacks and the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol , while Italy is considered a country which engages in defensive democratic courses of action sparsely.

[ by whom?

] Examples [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] Ten countries in Europe have outlawed Holocaust denial : France ( Loi Gayssot ), Belgium ( Belgian Holocaust denial law ), Switzerland (article 261bis of the Penal Code), Germany (§ 130 (3) of the penal code), Austria (article 3h Verbotsgesetz 1947 ), Romania , Slovakia , the Czech Republic (§ 405 of the Criminal Code), Lithuania , and Poland (article 55 of the law creating the Institute of National Remembrance 1998).

Germany [ edit ] In German politics and constitutional law the concept exists under the term wehrhafte or streitbare Demokratie ("well-fortified", [ 1 ] "battlesome", [ 2 ] "defensive" [ 3 ] or "militant democracy" [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] ) which implies that the federal government ( Bundesregierung ), the parliament ( Bundestag and Bundesrat ) and the judiciary are given extensive powers and duties to defend the liberal democratic basic order ( freiheitliche demokratische Grundordnung ) against those who want to abolish it. The idea behind the concept is the notion that even a majority rule of the people cannot be allowed to install a totalitarian or autocratic regime, thereby violating the principles of the German constitution, the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany . The German concept of defensive/militant democracy is a reaction to the experience of the Weimar Republic , whose liberal and democratic order was eliminated by the Nazi government – which came into office legally – and the Enabling Act of 1933 . The lawyer and political scientist Karl Loewenstein who had emigrated from Germany to the United States in 1933, coined the term wehrhafte Demokratie as he was convinced that the Weimar Republic had not sufficiently defended its democracy against subversive elements that were attacking its foundations.

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Several articles of the German constitution allow a range of different measures to "defend the liberal democratic basic order ".

Article 9 of the German Constitution allows for associations whose purpose or activity is directed against the constitutional order ( verfassungsmäßige Ordnung ) to be proscribed by the federal or state governments. The forced dissolution of an association is subject to legal review by administrative courts.

The Federal Constitutional Court ( Bundesverfassungsgericht ) may declare political parties unconstitutional and dissolve them if their aims or the conduct of their supporters seek to impair or eliminate the liberal democratic basic order, according to Article 21 paragraph 2.

According to Art. 18, the Federal Constitutional Court can restrict the fundamental rights of people who fight against the constitutional order. As of 2022 [update] , that has never happened in the history of the Federal Republic.

According to Article 20 paragraph 4 of the Constitution, every German citizen has a right to resistance against anyone who wants to abolish the constitutional order, "if no other remedy is possible". However, this provision has never been applied in practice.

According to the Federal Civil Service Act ( Bundesbeamtengesetz ) and the Civil Servant Status Act ( Beamtenstatusgesetz ), every civil servant ( Beamter , a category that also includes most school and university teachers) is required "to stand up for the liberal democratic basic order (...) at all times". When they take up their duties, they are therefore sworn to defend the constitutional order. Applicants who do not guarantee to stand up for the democratic order can be excluded from the civil service. This was particularly strict during the period of the Anti-Radical Decree from 1972 to 1985 (in some federal states until 1991), when all applicants were screened by the constitutional protection authorities. Over 1,000 prospective teachers and university lecturers were rejected as "enemies of the constitution" ( Verfassungsfeinde ) – in most cases due to their membership in far-left organisations – which amounted to a professional ban ( Berufsverbot ).

In addition, Germany maintains a domestic intelligence service, the Verfassungsschutz (consisting of a Federal Office and 16 State Offices for the Protection of the Constitution ), one of whose main purposes is to investigate organisations whose activities are directed against the free democratic basic order (in particular far-right and far-left parties as well as Islamist extremists) – using both publicly accessible sources and undercover methods. The Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution publishes an annual report with a list of organisations that it monitors for extremist tendencies. The organisations concerned can have their inclusion in this report reviewed by the courts.

Israel [ edit ] Israel implemented the principle of defensive democracy, the Basic Law of the Knesset (Section 7A) which determined that "candidate lists would not participate in elections if its goals or actions, expressly or by implication, would deny the existence of the state of Israel as a Jewish state or deny the democratic character of the state of Israel." Various political science researchers [ who?

] have perceived Israel as a democracy defending itself mainly from social and security constraints with which the state of Israel has been dealing since its creation. During the first three decades of its existence, most Arab countries did not recognize the state of Israel's existence as legitimate . Through the years, concerns have been raised from within the Jewish majority in Israel that the Arab minority within the country , who consider themselves part of the Arab world , would cooperate with the neighboring countries in their struggle against Israel . This situation has often raised the issue of a self-defensive democracy on the agenda in Israel.

During the 1980s, the issue was heavily discussed in a different context – for the first time in Israel's history, an extreme right-wing Jewish party ( Kach ), who rejected the state's democratic character and the rights of the Arab minority within the country, won representation to the Israeli parliament in the 1984 elections to the Knesset . As a result, in 1985, Israel's Knesset amended a basic law so that parties who engage in incitement to racism would be outlawed.

[ 9 ] Accordingly, the Supreme Court did not allow the Kach party to run again in the 1988 elections , on the basis that the party advocates racism .

[ 9 ] Republic of Korea (South Korea) [ edit ] Learning from legislation of West Germany, National Assembly of Second Republic inserted Defensive Democracy in their Constitution in 1960. Currently (as of 2022) in the Sixth Republic, it remains in the Constitution (§8(4) — esp. defensive democracy to prevent illegal parties) and has some procedures in other laws. The Constitutional Court of Korea is in charge of deciding if a party is illegal and therefore should be dissolved.

For the first time since the Constitutional Court of Korea was created, in November 2013, the Justice Ministry of Korea petitioned the Constitutional Court to dissolve the Unified Progressive Party , citing its pro-North Korean activities such as the 2013 South Korean sabotage plot . On 19 December 2014, the Court ruled 8-1 that the Unified Progressive Party be dissolved. This ruling was quite controversial in South Korea.

[ dubious – discuss ] Republic of China (Taiwan) [ edit ] Article 5 of the Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China clearly states that any political party whose purpose or behaviour threatens the existence of the Republic of China or constitutional order of liberal democracy is unconstitutional, and the Constitutional Court can dissolve it.

Chile [ edit ] Article 8 of the 1980 Constitution originally declared acts and groups promoting violence, totalitarianism or class struggle as unconstitutional, as well as barring those found guilty of such from political and some civic activities for a number of years. As a result of the 1989 referendum , multiple reforms to the Constitution were introduced, repealing Article 8 in its original form entirely, but amending Article 19 N°15 to replace it in much of its function (without a specific mention of class struggle), focusing on guaranteeing political pluralism and safeguarding the constitutional and democratic order.

See also [ edit ] Communist Party of Germany v. the Federal Republic of Germany Eternity clause in Germany Guided democracy National security Paradox of tolerance Socialist Reich Party References [ edit ] ^ Hans-Gerd Jaschke (2004).

"Die Zukunft der 'streitbaren Demokratie' " [The future of 'well-fortified democracy'].

Totalitarismus und Demokratie .

1 (1): 109– 123.

^ Markus Thiel (2009). "Germany". In Markus Thiel (ed.).

The 'Militant Democracy' Principle in Modern Democracies . Ashgate. p. 109.

^ a b Bastiaan Rijpkema (2018). "Introduction".

Militant Democracy: The Limits of Democratic Tolerance . Routledge.

^ András Sajó (2004). "Militant Democracy and Transition towards Democracy". In András Sajó (ed.).

Militant Democracy . Eleven International Publishing. p. 221.

^ Svetlana Tyulkina (2015).

Militant Democracy: Undemocratic political parties and beyond . Routledge. p. 13.

^ Cristóbal Rovira Kaltwasser (2019). "Militant Democracy Versus Populism". In Anthoula Malkopoulou; Alexander S. Kirshner (eds.).

Militant Democracy and Its Critics: Populism, Parties, Extremism . Edinburgh University Press. p. 75.

^ Markus Thiel (2009). "Germany". In Markus Thiel (ed.).

The 'Militant Democracy' Principle in Modern Democracies . Ashgate. pp.

109– 110.

^ Ivan Ermakoff (2018). "Frail Democracy". In Afshin Ellian; Bastiaan Rijpkema (eds.).

Militant Democracy – Political Science, Law and Philosophy . Springer. p. 51.

^ a b Burack, Emily (1 March 2019).

"Rabbi Meir Kahane and Israel's far right, explained" .

Times of Israel .

Literature [ edit ] Andras Sajo.

From militant democracy to the preventive state?

Constitutional Law Review No. 1 Rory O'Connell Militant Democracy and Human Rights Principles Constitutional Law Review No. 1 Authority control databases : National Germany Korea NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rhtnh
Cached time: 20250817061154
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.480 seconds
Real time usage: 0.611 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2825/1000000
Revision size: 15096/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 92747/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10214/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53263/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.329/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21563545/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  542.777      1 -total
 22.41%  121.623      1 Template:Reflist
 17.17%   93.222      1 Template:Democracy
 16.67%   90.508      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 16.44%   89.225     15 Template:Lang
 16.41%   89.091      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.20%   77.047      3 Template:Ambox
 11.92%   64.676      1 Template:Cite_journal
 10.92%   59.287      1 Template:Expand_German
 10.21%   55.417      1 Template:Expand_language Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5898379:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817061154 and revision id 1300496122. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Defensive_democracy&oldid=1300496122 " Category : Types of democracy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from March 2024 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2025 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2012 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from December 2020 This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 17:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Defensive democracy 12 languages Add topic

