Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Context 2 Adherents 3 Criticisms 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Value pluralism 8 languages العربية Čeština Español فارسی Français Nederlands 日本語 Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Idea in ethics; many principles are true at the same time This article is about the philosophical concept of value-pluralism. For other uses of the term, see Pluralism (disambiguation) .

In ethics , value pluralism (also known as ethical pluralism or moral pluralism ) is the idea that there are several values which may be equally correct and fundamental, and yet in conflict with each other. In addition, value-pluralism postulates that in many cases, such incompatible values may be incommensurable , in the sense that there is no objective ordering of them in terms of importance. Value pluralism is opposed to value monism , which states that all other forms of value can be commensured with or reduced to a single form.

Value-pluralism is a theory in metaethics , rather than a theory of normative ethics , or a set of values in itself.

Oxford philosopher and historian of ideas Isaiah Berlin is credited with being the first to popularize a substantial work describing the theory of objective value-pluralism, bringing it to the attention of academia (cf. the Isaiah Berlin Virtual Library). The related idea that fundamental values can and, in some cases, do conflict with each other is prominent in the thought of Max Weber , captured in his notion of "polytheism".

[ 1 ] Context [ edit ] Value-pluralism is an alternative to both moral relativism and moral absolutism (which Berlin called monism ).

[ 2 ] An example of value-pluralism is the idea that the moral life of a nun is incompatible with that of a mother, yet there is no purely rational measure of which is preferable. Hence, values are a means to an end. Furthermore, moral decisions often take radical preferences because people’s needs differ. Moral decisions are made with varying rational calculuses that determine moral values attributed to the moral facts.

Value-pluralism differs from value-relativism in that pluralism accepts limits to differences, such as when vital human needs are violated.

[ 3 ] Political scientists have often referred to societies as being pluralistic on the basis of the existence of several competing value systems. Littunen says that such societies exhibit value pluralism.

[ 4 ] If values can be compared with virtues or duties then reference might also be made to the arguments of classical philosophy. Kant, for example, referred to "a conflict of duties" [ 5 ] and the subject can be traced back to Plato's Statesman where he wrote that although the aim may be "to promote not a part of virtue but the whole", it is often the case that the different parts of virtue "may be at war with one another".

[ 6 ] Adherents [ edit ] Part of a series on Communitarianism Ideas Civil society Common good Community Consensus decision-making Diversity Political particularism Positive rights Social capital Solidarity Social responsibility Value pluralism Workplace democracy Intellectuals Aristotle Barber Barzilai Bellah Seyla Benhabib Blond Etzioni Galston Hauerwas Jean Bethke Elshtain Hegel Kuczewski MacIntyre Marglin Adán Preve Putnam Rousseau Reich Sandel Taylor Tönnies Walzer Related topics Catholic social teaching Christian democracy Libertarian socialism Progressivism Radical centrism Republicanism Social democracy Utopian socialism Politics portal v t e Isaiah Berlin suggested that James Fitzjames Stephen , rather than himself, deserved credit for fathering value-pluralism.

[ 7 ] Stephen had observed: "There are innumerable differences which obviously add to the interest of life, and without which it would be unendurably dull. Again, there are differences which can neither be left unsettled nor be settled without a struggle, and a real one, but in regard to which the struggle is rather between inconsistent forms of good than between good and evil. In cases of this sort no one need see an occasion for anything more than a good-tempered trial of strength and skill, except those narrow-minded fanatics whose minds are incapable of taking in more than one idea at a time, or of having a taste for more things than one, which one thing is generally a trifle. There is no surer mark of a poor, contemptible, cowardly character than the inability to conduct disputes of this sort with fairness, temper, humanity, goodwill to antagonists, and a determination to accept a fair defeat in good part and to make the best of it." [ 8 ] William James , influenced by Fitzjames Stephen, endorsed value-pluralism in an essay on " The Moral Philosopher and the Moral Life ", which he first delivered as a lecture in 1891. He wrote that none "of the measures [of goodness] that have been actually proposed has, however, given general satisfaction ... The various ideals have no common character apart from the fact that they are ideals. No single abstract principle can be so used as to yield to the philosopher anything like a scientifically accurate and genuinely useful casuistic scale." Joseph Raz and many others have done further work clarifying and defending value-pluralism. For instance, political philosopher William Galston , former policy advisor to President Bill Clinton, has defended a Berlinian approach to value pluralism in books like Liberal Pluralism.

[ 9 ] Social psychologist Philip E. Tetlock , studies [ 10 ] [ 11 ] and identifies with [ 12 ] value pluralism.

Criticisms [ edit ] The philosopher Charles Blattberg , who was Berlin's student, has advanced an important critique of Berlin's value-pluralism. Blattberg focuses on value-pluralism's applications to Marx, the Russian intelligentsia, Judaism, and Berlin's early political thought, as well as Berlin's conceptions of liberty, the Enlightenment versus the Counter-Enlightenment, and history.

Another notable critic of value-pluralism in recent times is Ronald Dworkin , the second most-cited American legal scholar, who attempts to forge a liberal theory of equality from a monist starting-point, citing the failure of value-pluralism to adequately address the "Equality of what?" debate.

Alan Brown suggests that Berlin ignores the fact that values are indeed commensurable as they can be compared by their varying contributions towards the human good.

[ 13 ] Regarding the ends of freedom, equality, efficiency, creativity, etc., Brown maintains that none of these are ends in themselves but are valued for their consequences. Brown concludes that Berlin has failed to show that the problem of conflicting values is insoluble in principle.

[ 13 ] The deliberative democrat Robert Talisse has published several articles criticizing the pluralism of Isaiah Berlin, William Galston, Richard Flathman , and John Gray , alleging informal logic and internal epistemological contradictions.

See also [ edit ] Agonism Moral skepticism Perspectivism Summum Bonum The Right and the Good Value system References [ edit ] ^ "Max Weber" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Max Weber . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2022.

^ Cherniss, Joshua; Hardy, Henry (2013-11-29).

"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Isaiah Berlin" . Retrieved 2015-01-16 .

^ Crowder, George (2002).

Liberalism and Value Pluralism . London: Continuum .

ISBN 0-8264-5048-2 .

^ Kazemzadeh, Hamed (2020).

"Hamed Kazemzadeh: Democratic platform in Social Pluralism" .

Internal Journal of ACPCS (10).

^ Kant I.

Critique of Practical Reason 1788 (tr. Abbott T.K., Longmans, Green & Co., London, 1883) p.280 ^ Plato Statesman 306; cf.

Laws 705, Republic 443 ^ Blattberg, Charles (1996).

"An Exchange with Professor Sir Isaiah Berlin" (PDF) . The Isaiah Berlin Literary Trust.

^ Stephen, James Fitzjames (1874).

Liberty, Equality, Fraternity .

^ Liberal Pluralism: The Implications of Value Pluralism for Political Theory and Practice . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2002-05-13.

ISBN 9780521813044 .

^ Tetlock, P.E.; Peterson, R.; Lerner, J. (2009). "Revising the value pluralism model: Incorporating social content and context postulates".

Ontario Symposium on Social and Personality Psychology: Values .

^ Tetlock, P.E. (1986). "A value pluralism model of ideological reasoning".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

50 (4): 819– 827.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.50.4.819 .

^ Haidt, Jonathan (February 11, 2011).

"The bright future of post-partisan social psychology" .

edge.org .

^ a b Brown, A. (1986) Modern Political Philosophy; Theories of the Just Society, Middlesex, Penguin Books pp. 157–158 Further reading [ edit ] Berlin, Isaiah (1991).

The Crooked Timber of Humanity . London: Fontana Press.

ISBN 0-00-686221-7 .

Berlin, Isaiah (1969).

Four Essays on Liberty . Oxford Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-500272-5 .

Blattberg, Charles (2000).

From Pluralist to Patriotic Politics . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-829688-6 .

Blattberg has recently criticized value pluralists for taking politics "too seriously." Connolly, William (2008).

Pluralism . Durham: Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8223-3567-2 .

Crowder, George (2019).

The Problem of Value Pluralism: Isaiah Berlin and Beyond . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1138724822 .

Dworkin, Ronald (2000).

Sovereign Virtue . Cambridge: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 0-674-00219-9 .

James, William (1960).

The Will to Believe . New York: Dover Publications .

ISBN 0-486-20291-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Raz, Joseph (2003).

The Practice of Value . Oxford Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-926147-4 .

Raz, Joseph (1986).

The Morality of Freedom . Oxford: Clarendon Press .

ISBN 0-19-824772-9 .

External links [ edit ] Mason, Elinor.

"Value Pluralism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The Isaiah Berlin Virtual Library Philosophy Bites podcast interview: Henry Hardy on Isaiah Berlin's Pluralism .

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Value_pluralism&oldid=1226016669 " Categories : Metaethics Pluralism (philosophy) Social philosophy Value (ethics) Ethical theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 28 May 2024, at 02:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Value pluralism 8 languages Add topic

