Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins 2.2 1958–1965: Early hippies 2.3 1965–1967: Rise to prevalence 2.4 1967: Human Be-In, Summer of Love, and popularity surge 2.5 1967–1970: Revolution and peak of influence 2.6 1970–1973: Aftershocks and decline 2.7 1973–present: Absorption into the mainstream and new developments 3 Ethos and characteristics Toggle Ethos and characteristics subsection 3.1 Art and fashion 3.2 Love and sex 3.3 Travel 3.3.1 Hippie trail 3.4 Spirituality and religion 3.5 Politics 3.6 Drugs 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Culture 4.2 Music 4.3 United Kingdom 4.4 Media 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Hippie 75 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person associated with 1965–1973 counterculture "Hippies" redirects here. For the British comedy series, see Hippies (TV series) . For the garage rock album, see Hippies (album) . For other uses, see Hippie (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Yippie , Yuppie , Hipster (1940s subculture) , or Hipster (contemporary subculture) .

Clockwise from top: Young people near the Woodstock music festival in August 1969; Button pins from the sexual revolution ; Jefferson Airplane on the cover of Cash Box in 1967; An anti-war demonstrator offers a flower to a Military Police officer during the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam 's 1967 March on the Pentagon .

A hippie , also spelled hippy , [ 1 ] especially in British English, [ 2 ] is someone associated with the counterculture of the mid-1960s to early 1970s, originally a youth movement that began in the United States and spread to different countries around the world.

[ 3 ] The word hippie came from hipster and was used to describe beatniks [ 4 ] who moved into New York City's Greenwich Village , San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury district, and Chicago's Old Town community. The term hippie was used in print by San Francisco writer Michael Fallon, helping popularize use of the term in the media, although the tag was seen elsewhere earlier.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The origins of the terms hip and hep are uncertain. By the 1940s, both had become part of African American jive slang and meant "sophisticated; currently fashionable; fully up-to-date".

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The Beats adopted the term hip , and early hippies adopted the language and countercultural values of the Beat Generation. Hippies created their own communities, listened to psychedelic music , embraced the sexual revolution , and many used drugs such as marijuana and LSD to explore altered states of consciousness .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In 1967, the Human Be-In in Golden Gate Park , San Francisco, and the Monterey International Pop Festival [ 12 ] popularized hippie culture, leading to the Summer of Love on the West Coast of the United States, and the 1969 Woodstock Festival on the East Coast. Hippies in Mexico, known as jipitecas , formed La Onda (the Wave) and gathered at Avándaro , while in New Zealand, nomadic housetruckers practiced alternative lifestyles and promoted sustainable energy at Nambassa . In the United Kingdom in 1970, many gathered at the gigantic third Isle of Wight Festival with a crowd of around 400,000 people.

[ 13 ] In later years, mobile "peace convoys" of New Age travellers made summer pilgrimages to free music festivals at Stonehenge and elsewhere. In Australia, hippies gathered at Nimbin for the 1973 Aquarius Festival and the annual Cannabis Law Reform Rally or MardiGrass . " Piedra Roja Festival", a major hippie event in Chile, was held in 1970.

[ 14 ] Hippie and psychedelic culture influenced 1960s to mid 1970s teenager and youth culture in Iron Curtain countries in Eastern Europe (see Mánička ).

[ 15 ] Hippie fashion and values had a major effect on culture, influencing popular music , television, film, literature, and the arts. Since the 1960s, mainstream society has assimilated many aspects of hippie culture. The religious and cultural diversity the hippies espoused has gained widespread acceptance, and their pop versions of Eastern philosophy and Asiatic spiritual concepts have reached a larger group. The vast majority of people who had participated in the golden age of the hippie movement were those born soon after the end of World War II , during the late 1940s and early 1950s. These include the youngest of the Silent Generation and oldest of the Baby Boomers ; the former who were the actual leaders of the movement as well as the early pioneers of rock music .

[ 16 ] Etymology [ edit ] Main article: Hippie (etymology) Contemporary hippie at the Rainbow Gathering in Russia, 2005 Lexicographer Jesse Sheidlower , the principal American editor of the Oxford English Dictionary , argues that the terms hipster and hippie are derived from the word hip , whose origins are unknown.

[ 17 ] The word hip in the sense of "aware, in the know" is first attested in a 1902 cartoon by Tad Dorgan , [ 18 ] and first appeared in prose in a 1904 novel by George Vere Hobart [ 19 ] (1867–1926), Jim Hickey: A Story of the One-Night Stands , where an African-American character uses the slang phrase "Are you hip?" The term hipster was coined by Harry Gibson in 1944.

[ 20 ] By the 1940s, the terms hip , hep and hepcat were popular in Harlem jazz slang, although hep eventually came to denote an inferior status to hip .

[ 21 ] In Greenwich Village in the early 1960s, New York City , young counterculture advocates were named hips because they were considered "in the know" or "cool", as opposed to being square , meaning conventional and old-fashioned. In the April 27, 1961 issue of The Village Voice , "An open letter to JFK & Fidel Castro", Norman Mailer utilizes the term hippies, in questioning JFK's behavior.  In a 1961 essay, Kenneth Rexroth used both the terms hipster and hippies to refer to young people participating in black American or Beatnik nightlife.

[ 22 ] According to Malcolm X 's 1964 autobiography, the word hippie in 1940s Harlem had been used to describe a specific type of white man who "acted more Negro than Negroes".

[ 23 ] Andrew Loog Oldham refers to "all the Chicago hippies," seemingly about black blues/R&B musicians, in his rear sleeve notes to the 1965 LP The Rolling Stones, Now!

Although the word hippies made other isolated appearances in print during the early 1960s, the first use of the term on the West Coast appeared in the article "A New Paradise for Beatniks " (in the San Francisco Examiner , issue of September 5, 1965) by San Francisco journalist Michael Fallon. In that article, Fallon wrote about the Blue Unicorn Cafe ( coffeehouse ) (located at 1927 Hayes Street in the Haight-Ashbury district of San Francisco), using the term hippie to refer to the new generation of beatniks who had moved from North Beach into the Haight-Ashbury district.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of the hippie movement Origins [ edit ] A 1967 VW Kombi bus decorated with hand-painting A July 1967 Time magazine study on hippie philosophy credited the foundation of the hippie movement with historical precedent as far back as the sadhu of India, the spiritual seekers who had renounced the world and materialistic pursuits by taking Sannyasa . Even the counterculture of the Ancient Greeks, espoused by philosophers like Diogenes of Sinope and the cynics were also early forms of hippie culture.

[ 26 ] It also named as notable influences the religious and spiritual teachings of Buddha , Hillel the Elder , Jesus , St. Francis of Assisi , Henry David Thoreau , Gandhi and J. R. R. Tolkien .

[ 26 ] The first signs of modern "proto-hippies" emerged at the end of the 19th century in Europe. Late 1890s to early 1900s, a German youth movement arose as a countercultural reaction to the organized social and cultural clubs that centered on "German folk music". Known as Der Wandervogel ("wandering bird"), this hippie movement opposed the formality of traditional German clubs, instead emphasizing folk music and singing, creative dress, and outdoor life involving hiking and camping.

[ 27 ] Inspired by the works of Goethe , Friedrich Nietzsche , and Hermann Hesse , Wandervogel attracted thousands of young Germans who rejected the rapid trend toward urbanization and yearned for the pagan , back-to-nature spiritual life of their ancestors.

[ 28 ] During the first several decades of the 20th century, Germans settled around the United States, bringing the values of this German youth culture. Some opened the first health food stores , and many moved to southern California where they introduced an alternative lifestyle. One group, called the "Nature Boys", took to the California desert and raised organic food, espousing a back-to-nature lifestyle like the Wandervogel.

[ 29 ] Songwriter eden ahbez wrote a hit song called Nature Boy inspired by Robert Bootzin ( Gypsy Boots ), who helped popularize health-consciousness, yoga , and organic food in the United States.

Beatniks posing in front of a piece of beatnik art, 1959. The Beat Generation are seen as a predecessor to the hippie movement The hippie movement in the United States began as a youth movement. Composed mostly of white teenagers and young adults between 15 and 25 years old, [ 30 ] [ 31 ] hippies inherited a tradition of cultural dissent from bohemians and beatniks of the Beat Generation in the late 1950s.

[ 31 ] Beats like Allen Ginsberg crossed over from the beat movement and became fixtures of the burgeoning hippie and anti-war movements . By 1965, hippies had become an established social group in the U.S., and the movement eventually expanded to other countries, [ 32 ] [ 33 ] extending as far as the United Kingdom and Europe, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Japan, Mexico , and Brazil.

[ 34 ] The hippie ethos influenced the Beatles and others in the United Kingdom and other parts of Europe, and they in turn influenced their American counterparts.

[ 35 ] Hippie culture spread worldwide through a fusion of rock music , folk , blues , and psychedelic rock ; it also found expression in literature, the dramatic arts, fashion , and the visual arts, including film, posters advertising rock concerts, and album covers.

[ 36 ] In 1968, "core visible hippies" represented just under 0.2% of the U.S. population [ 37 ] and dwindled away by mid-1970s.

[ 32 ] Along with the New Left and the Civil Rights Movement , the hippie movement was one of three dissenting groups of the 1960s counterculture.

[ 33 ] Hippies rejected established institutions, criticized middle class values, opposed nuclear weapons and the Vietnam War , embraced aspects of Eastern philosophy , [ 38 ] championed sexual liberation , were often vegetarian and eco-friendly , promoted the use of psychedelic drugs which they believed expanded one's consciousness, and created intentional communities or communes. They used alternative arts, street theatre , folk music , and psychedelic rock as a part of their lifestyle and as a way of expressing their feelings, their protests, and their vision of the world and life. Hippies opposed political and social orthodoxy, choosing a gentle and nondoctrinaire ideology that favored peace, love, and personal freedom, [ 39 ] [ 40 ] expressed for example in the Beatles ' song " All You Need is Love ".

[ 41 ] Hippies perceived the dominant culture as a corrupt, monolithic entity that exercised undue power over their lives, calling this culture " the Establishment ", " Big Brother ", or " the Man ".

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Noting that they were "seekers of meaning and value", scholars like Timothy Miller have described hippies as a new religious movement .

[ 45 ] 1958–1965: Early hippies [ edit ] Escapin' through the lily fields I came across an empty space It trembled and exploded Left a bus stop in its place The bus came by and I got on That's when it all began There was cowboy Neal At the wheel Of a bus to never-ever land – Grateful Dead , lyrics from "That's It for the Other One" [ 46 ] During the late 1950s and early 1960s, novelist Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters lived communally first in Oregon and after the 1962 success of his novel One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest in his San Francisco villa. Members included Beat Generation hero Neal Cassady , Ken Babbs , Carolyn Adams (aka Mountain Girl/Carolyn Garcia) , Stewart Brand , Del Close , Paul Foster , George Walker , Sandy Lehmann-Haupt and others. Their adventures were documented in Tom Wolfe 's book The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test . With Cassady at the wheel of a school bus named Further , the Merry Pranksters traveled across the United States to celebrate the publication of Kesey's novel Sometimes a Great Notion and to visit the 1964 World's Fair in New York City. The Merry Pranksters were known for using cannabis , amphetamine , and LSD , and during their journey they "turned on" many people to these drugs . The Merry Pranksters filmed and audio-taped their bus trips, creating an immersive multimedia experience that would later be presented to the public in the form of festivals and concerts. The Grateful Dead wrote a song about the Merry Pranksters' bus trips called "That's It for the Other One".

[ 46 ] In 1961, although being closely associated to the L.A. freak scene , Vito Paulekas and his wife Szou established in Hollywood a clothing boutique which was credited with being one of the first to introduce "hippie" fashion as well as a brand of free-form dancing that would become associated with hippie culture. Vito would also provide rehearsal space for the Byrds and Love , as well as helping bring attention to them by inviting his dance troupe to invade their concerts, they would later accompany the Byrds on a nationwide tour.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] During this period Greenwich Village in New York City and Berkeley , California anchored the American folk music circuit.

Berkeley's two coffee houses, "the Cabale Creamery" and "the Jabberwock", sponsored performances by folk music artists in a beat setting.

[ 51 ] In April 1963, Chandler A. Laughlin III, co-founder of the Cabale Creamery, [ 52 ] established a kind of tribal, family identity among approximately fifty people who attended a traditional, all-night Native American peyote ceremony in a rural setting. This ceremony combined a psychedelic experience with traditional Native American spiritual values; these people went on to sponsor a unique genre of musical expression and performance at the "Red Dog Saloon" in the isolated, old-time mining town of Virginia City , Nevada.

[ 53 ] 1965–1967: Rise to prevalence [ edit ] During the summer of 1965, Laughlin recruited much of the original talent that led to a unique amalgam of traditional folk music and the developing psychedelic rock scene.

[ 53 ] He and his cohorts created at this very place what became known as " The Red Dog Experience ", featuring previously unknown musical acts— Grateful Dead , Jefferson Airplane , Big Brother and the Holding Company , Quicksilver Messenger Service , the Charlatans , and others—who played in the completely refurbished, intimate setting of Nevada, Virginia City's "Red Dog Saloon". There was no clear delineation between "performers" and "audience" in "The Red Dog Experience", during which music, psychedelic experimentation, a unique sense of personal style, and Bill Ham's first primitive light shows combined to create a new sense of community.

[ 54 ] Laughlin and George Hunter of the Charlatans were true "proto-hippies", with their long hair , boots, and outrageous clothing of 19th-century American (and Native American) heritage.

[ 53 ] LSD manufacturer Owsley Stanley lived in Berkeley during 1965 and provided much of the LSD that became a seminal part of the "Red Dog Experience", the early evolution of psychedelic rock and budding hippie culture. At the "Red Dog Saloon", the Charlatans were the first psychedelic rock band to play live (albeit unintentionally) loaded on LSD.

[ 55 ] When they returned to San Francisco, "Red Dog" participants Luria Castell, Ellen Harman and Alton Kelley created a collective called "the Family Dog." [ 53 ] Modeled on their "Red Dog experiences", on October 16, 1965, the "Family Dog" hosted " A Tribute to Dr. Strange " at Longshoreman's Hall.

[ 56 ] Attended by approximately one thousand of the Bay Area's original "hippies", this was San Francisco's first psychedelic rock performance, costumed dance and light show, featuring Jefferson Airplane , the Great Society and the Marbles.

[ 57 ] Two other events followed before year's end, one at "California Hall" and one at "the Matrix".

[ 53 ] After the first three "Family Dog" events, a much larger psychedelic event occurred at San Francisco's "Longshoreman's Hall". Called the " Trips Festival ", it took place on January 21 – 23, 1966, and was organized by Stewart Brand , Ken Kesey , Owsley Stanley and others. Ten thousand people attended this sold-out event, with a thousand more turned away each night.

[ 58 ] On Saturday January 22, the Grateful Dead and Big Brother and the Holding Company came on stage, and six thousand people arrived to imbibe punch spiked with LSD and to witness one of the first fully developed light shows of the era.

[ 59 ] It is nothing new. We have a private revolution going on. A revolution of individuality and diversity that can only be private. Upon becoming a group movement, such a revolution ends up with imitators rather than participants...It is essentially a striving for realization of one's relationship to life and other people...

Bob Stubbs, "Unicorn Philosophy" [ 60 ] By February 1966, the "Family Dog" became "Family Dog Productions" under organizer Chet Helms , promoting happenings at the Avalon Ballroom and the Fillmore Auditorium in initial cooperation with Bill Graham . The Avalon Ballroom, the Fillmore Auditorium, and other venues provided settings where participants could partake of the full psychedelic music experience. Bill Ham, who had pioneered the original "Red Dog" light shows, perfected his art of liquid light projection , which combined light shows and film projection and became synonymous with the "San Francisco ballroom experience".

[ 53 ] [ 61 ] The sense of style and costume that began at the "Red Dog Saloon" flourished when San Francisco's Fox Theater went out of business and hippies bought up its costume stock, reveling in the freedom to dress up for weekly musical performances at their favorite ballrooms. As San Francisco Chronicle music columnist Ralph J. Gleason put it, "They danced all night long, orgiastic, spontaneous and completely free form." [ 53 ] Some of the earliest San Francisco hippies were former students at San Francisco State College [ 62 ] who became intrigued by the developing psychedelic hippie music scene.

[ 53 ] These students joined the bands they loved, living communally in the large, inexpensive Victorian apartments in the Haight-Ashbury .

[ 63 ] Young Americans around the country began moving to San Francisco, and by June 1966, around 15,000 hippies had moved into the Haight.

[ 64 ] the Charlatans , Jefferson Airplane , Big Brother and the Holding Company , and the Grateful Dead all moved to San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury neighborhood during this period. Activity centered on the Diggers , a guerrilla street theatre group that combined spontaneous street theatre, anarchistic action, and art happenings in their agenda to create a "free city". By late 1966, the Diggers opened free stores which simply gave away their stock, provided free food, distributed free drugs, gave away money, organized free music concerts, and performed works of political art.

[ 65 ] On October 6, 1966, the state of California declared LSD a controlled substance, which made the drug illegal.

[ 66 ] In response to the criminalization of LSD, San Francisco hippies staged a gathering in the Golden Gate Park panhandle , called the Love Pageant Rally , [ 66 ] attracting an estimated 700–800 people.

[ 67 ] As explained by Allan Cohen, co-founder of the San Francisco Oracle , the purpose of the rally was twofold: to draw attention to the fact that LSD had just been made illegal—and to demonstrate that people who used LSD were not criminals, nor were they mentally ill. The Grateful Dead played, and some sources claim that LSD was consumed at the rally. According to Cohen, those who took LSD "were not guilty of using illegal substances...We were celebrating transcendental consciousness, the beauty of the universe, the beauty of being." [ 68 ] In West Hollywood , California , the Sunset Strip curfew riots , also known as the "hippie riots", were a series of early counterculture -era clashes that took place between police and young people in 1966 and continuing on and off through the early 1970s. In 1966, annoyed residents and business owners in the district had encouraged the passage of strict (10:00 p.m.) curfew and loitering laws to reduce the traffic congestion resulting from crowds of young club patrons.

[ 69 ] This was perceived by young, local rock music fans as an infringement on their civil rights , and on Saturday, November 12, 1966, fliers were distributed along the Strip inviting people to demonstrate later that day. Hours before the protest one of the rock 'n' roll radio stations in L.A. announced there would be a rally at Pandora's Box , a club at the corner of Sunset Boulevard and Crescent Heights, and cautioned people to tread carefully.

[ 70 ] The Los Angeles Times reported that as many as 1,000 youthful demonstrators, including such celebrities as Jack Nicholson and Peter Fonda (who was afterward handcuffed by police), erupted in protest against the perceived repressive enforcement of these recently invoked curfew laws.

[ 69 ] This incident provided the basis for the 1967 low-budget teen exploitation film Riot on Sunset Strip , and inspired multiple songs including the famous Buffalo Springfield song " For What It's Worth ".

[ 71 ] 1967: Human Be-In, Summer of Love, and popularity surge [ edit ] Main article: Summer of Love Junction of Haight and Ashbury Streets, San Francisco, celebrated as the central location of the Summer of Love On January 14, 1967, the outdoor Human Be-In organized by Michael Bowen [ 72 ] helped to popularize hippie culture across the United States, with 20,000 to 30,000 hippies gathering in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park.

On March 26, 1967, Lou Reed , Edie Sedgwick and 10,000 hippies came together in Manhattan for the Central Park Be-In on Easter Sunday .

[ 73 ] The KFRC Fantasy Fair and Magic Mountain Music Festival from June 10–11, and the Monterey Pop Festival from June 16–18, introduced the music of the counterculture - and the new concept of a rock festival - to a wide audience, and marked the start of the "Summer of Love".

[ 74 ] Scott McKenzie 's rendition of John Phillips ' song " San Francisco " became a hit in the United States and Europe. The lyrics, "If you're going to San Francisco, be sure to wear some flowers in your hair", inspired thousands of young people from all over the world to travel to San Francisco, sometimes wearing flowers in their hair and distributing flowers to passersby, earning them the name " Flower Children ". Bands like the Grateful Dead , Big Brother and the Holding Company (with Janis Joplin ), and Jefferson Airplane lived in the Haight.

According to the hippies, LSD was the glue that held the Haight together. It was the hippie sacrament, a mind detergent capable of washing away years of social programming, a re-imprinting device, a consciousness-expander, a tool that would push us up the evolutionary ladder.

Jay Stevens [ 75 ] In June 1967, Herb Caen was approached by "a distinguished magazine" [ 76 ] to write about why hippies were attracted to San Francisco. He declined the assignment but interviewed hippies in the Haight for his own newspaper column in the San Francisco Chronicle . Caen determined that, "Except in their music, they couldn't care less about the approval of the straight world." [ 76 ] Caen himself felt that the city of San Francisco was so straight that it provided a visible contrast with hippie culture.

[ 76 ] On July 7, 1967 Time magazine featured a cover story entitled "The Hippies: The Philosophy of a Subculture." The article described the guidelines of the hippie code: Do your own thing, wherever you have to do it and whenever you want. Drop out. Leave society as you have known it. Leave it utterly. Blow the mind of every straight person you can reach. Turn them on, if not to drugs, then to beauty, love, honesty, fun.

[ 77 ] It is estimated that around 100,000 people traveled to San Francisco in the summer of 1967. The media was right behind them, casting a spotlight on the Haight-Ashbury district and popularizing the "hippie" label. With this increased attention, hippies found support for their ideals of love and peace but were also criticized for their anti-work, pro-drug, and permissive ethos.

[ citation needed ] External images Death of Hippie sunrise, October 6, 1967 Hippies parade, at Haight and Ashbury, carrying a symbolic casket. (North-east) [ 78 ] Hippies parade, at Haight and Ashbury, carrying a symbolic casket. (East) George Harrison strums a borrowed guitar, followed by hippies. . Harrison spent an hour touring the Haight-Ashbury, before this stroll through Golden Gate Park.

At this point, the Beatles had released their groundbreaking album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band , which was quickly embraced by the hippie movement with its colorful psychedelic sonic imagery.

[ 79 ] In 1967 Chet Helms brought the Haight Ashbury hippie and psychedelic scene to Denver , when he opened the Family Dog Denver , modeled on his Avalon Ballroom in San Francisco. The music venue created a nexus for the hippie movement in the western-minded Denver, which led to serious conflicts with city leaders, parents and the police, who saw the hippie movement as dangerous. The resulting legal actions and pressure caused Helms and Bob Cohen to close the venue at the end of that year.

[ 80 ] By the end of the summer, the Haight-Ashbury scene had deteriorated. The incessant media coverage led the Diggers to declare the "death" of the hippie with a parade.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] According to poet Susan 'Stormi' Chambless, the hippies buried an effigy of a hippie in the Panhandle to demonstrate the end of his/her reign. Haight-Ashbury could not accommodate the influx of crowds (mostly naive youngsters) with no place to live. Many took to living on the street, panhandling and drug-dealing. There were problems with malnourishment, disease, and drug addiction. Crime and violence skyrocketed. None of these trends reflected what the hippies had envisioned.

[ 84 ] By the end of 1967, many of the hippies and musicians who initiated the Summer of Love had moved on. Beatle George Harrison had once visited Haight-Ashbury and found it to be just a haven for dropouts, inspiring him to give up LSD.

[ 85 ] Misgivings about the hippie culture, particularly with regard to substance use and lenient morality, fueled the moral panics of the late 1960s.

[ 86 ] 1967–1970: Revolution and peak of influence [ edit ] Anti-war protesters in Lincoln Park, Chicago , attending a Yippie organized event, approximately five miles north of the 1968 Democratic National Convention . The band MC5 can be seen playing.

By 1968, hippie-influenced fashions were beginning to take off in the mainstream, especially for youths and younger adults of the populous baby boomer generation, many of whom may have aspired to emulate the hardcore movements now living in tribalistic communes, but had no overt connections to them. This was noticed not only in terms of clothes and longer hair for men, but also in music, film, art and literature, not just in the United States, but around the world.

Eugene McCarthy 's brief presidential campaign successfully persuaded a significant minority of young adults to "get clean for Gene" by shaving their beards or wearing longer skirts; however the "Clean Genes" had little impact on the popular image in the media spotlight, of the hirsute hippy adorned in beads, feathers, flowers and bells.

A sign of this was the visibility that the hippie subculture gained in various mainstream and underground media.

Hippie exploitation films are 1960s exploitation films about the hippie counterculture [ 87 ] with stereotypical situations associated with the movement such as cannabis and LSD use, sex and wild psychedelic parties. Examples include The Love-ins , Psych-Out , The Trip , and Wild in the Streets . Other more serious and more critically acclaimed films about the hippie counterculture also appeared such as Easy Rider and Alice's Restaurant . (See also: List of films related to the hippie subculture .) Documentaries and television programs have also been produced until today as well as fiction and nonfiction books . The popular Broadway musical Hair was presented in 1967.

People commonly label other cultural movements of that period as hippie, but there are differences. For example, hippies were often not directly engaged in politics, as contrasted with "Yippies" (Youth International Party), an activist organization. The Yippies came to national attention during their celebration of the 1968 spring equinox, when some 3,000 of them took over Grand Central Terminal in New York—eventually resulting in 61 arrests. Especially their leaders Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin , the Yippies became notorious for their theatrics, such as trying to levitate the Pentagon at the October 1967 war protest, and such slogans as "Rise up and abandon the creeping meatball!" Their stated intention to protest the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago in August, including nominating their own candidate, " Lyndon Pigasus Pig " (an actual pig), was also widely publicized in the media at this time.

[ 88 ] In Cambridge, Massachusetts hippies congregated each Sunday for a large "be-in" at Cambridge Common with swarms of drummers and those beginning the Women's Movement. In the United States, the Hippie movement started to be seen as part of the " New Left ", which was associated with anti-war college-campus protest movements.

[ 89 ] The New Left was a term used mainly in the United Kingdom and United States in reference to activists , educators , agitators and others in the 1960s and 1970s who sought to implement a broad range of reforms on issues such as gay rights, abortion, gender roles and drugs [ 89 ] in contrast to earlier leftist or Marxist movements that had taken a more vanguardist approach to social justice and focused mostly on labor unionization and questions of social class .

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] In April 1969, the building of People's Park in Berkeley, California received international attention. The University of California, Berkeley had demolished all the buildings on a 2.8-acre (11,000 m 2 ) parcel near campus, intending to use the land to build playing fields and a parking lot. After a long delay, during which the site became a dangerous eyesore, thousands of ordinary Berkeley citizens, merchants, students, and hippies took matters into their own hands, planting trees, shrubs, flowers and grass to convert the land into a park. A major confrontation ensued on May 15, 1969, when Governor Ronald Reagan ordered the park destroyed, which led to a two-week occupation of the city of Berkeley by the California National Guard .

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Flower power came into its own during this occupation as hippies engaged in acts of civil disobedience to plant flowers in empty lots all over Berkeley under the slogan "Let a Thousand Parks Bloom".

Swami Satchidananda giving the opening talk at the Woodstock Festival of 1969 In August 1969, the Woodstock Music and Art Fair took place in Bethel, New York , which for many, exemplified the best of hippie counterculture. Over 500,000 people arrived [ 94 ] to hear some of the most notable musicians and bands of the era, among them Canned Heat , Richie Havens , Joan Baez , Janis Joplin , Grateful Dead , Creedence Clearwater Revival , Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young , Carlos Santana , Sly and the Family Stone , the Who , Jefferson Airplane and Jimi Hendrix .

Wavy Gravy 's Hog Farm provided security and attended to practical needs, and the hippie ideals of love and human fellowship seemed to have gained real-world expression. Similar rock festivals occurred in other parts of the country, which played a significant role in spreading hippie ideals throughout America.

[ 95 ] In December 1969, a rock festival took place in Altamont, California , about 45 km (30 miles) east of San Francisco. Initially billed as "Woodstock West", its official name was the Altamont Free Concert . About 300,000 people gathered to hear the Rolling Stones ; Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young ; Jefferson Airplane and other bands. The Hells Angels provided security that proved far less benevolent than the security provided at the Woodstock event: 18-year-old Meredith Hunter was stabbed and killed by one of the Hells Angels during the Rolling Stones' performance after he brandished a gun and waved it toward the stage.

[ 96 ] 1970–1973: Aftershocks and decline [ edit ] By the 1970s, the 1960s zeitgeist that had spawned hippie culture seemed to be on the wane.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] The events at the Altamont Free Concert shocked many Americans, [ 100 ] including those who had strongly identified with hippie culture. Another shock came in the form of the Sharon Tate and Leno and Rosemary LaBianca murders committed in August 1969 by Charles Manson and his "family" of followers.

Nevertheless, the turbulent political atmosphere that featured the bombing of Cambodia and shootings by National Guardsmen at Jackson State University and Kent State University still brought people together. These shootings inspired the May 1970 song by Quicksilver Messenger Service "What About Me?", where they sang, "You keep adding to my numbers as you shoot my people down", as well as Neil Young 's " Ohio ", a song that protested the Kent State massacre, recorded by Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young .  The anti-war movement reached its peak at the 1971 May Day Protests as over 12,000 protesters were arrested in Washington, D.C.; President Nixon himself actually ventured out of the White House and chatted with a group of the hippie protesters. The draft was ended soon thereafter, in January 1973.

1973–present: Absorption into the mainstream and new developments [ edit ] Much of hippie style had been integrated into mainstream American society by the early 1970s.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Large rock concerts that originated with the 1967 KFRC Fantasy Fair and Magic Mountain Music Festival and Monterey Pop Festival and the British Isle of Wight Festival in 1968 became the norm, evolving into stadium rock in the process. During the mid-late 1970s, with the end of the draft and the Vietnam War , a renewal of patriotic sentiment associated with the approach of the United States Bicentennial , the decline in popularity of psychedelic rock, and the emergence of new genres such as prog rock , heavy metal , disco , and punk rock , the mainstream media lost interest in the hippie counterculture. At the same time there was a revival of the Mod subculture , skinheads , teddy boys and the emergence of new youth cultures, like the punks , goths (an arty offshoot of punk), and football casuals ; starting in the late 1960s and early 1970s in Britain, hippies had begun to come under attack by skinheads.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] A group of hippies in Tallinn , 1989 Couple attending Snoqualmie Moondance Festival, August 1993 Many hippies would adapt and become members of the growing countercultural New Age movement of the 1970s.

[ 106 ] While many hippies made a long-term commitment to the lifestyle, some people argue that hippies "sold out" during the 1980s and became part of the materialist, self-centered consumer yuppie culture.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] Although not as visible as it once was, hippie culture has never died out completely: hippies and neo-hippies can still be found on college campuses, on communes, and at gatherings and festivals. Many embrace the hippie values of peace, love, and community, and hippies may still be found in bohemian enclaves around the world.

[ 34 ] Hippie communes, where members tried to live the ideals of the hippie movement, continued to flourish. On the West Coast, Oregon had quite a few, [ 109 ] while in 1970, the hippie community of Tawapa was founded in New Mexico .

[ 110 ] It lasted until the 1990s, when the people were pushed off the land due to housing developments .

[ 111 ] Around 1994, a new term, " Zippie ", was being used to describe hippies that had embraced New Age beliefs, new technology, and a love for electronic music.

[ 112 ] Ethos and characteristics [ edit ] Part of a series on Psychedelia Arts Psychedelic art Algorithmic art Cyberdelic Diffraction Fractal art Liquid light show LSD art Paisley Phosphene Psychedelic music Acid house Acid jazz Acid rock Acid techno Acid trance Chillwave Cloud rap Hypnagogic pop Madchester Neo-psychedelia Palm Desert Scene Peyote song P-Funk Psychedelic folk Psychedelic funk Psychedelic pop Psychedelic rock Psychedelic soul Psychedelic trance Space rock Stoner rock Trip hop Psychedelic film Acid Western Hippie exploitation films Stoner film Psychedelic literature Culture Counterculture Entheogen Smart shop Trip sitter Psychedelic microdosing Drugs 25I-NBOMe 2C-B Ayahuasca Cannabis DMT Ibogaine Ketamine LSD Mescaline Peyote Psilocybin mushrooms San Pedro cactus List of psychedelic drugs List of psilocybin mushrooms Psychoactive cactus Trip killer Experience Bad trip Ecology Ego death Therapy Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder History Acid Tests Albert Hofmann Alexander Shulgin Counterculture of the 1960s History of LSD Owsley Stanley Psychedelic era Summer of Love Timothy Leary William Leonard Pickard Law Drug liberalization Drug policy of the Netherlands Drug policy of Oregon Drug policy of Portugal Drug policy reform Legality of cannabis Legal status of psilocybin mushrooms Neurolaw Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Related topics Addiction Cannabis Cognitive liberty Drug checking Harm reduction Hippie MDMA Neuroenhancement Neuroethics Philosophy of psychedelics Psychonautics Prohibition of drugs Rave Recreational drug use Regulation of therapeutic goods Self-experimentation Surrealism v t e Tie-dyed clothes, associated with hippie culture The bohemian predecessor of the hippie culture in San Francisco was the " Beat Generation " style of coffee houses and bars, whose clientele appreciated literature, a game of chess, music (in the forms of jazz and folk style), modern dance, and traditional crafts and arts like pottery and painting." [ 113 ] The entire tone of the new subculture was different. Jon McIntire, manager of the Grateful Dead from the late 1960s to the mid-1980s, points out that the great contribution of the hippie culture was this projection of joy . "The beatnik thing was black, cynical, and cold." [ 114 ] Hippies sought to free themselves from societal restrictions, choose their own way, and find new meaning in life . One expression of hippie independence from societal norms was found in their standard of dress and grooming, which made hippies instantly recognizable to one another, and served as a visual symbol of their respect for individual rights. Through their appearance, hippies declared their willingness to question authority, and distanced themselves from the "straight" and " square " (i.e., conformist) segments of society.

[ 115 ] Personality traits and values that hippies tend to be associated with are " altruism and mysticism , honesty , joy and nonviolence ".

[ 116 ] Art and fashion [ edit ] See also: Psychedelia Leading proponents of the 1960s Psychedelic Art movement were San Francisco poster artists such as Rick Griffin , Victor Moscoso , Bonnie MacLean , Stanley Mouse and Alton Kelley , and Wes Wilson . Their psychedelic-rock concert posters were inspired by Art Nouveau , Victoriana , Dada , and Pop Art . Posters for concerts in the Fillmore West , a concert auditorium in San Francisco, popular with hippie audiences, were among the most notable of the time. Richly saturated colors in glaring contrast, elaborately ornate lettering, strongly symmetrical composition, collage elements, rubber-like distortions, and bizarre iconography are all hallmarks of the San Francisco psychedelic poster art style. The style flourished from roughly the years 1966 until 1972. Their work was immediately influential to album cover art, and indeed all of the aforementioned artists also created album covers.

Psychedelic light shows were a new art form developed for rock concerts. Using oil and dye in an emulsion that was set between large convex lenses upon overhead projectors, the light-show artists created bubbling liquid visuals that pulsed in rhythm to the music. This was mixed with slide shows and film loops to create an improvisational motion picture art form, and to give visual representation to the improvisational jams of the rock bands and create a completely "trippy" atmosphere for the audience.

[ citation needed ] The Brotherhood of Light were responsible for many of the light shows in San Francisco psychedelic rock concerts.

Out of the psychedelic counterculture there also arose a new genre of comic books: underground comix .

Zap Comix was among the original underground comics, and featured the work of Robert Crumb , S. Clay Wilson , Victor Moscoso, Rick Griffin , and Robert Williams among others. Underground comix were ribald and intensely satirical, and seemed to pursue weirdness for the sake of weirdness.

Gilbert Shelton created perhaps the most enduring of underground cartoon characters, The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers , whose drugged-out exploits held a mirror up to the hippie lifestyle of the 1960s.

Monument to the hippie era in Tamil Nadu , India As in other counterculture movements such as the beat movement and the later punk movement , hippie symbols and iconography were purposely borrowed from either "low" or "primitive" cultures, with hippie fashion reflecting a disorderly, often vagrant style.

[ 117 ] As with other adolescent, white middle-class movements, deviant behavior of the hippies involved challenging the prevailing gender differences of their time: both men and women in the hippie movement wore jeans and maintained long hair, [ 118 ] and both genders wore sandals, moccasins or went barefoot .

[ 64 ] Men often wore beards, [ 119 ] while women wore little or no makeup, with many going braless .

[ 64 ] Hippies often chose brightly colored clothing and wore unusual styles , such as bell-bottom pants, vests, tie-dyed garments, dashikis , peasant blouses , and long, full skirts; non-Western inspired clothing with Native American , Latin American , African and Asiatic motifs was also popular. Much hippie clothing was self-made in defiance of corporate culture, and hippies often purchased their clothes from flea markets and second-hand shops.

[ 119 ] Favored accessories for both men and women included Native American jewelry, head scarves, headbands, long beaded necklaces , and circular John Lennon style glasses.

[ 64 ] Hippie homes, vehicles and other possessions were often decorated with psychedelic art . The bold colors, hand-made clothing and loose fitting clothes opposed the tight and uniform clothing of the 1940s and 1950s. It also rejected consumerism in that the hand-production of clothing called for self-efficiency and individuality.

[ 120 ] Love and sex [ edit ] See also: Free love Oz number 28, also known as the " Schoolkids issue of Oz ", which was the main cause of a 1971 high-profile obscenity case in the United Kingdom.

Oz was a UK underground publication with a general hippie / counter-cultural point of view.

The common stereotype on the issues of love and sex had it that the hippies were " promiscuous , having wild sex orgies , seducing innocent teenagers and every manner of sexual perversion." [ 121 ] The hippie movement appeared concurrently in the midst of a rising sexual revolution , in which many views of the status quo on this subject were being challenged.

The clinical study Human Sexual Response was published by Masters and Johnson in 1966, and the topic suddenly became more commonplace in America. The 1969 book Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex (But Were Afraid to Ask) by psychiatrist David Reuben was a more popular attempt at answering the public's curiosity regarding such matters. Then in 1972 appeared The Joy of Sex by Alex Comfort , reflecting an even more candid perception of love-making. By this time, the recreational or 'fun' aspects of sexual behavior were being discussed more openly than ever before, and this more 'enlightened' outlook resulted not just from the publication of such new books as these, but from a more pervasive sexual revolution that had already been well underway for some time.

[ 121 ] The hippies inherited various countercultural views and practices regarding sex and love from the Beat Generation ; "their writings influenced the hippies to open up when it came to sex, and to experiment without guilt or jealousy ." [ 122 ] One popular hippie slogan that appeared was "If it feels good, do it!" [ 121 ] which for many meant "you are free to love whomever you please, whenever you please, however you please". This encouraged spontaneous sexual activity and experimentation.

Group sex , public sex , homosexuality ; under the influence of drugs, all the taboos went out the window. This doesn't mean that straight sex or monogamy were unknown, quite the contrary. Nevertheless, the open relationship became an accepted part of the hippie lifestyle. This meant that you might have a primary relationship with one person, but if another attracted you, you could explore that relationship without rancor or jealousy." [ 121 ] Hippies embraced the old slogan of free love of the radical social reformers of other eras; it was accordingly observed that "Free love made the whole love, marriage, sex, baby package obsolete. Love was no longer limited to one person, you could love anyone you chose. In fact love was something you shared with everyone, not just your sex partners. Love exists to be shared freely. We also discovered the more you share, the more you get! So why reserve your love for a select few? This profound truth was one of the great hippie revelations." [ 121 ] Sexual experimentation alongside psychedelics also occurred, due to the perception of their being uninhibitors.

[ 123 ] Others explored the spiritual aspects of sex .

[ 124 ] Travel [ edit ] Hand-crafted Hippie Truck, 1968 Hippies tended to travel light, and could pick up and go wherever the action was at any time. Whether at a love-in on Mount Tamalpais near San Francisco, a demonstration against the Vietnam War in Berkeley, or one of Ken Kesey 's "Acid Tests", if the "vibe" was not right and a change of scene was desired, hippies were mobile at a moment's notice. Planning was eschewed, as hippies were happy to put a few clothes in a backpack, stick out their thumbs and hitchhike anywhere. Hippies seldom worried whether they had money, hotel reservations or any of the other standard accoutrements of travel. Hippie households welcomed overnight guests on an impromptu basis, and the reciprocal nature of the lifestyle permitted greater freedom of movement. People generally cooperated to meet each other's needs in ways that became less common after the early 1970s.

[ 125 ] This way of life is still seen among Rainbow Family groups, new age travellers and New Zealand's housetruckers .

[ 126 ] Hippie Truck interior A derivative of this free-flow style of travel were the hippie trucks and buses, hand-crafted mobile houses built on a truck or bus chassis to facilitate a nomadic lifestyle, as documented in the 1974 book Roll Your Own .

[ 127 ] Some of these mobile houses were quite elaborate, with beds, toilets, showers and cooking facilities.

On the West Coast, a unique lifestyle developed around the Renaissance Faires that Phyllis and Ron Patterson first organized in 1963. During the summer and fall months, entire families traveled together in their trucks and buses, parked at Renaissance Pleasure Faire sites in Southern and Northern California, worked their crafts during the week, and donned Elizabethan costume for weekend performances, and attended booths where handmade goods were sold to the public. The sheer number of young people living at the time made for unprecedented travel opportunities to special happenings. The peak experience of this type was the Woodstock Festival near Bethel, New York , from August 15 to 18, 1969, which drew between 400,000 and 500,000 people.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] Hippie trail [ edit ] Main article: Hippie trail One travel experience, undertaken by hundreds of thousands of hippies between 1969 and 1971, was the Hippie trail overland route to India. Carrying little or no luggage, and with small amounts of cash, almost all followed the same route, hitch-hiking across Europe to Athens and on to Istanbul , then by train through central Turkey via Erzurum , continuing by bus into Iran, via Tabriz and Tehran to Mashhad , across the Afghan border into Herat , through southern Afghanistan via Kandahar to Kabul , over the Khyber Pass into Pakistan, via Rawalpindi and Lahore to the Indian frontier. Once in India, hippies went to many different destinations, but gathered in large numbers on the beaches of Goa and Kovalam in Trivandrum ( Kerala ), [ 130 ] or crossed the border into Nepal to spend months in Kathmandu . In Kathmandu, most of the hippies hung out in the tranquil surroundings of a place called Freak Street [ 131 ] ( Nepal Bhasa : Jhoo Chhen), which still exists near Kathmandu Durbar Square.

Spirituality and religion [ edit ] See also: New Age , Jesus movement , and Zen boom Many hippies rejected mainstream organized religion in favor of a more personal spiritual experience.  Buddhism and Hinduism often resonated with hippies, as they were seen as less rule-bound, and less likely to be associated with existing baggage.

[ 132 ] Some hippies embraced neo-paganism , especially Wicca . Others were involved with the occult, with people like Timothy Leary citing Aleister Crowley as influences. By the 1960s, western interest in Hindu spirituality and yoga reached its peak, giving rise to a great number of Neo-Hindu schools specifically advocated to a western public.

[ 133 ] In his 1991 book, "Hippies and American Values", Timothy Miller described the hippie ethos as essentially a "religious movement" whose goal was to transcend the limitations of mainstream religious institutions. "Like many dissenting religions, the hippies were enormously hostile to the religious institutions of the dominant culture, and they tried to find new and adequate ways to do the tasks the dominant religions failed to perform." [ 134 ] In his seminal, contemporaneous work, "The Hippie Trip", author Lewis Yablonsky notes that those who were most respected in hippie settings were the spiritual leaders, the so-called "high priests" who emerged during that era.

[ 135 ] Timothy Leary , family and band on a lecture tour at State University of New York at Buffalo in 1969 One such hippie "high priest" was San Francisco State University Professor Stephen Gaskin .  Beginning in 1966, Gaskin's "Monday Night Class" eventually outgrew the lecture hall, and attracted 1,500 hippie followers in an open discussion of spiritual values, drawing from Christian, Buddhist, and Hindu teachings.  In 1970 Gaskin founded a Tennessee community called The Farm , and even late in life he still listed his religion as "Hippie." [ 136 ] [ 137 ] [ 138 ] Timothy Leary was an American psychologist and writer, known for his advocacy of psychedelic drugs . On September 19, 1966, Leary founded the League for Spiritual Discovery , a religion declaring LSD as its holy sacrament, in part as an unsuccessful attempt to maintain legal status for the use of LSD and other psychedelics for the religion's adherents based on a "freedom of religion" argument.

The Psychedelic Experience was the inspiration for John Lennon 's song " Tomorrow Never Knows " in the Beatles ' album Revolver .

[ 139 ] Leary published a pamphlet in 1967 called Start Your Own Religion to encourage just that [ 140 ] and was invited to attend the January 14, 1967 Human Be-In , a gathering of 20,000 to 30,000 hippies in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park . In speaking to the group, he coined the famous phrase " Turn on, tune in, drop out ".

[ 141 ] The English magician Aleister Crowley became an influential icon to the new alternative spiritual movements of the decade as well as for rock musicians. The Beatles included him as one of the many figures on the cover sleeve of their 1967 album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band , while Jimmy Page , the guitarist of the Yardbirds and co-founder of 1970s rock band Led Zeppelin , was fascinated by Crowley, and owned some of his clothing, manuscripts and ritual objects, and during the 1970s bought Boleskine House , which appears in the band's 1976 film The Song Remains the Same . On the back cover of the Doors 1970 compilation album 13 , Jim Morrison and the other members of the Doors are shown posing with a bust of Aleister Crowley.

Timothy Leary also openly acknowledged Crowley's inspiration.

[ 142 ] After the hippie era, the Dudeist philosophy and lifestyle developed.  Inspired by "the Dude", the neo-hippie protagonist of the Coen Brothers ' 1998 film The Big Lebowski , Dudeism's stated primary objective is to promote a modern form of Chinese Taoism , outlined in Tao Te Ching by Laozi (6th century BC), blended with concepts by the Ancient Greek philosopher Epicurus (341–270 BC), and presented in a style as personified by the character of Jeffrey "the Dude" Lebowski, a fictional hippie character portrayed by Jeff Bridges in the film.

[ 143 ] Dudeism has sometimes been regarded as a mock religion , [ 144 ] [ 145 ] though its founder and many adherents regard it seriously.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] [ 148 ] Politics [ edit ] See also: Flower power and Make love, not war "The hippies were heirs to a long line of bohemians that includes William Blake , Walt Whitman , Ralph Waldo Emerson , Henry David Thoreau , Hermann Hesse , Arthur Rimbaud , Oscar Wilde , Aldous Huxley , utopian movements like the Rosicrucians and the Theosophists , and most directly the Beatniks . Hippies emerged from a society that had produced birth-control pills, a counterproductive war in Vietnam, the liberation and idealism of the civil rights movement , feminism, homosexual rights, FM radio, mass-produced LSD , a strong economy, and a huge number of baby-boom teenagers . These elements allowed the hippies to have a mainstream impact that dwarfed that of the Beats and earlier avant-garde cultures." "In Defense of Hippies" by Danny Goldberg [ 132 ] For the historian of the anarchist movement Ronald Creagh , the hippie movement could be considered as the last spectacular resurgence of utopian socialism .

[ 149 ] For Creagh, a characteristic of this is the desire for the transformation of society not through political revolution, or through reformist action pushed forward by the state, but through the creation of a counter-society of a socialist character in the midst of the current system, which will be made up of ideal communities of a more or less libertarian social form.

[ 149 ] The peace symbol was developed in the UK as a logo for the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament , and was embraced by U.S. anti-war protesters during the 1960s. Hippies were often pacifists , and participated in nonviolent political demonstrations, such as Civil Rights Movement , the marches on Washington, D.C.

, and anti–Vietnam War demonstrations, including draft-card burnings and the 1968 Democratic National Convention protests .

[ 150 ] The degree of political involvement varied widely among hippies, from those who were active in peace demonstrations, to the more anti-authority street theater and demonstrations of the Yippies , the most politically active hippie sub-group.

[ 151 ] Bobby Seale discussed the differences between Yippies and hippies with Jerry Rubin , who told him that Yippies were the political wing of the hippie movement, as hippies have not "necessarily become political yet". Regarding the political activity of hippies, Rubin said, "They mostly prefer to be stoned, but most of them want peace, and they want an end to this stuff." [ 152 ] In addition to nonviolent political demonstrations, hippie opposition to the Vietnam War included organizing political action groups to oppose the war, refusal to serve in the military and conducting " teach-ins " on college campuses that covered Vietnamese history and the larger political context of the war.

[ 153 ] Scott McKenzie's 1967 rendition of John Phillips' song " San Francisco (Be Sure to Wear Flowers in Your Hair) ", which helped to inspire the hippie Summer of Love, became a homecoming song for all Vietnam veterans arriving in San Francisco from 1967 onward. McKenzie has dedicated every American performance of "San Francisco" to Vietnam veterans, and he sang in 2002 at the 20th anniversary of the dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial .

[ 154 ] Hippie political expression often took the form of "dropping out" of society to implement the changes they sought.

Tahquitz Canyon , Palm Springs, California, 1969, sharing a joint Politically motivated movements aided by hippies include the back to the land movement of the 1960s, cooperative business enterprises , alternative energy , the free press movement, and organic farming .

[ 102 ] [ 155 ] The San Francisco group known as the Diggers articulated an influential radical criticism of contemporary mass consumer society, and so they opened free stores which simply gave away their stock, provided free food, distributed free drugs, gave away money, organized free music concerts, and performed works of political art.

[ 65 ] The Diggers took their name from the original English Diggers (1649–50) led by Gerrard Winstanley , [ 156 ] and they sought to create a mini-society free of money and capitalism .

[ 157 ] Such activism was ideally carried through anti-authoritarian and non-violent means; thus it was observed that "The way of the hippie is antithetical to all repressive hierarchical power structures since they are adverse to the hippie goals of peace, love and freedom... Hippies don't impose their beliefs on others. Instead, hippies seek to change the world through reason and by living what they believe." [ 158 ] The political ideals of hippies influenced other movements, such as anarcho-punk , rave culture , green politics , stoner culture and the New Age movement. Arguments can be made that being " woke " is only the latest natural offshoot of hipness, since both seek heightened "awareness" of one's surroundings (social, political, sexual etc.). For example, John Leland elaborates on the origins of coded language from African American slaves as a type of aware hipness and documents connections to downtrodden Jews and other minorities in American society in Hip: The History .

[ 159 ] Penny Rimbaud of the English anarcho-punk band Crass said in interviews, and in an essay called The Last of the Hippies , that Crass was formed in memory of his friend Wally Hope .

[ 160 ] Crass had its roots in Dial House , which was established in 1967 as a commune.

[ 161 ] Some punks were often critical of Crass for their involvement in the hippie movement. Like Crass, Jello Biafra was influenced by the hippie movement, and cited the yippies as a key influence on his political activism and thinking, though he also wrote songs critical of hippies.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] Drugs [ edit ] Part of a series on Cannabis Arts Culture 420 ( chan ) Books Magu (deity) Names Religion Judaism Latter-day Saints Sikhism Smoke-in Spiritual use Sports Stoner film Stoner rock Terms Chemistry Phytocannabinoids Main THC Dronabinol (INN) CBD Minor delta -3-THC delta -4-THC delta -7-THC delta -8-THC delta -10-THC delta -11-THC THCB THCH THCP CBDH CBDP Semi-synthetic cannabinoids THC-O-acetate Synthetic cannabinoids AM AM-2201 CP CP-55940 Nabilone Dimethylheptylpyran HU HU-210 HU-331 JWH JWH-018 JWH-073 JWH-133 Levonantradol MDMB-CHMICA SR144528 WIN 55,212-2 Pharmacology Cannabinoid receptors Cannabinoid receptor type 1 Cannabinoid receptor type 2 Endocannabinoids (activate cannabinoid receptors) 2-AG Anandamide NADA Virodhamine Consumption Drinks Edibles Smoking Tea Conversion of CBD to THC Vaping Adult lifetime cannabis use by country Annual cannabis use by country Economics Coffeeshop Cultivation Shop Social Club Grow house Grow shop Head shop Marijuana vending machine Effects Dependence Driving Drug testing Effects of legalized cannabis Gateway drug theory Long term effects Medicine Memory Pregnancy Time perception Forms Bhang Blunt Charas Flower essential oil Hashish Oil Hemp Beer Milk Oil Protein Hempcrete Joint Kief Roach Synthetic cannabis Tincture Law Cannabis rights Legality of cannabis Timeline of cannabis law Cannabis and international law Centenary of Cannabis prohibition UN 2020 descheduling Single Convention on adult use Cannabis in the United States Legality Legal history Timeline Medical Non-medical Cannabis in Canada Cannabis Act Cannabis laws of Canada by province or territory Legal history of cannabis in Canada Elsewhere Cannabis by country Cannabis in Malta Cannabis in Spain Cannabis in South Africa Cannabis in Thailand Cannabis in the Netherlands Drug policy of Portugal Structural scheduling of synthetic cannabinoids Variants Autoflowering cannabis Genus Cannabis Species Cannabis sativa Cannabis indica Cannabis ruderalis Strains Acapulco Gold Charlotte's web Kush Malawi Gold Sour Diesel Related Drug culture Drug liberalization Illegal drug trade Psychedelia Cannabis portal Medicine portal Agriculture portal v t e See also: Spiritual use of cannabis ; History of LSD ; and Turn on, tune in, drop out Following in the footsteps of the Beats, many hippies used cannabis (marijuana), considering it pleasurable and benign. They used drugs such as marijuana, LSD , psilocybin mushrooms , or magic mushrooms, and mescaline ( peyote ) to gain spiritual awakening.

On the East Coast of the United States , Harvard University professors Timothy Leary , [ 164 ] Ralph Metzner and Richard Alpert (Ram Dass) advocated psychotropic drugs for psychotherapy , self-exploration, religious and spiritual use. Regarding LSD, Leary said, "Expand your consciousness and find ecstasy and revelation within." [ 165 ] On the West Coast of the United States , Ken Kesey was an important figure in promoting the recreational use of psychotropic drugs, especially LSD, also known as "acid." By holding what he called " Acid Tests ", and touring the country with his band of Merry Pranksters , Kesey became a magnet for media attention that drew many young people to the fledgling movement. The Grateful Dead (originally billed as the Warlocks) played some of their first shows at the Acid Tests, often as high on LSD as their audiences. Kesey and the Pranksters had a "vision of turning on the world." [ 165 ] Harder drugs, such as cocaine , amphetamines and heroin, were also sometimes used in hippie settings; however, these drugs were often disdained, even among those who used them, because they were recognized as harmful and addictive.

[ 166 ] Legacy [ edit ] See also: List of books and publications related to the hippie subculture and List of films related to the hippie subculture Culture [ edit ] Newcomers to the Internet are often startled to discover themselves not so much in some soulless colony of technocrats as in a kind of cultural Brigadoon - a flowering remnant of the '60s, when hippie communalism and libertarian politics formed the roots of the modern cyberrevolution...

Stewart Brand , "We Owe It All To The Hippies" (1995).

[ 167 ] "The '60s were a leap in human consciousness. Mahatma Gandhi, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, Che Guevara, they led a revolution of conscience. The Beatles, the Doors, Jimi Hendrix created revolution and evolution themes. The music was like Dalí, with many colors and revolutionary ways. The youth of today must go there to find themselves." — Carlos Santana [ 168 ] The legacy of the hippie movement continues to permeate Western society.

[ 169 ] In general, unmarried couples of all ages feel free to travel and live together without societal disapproval.

[ 102 ] [ 170 ] Frankness regarding sexual matters has become more common, and the rights of homosexual , bisexual and transgender people, as well as people who choose not to categorize themselves at all, have expanded.

[ 171 ] Religious and cultural diversity has gained greater acceptance.

[ 172 ] Co-operative business enterprises and creative community living arrangements are more accepted than before.

[ 173 ] Some of the little hippie health food stores of the 1960s and 1970s are now large-scale, profitable businesses, due to greater interest in natural foods, herbal remedies, vitamins and other nutritional supplements.

[ 174 ] It has been suggested that 1960s and 1970s counterculture embraced certain types of " groovy " science and technology. Examples include surfboard design, renewable energy , aquaculture and client-centered approaches to midwifery , childbirth , and women's health .

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] Authors Stewart Brand and John Markoff argue that the development and popularization of personal computers and the Internet find one of their primary roots in the anti-authoritarian ethos promoted by hippie culture.

[ 167 ] [ 177 ] Distinct appearance and clothing was one of the immediate legacies of hippies worldwide.

[ 119 ] [ 178 ] During the 1960s and 1970s, mustaches, beards and long hair became more commonplace and colorful, while multi-ethnic clothing dominated the fashion world. Since that time, a wide range of personal appearance options and clothing styles, including nudity, have become more widely acceptable, all of which was uncommon before the hippie era.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] Hippies also inspired the decline in popularity of the necktie and other business clothing, which had been unavoidable for men during the 1950s and early 1960s. Additionally, hippie fashion itself has been commonplace in the years since the 1960s in clothing and accessories, particularly the peace symbol .

[ 180 ] Astrology , including everything from serious study to whimsical amusement regarding personal traits, was integral to hippie culture.

[ 181 ] The generation of the 1970s became influenced by the hippie and the 1960s countercultural legacy. As such in New York City musicians and audiences from the female, homosexual, Black, and Latino communities adopted several traits from the hippies and psychedelia . They included overpowering sound, free-form dancing, multi-colored, pulsating lighting, colorful costumes, and hallucinogens .

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] [ 184 ] 1960s Psychedelic soul groups like the Chambers Brothers and especially Sly and the Family Stone influenced George Clinton, P-funk and the Temptations .

[ 185 ] In addition, the perceived positivity, lack of irony, and earnestness of the hippies informed proto-disco music like M.F.S.B.

's album Love Is the Message .

[ 182 ] [ 186 ] Disco music supported the '70s LGBT movement.

The hippie legacy in literature includes the lasting popularity of books reflecting the hippie experience, such as The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test .

[ 187 ] In 1995, The Sekhmet Hypothesis attempted to link both hippie and rave culture together in relation to transactional analysis, suggesting that rave culture was a social archetype based on the mood of friendly strength, compared to the gentle hippie archetype, based on friendly weakness.

[ 188 ] The later electronic dance genres known as goa trance and psychedelic trance and its related events and culture have important hippie legacies and neo hippie elements. The popular DJ of the genre Goa Gil , like other hippies from the 1960s, left the US and Western Europe to travel on the hippie trail and later developed psychedelic parties and music in the Indian state of Goa , in which the goa and psytrance genres were born and exported around the world in the 1990s and 2000s.

[ 189 ] Music [ edit ] In music, the folk rock and psychedelic rock popular among hippies evolved into genres such as acid rock , world beat and heavy metal music .

Psychedelic trance (also known as psytrance) is a type of electronic music influenced by 1960s psychedelic rock. The tradition of hippie music festivals began in the United States in 1965 with Ken Kesey's Acid Tests , where the Grateful Dead played tripping on LSD and initiated psychedelic jamming. For the next several decades, many hippies and neo-hippies became part of the Deadhead community, attending music and art festivals held around the country. The Grateful Dead toured continuously, with few interruptions between 1965 and 1995.

Phish and their fans (called Phish Heads ) operated in the same manner, with the band touring continuously between 1983 and 2004. Many contemporary bands performing at hippie festivals and their derivatives are called jam bands , since they play songs that contain long instrumentals similar to the original hippie bands of the 1960s.

[ 190 ] With the demise of Grateful Dead and Phish, nomadic touring hippies attend a growing series of summer festivals, the largest of which is called the Bonnaroo Music & Arts Festival , which premiered in 2002. The Oregon Country Fair is a three-day festival featuring handmade crafts, educational displays and costumed entertainment. The annual Starwood Festival , founded in 1981, is a seven-day event indicative of the spiritual quest of hippies through an exploration of non-mainstream religions and world-views, and has offered performances and classes by a variety of hippie and counter-culture icons.

[ 191 ] The Burning Man festival began in 1986 at a San Francisco beach party and is now held in the Black Rock Desert northeast of Reno, Nevada . Although few participants would accept the hippie label, Burning Man is a contemporary expression of alternative community in the same spirit as early hippie events. The gathering becomes a temporary city (36,500 occupants in 2005, 50,000+ in 2011), with elaborate encampments, displays, and many art cars . Other events that enjoy a large attendance include the Rainbow Family Gatherings , the Gathering of the Vibes , Community Peace Festivals, and the Woodstock Festivals .

United Kingdom [ edit ] Further information: New Age travellers and Second Summer of Love In the UK, there are many new age travellers who are known as hippies to outsiders, but prefer to call themselves the Peace Convoy . They started the Stonehenge Free Festival in 1974, but English Heritage later banned the festival in 1985, resulting in the Battle of the Beanfield . With Stonehenge banned as a festival site, new age travellers gather at the annual Glastonbury Festival . Today [ when?

] , hippies in the UK can be found in parts of South West England , such as Bristol (particularly the neighborhoods of Montpelier , Stokes Croft , St Werburghs , Bishopston , Easton and Totterdown ), Glastonbury in Somerset , Totnes in Devon , and Stroud in Gloucestershire , as well as in Hebden Bridge in West Yorkshire , and in areas of London and Cornwall . In the summer, many hippies and those of similar subcultures gather at numerous outdoor festivals in the countryside.

In New Zealand, between 1976 and 1981, tens of thousands of hippies gathered from around the world on large farms around Waihi and Waikino for music and alternatives festivals. Named Nambassa , the festivals focused on peace, love, and a balanced lifestyle. The events featured practical workshops and displays advocating alternative lifestyles , self sufficiency , clean and sustainable energy and sustainable living .

[ 192 ] In the UK and Europe, the years 1987 until 1989 were marked by a large-scale revival of many characteristics of the hippie movement. This later movement, composed mostly of people aged 18 to 25, adopted much of the original hippie philosophy of love, peace and freedom. The summer of 1988 became known as the Second Summer of Love . Although the music favored by this movement was modern electronic music , especially house music and acid house , one could often hear songs from the original hippie era in the chill out rooms at raves . Also, there was a trend towards psychedelic indie rock in the form of shoegaze , dream pop , Madchester and neo-psychedelic bands like Jesus And Mary Chain , the Sundays , Spacemen 3 , Loop , Stone Roses , Happy Mondays , Inspiral Carpets and Ride . This was effectively a parallel soundtrack to the rave scene that was rooted as much in 1960s psychedelic rock as it was in post-punk , though Madchester was more directly influenced by acid house, funk and northern soul. Many ravers were originally soul boys and football casuals , and football hooliganism declined after the Second Summer of Love. In the UK, many of the well-known figures of this movement first lived communally in Stroud Green , an area of north London located in Finsbury Park .

Media [ edit ] Popular films depicting the hippie ethos and lifestyle include Woodstock , Easy Rider , Hair , The Doors , Across the Universe , Taking Woodstock , and Crumb .

In 2002, photojournalist John Bassett McCleary published a 650-page, 6,000-entry unabridged slang dictionary devoted to the language of the hippies titled The Hippie Dictionary: A Cultural Encyclopedia of the 1960s and 1970s . The book was revised and expanded to 700 pages in 2004.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] McCleary believes that the hippie counterculture added a significant number of words to the English language by borrowing from the lexicon of the Beat Generation , through the hippies' shortening of beatnik words and then popularizing their usage.

[ 195 ] As a hippie, Ken Westerfield helped to popularize the alternative sport of Frisbee in the 1960s–1970s, that has become today's disc sports Hippies at the Nambassa 1981 Festival in New Zealand Goa Gil , original 1960s hippie who later became a pioneering electronic dance music DJ and party organizer, here appearing in the 2001 film Last Hippie Standing See also [ edit ] Society portal 1960s portal Afghan coat Anti-globalization movement Baby boomers Black Bear Ranch Blue Movie Cannabis culture Food Not Bombs Freak scene Generation gap Indomania Jesus freak List of alternative lifestyle communities List of historic rock festivals List of New Age topics Rastafari Simple living References [ edit ] This article needs more complete citations for verification .

Please help add missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable.

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ Hippie Cambridge Dictionary ^ "hippy - Definition of hippy in English by Oxford Dictionaries" , Oxford Dictionaries - English , archived from the original on December 31, 2017 ^ "hippie | History, Lifestyle, & Beliefs" , Encyclopedia Britannica , retrieved 2019-05-24 ^ "Beat movement - History, Characteristics, Writers, & Facts" , Encyclopedia Britannica , retrieved 2 March 2019 ^ Howard Smead (November 1, 2000), Don't Trust Anyone Over Thirty: The First Four Decades of the Baby Boom , iUniverse, pp. 155–, ISBN 978-0-595-12393-3 ^ Kilgallen, Dorothy (June 11, 1963), Dorothy Kilgallen's Voice of Broadway , Syndicated column via The Montreal Gazette , retrieved July 10, 2014 , New York hippies have a new kick – baking marijuana in cookies...

^ To say "I'm hip to the situation" means "I'm aware of the situation. See: Sheidlower, Jesse (December 8, 2004), "Crying Wolof: Does the word hip really hail from a West African language?" , Slate Magazine , retrieved May 7, 2007 ^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" , Etymonline.com , retrieved February 3, 2014 ^ "Hep - Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary" , Merriam-webster.com , August 31, 2012 , retrieved February 3, 2014 ^ Davis, Fred; Munoz, Laura (June 1968), "Heads and Freaks: Patterns and Meanings of Drug Use Among Hippies", Journal of Health and Social Behavior , 9 (2): 156– 64, doi : 10.2307/2948334 , ISSN 0022-1465 , JSTOR 2948334 , PMID 5745772 , S2CID 27921802 ^ Allen, James R.; West, Louis Jolyon (1968), "Flight from violence: Hippies and the green rebellion", American Journal of Psychiatry , 125 (3): 364– 370, doi : 10.1176/ajp.125.3.364 , PMID 5667202 ^ Festival, Monterey International Pop, "Monterey International Pop Festival" , Monterey International Pop Festival , archived from the original on 22 June 2017 , retrieved 2 March 2019 ^ "The attendance at the third Pop Festival at...Isle of Wight, England on 30 Aug 1970 was claimed by its promoters, Fiery Creations, to be 400,000." The Guinness book of Records, 1987 (p. 91), Russell, Alan (ed.).

Guinness World Records , 1986 ISBN 0851124399 .

^ Purcell, Fernando; Alfredo Riquelme (2009), Ampliando miradas: Chile y su historia en un tiempo global , RIL Editores, p. 21, ISBN 978-956-284-701-8 ^ "(Un)Civil Societies: September 3, 2007" , Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty , 11 November 2008 ^ "The Misconception About Baby Boomers and the Sixties" , The New Yorker , 18 August 2019 , retrieved 20 December 2021 ^ Vitaljich, Shaun (December 8, 2004), Crying Wolof , Slate Magazine , retrieved 2007-05-07 ^ Jonathan Lighter, Random House Dictionary of Historical Slang ^ George Vere Hobart (January 16, 1867 – January 31, 1926) ^ Harry "The Hipster" Gibson (1986), Everybody's Crazy But Me646456456654151 , The Hipster Story, Progressive Records ^ Harry Gibson wrote: "At that time musicians used jive talk among themselves and many customers were picking up on it. One of these words was hep which described someone in the know. When lots of people started using hep , musicians changed to hip . I started calling people hipsters and greeted customers who dug the kind of jazz we were playing as 'all you hipsters.' Musicians at the club began calling me Harry the Hipster ; so I wrote a new tune called 'Handsome Harry the Hipster.'" -- "Everybody's Crazy But Me" (1986).

^ Rexroth, Kenneth. (1961). " What's Wrong with the Clubs ." Metronome . Reprinted in Assays ^ Booth 2004 , p. 212.

^ Gilliland, John (1969).

"Show 42 - The Acid Test: Defining 'hippy' " (audio) .

Pop Chronicles .

University of North Texas Libraries .

Track 1.

^ Use of the term "hippie" did not become widespread in the mass media until early 1967, after San Francisco Chronicle columnist Herb Caen began to use the term; See "Take a Hippie to Lunch Today", S.F. Chronicle, January 20, 1967, p. 37. San Francisco Chronicle, January 18, 1967 column, p. 27 ^ a b "The Hippies" , Time , July 7, 1968 , retrieved 2007-08-24 ^ Randal, Annie Janeiro (2005), "The Power to Influence Minds", Music, Power, and Politics , Routledge, pp.

66– 67, ISBN 0-415-94364-7 ^ Kennedy, Gordon; Ryan, Kody (2003), Hippie Roots & The Perennial Subculture , archived from the original on August 30, 2007 , retrieved 2007-08-31 . See also: Kennedy 1998 .

^ Elaine Woo, Gypsy Boots, 89; Colorful Promoter of Healthy Food and Lifestyles , Los Angeles Times , August 10, 2004, Accessed December 22, 2008.

^ Zablocki, Benjamin . "Hippies." World Book Online Reference Center . 2006. Retrieved on 2006-10-12. "Hippies were members of a youth movement...from white middle-class families and ranged in age from 15 to 25 years old." ^ a b Dudley 2000 , pp. 193–194.

^ a b Hirsch 1993 , p. 419. Hirsch describes hippies as "Members of a cultural protest that began in the U.S. in the 1960s and affected Europe before fading in the 1970s...fundamentally a cultural rather than a political protest." ^ a b Pendergast & Pendergast 2005 . Pendergast writes: "The Hippies made up the...nonpolitical subgroup of a larger group known as the counterculture...the counterculture included several distinct groups...One group, called the New Left...Another broad group called...the Civil Rights Movement...did not become a recognizable social group until after 1965...according to John C. McWilliams, author of The 1960s Cultural Revolution ." ^ a b Stone 1999 , Hippy Havens ^ August 28 - Bob Dylan turns the Beatles on to cannabis for the second time. See also: Brown, Peter ; Gaines, Steven (2002), The Love You Make: An Insider's Story of the Beatles , NAL Trade, ISBN 0-451-20735-1 ; Moller, Karen (September 25, 2006), Tony Blair: Child Of The Hippie Generation , Swans , retrieved 2007-07-29 ^ Light My Fire: Rock Posters from the Summer of Love , Museum of Fine Arts, Boston , 2006, archived from the original on August 15, 2007 , retrieved 2007-08-25 ^ Yablonsky 1968 , pp. 36.

^ Oldmeadow 2004 , pp. 260, 264.

^ Stolley 1998 , pp. 137.

^ Yippie Abbie Hoffman envisioned a different society: "...where people share things, and we don't need money; where you have the machines for the people. A free society, that's really what it amounts to... a free society built on life; but life is not some Time Magazine , hippie version of fagdom... we will attempt to build that society..." See: Swatez, Gerald. Miller, Kaye. (1970).

Conventions: The Land Around Us Anagram Pictures. University of Illinois at Chicago Circle. Social Sciences Research Film Unit. qtd at ~16:48. The speaker is not explicitly identified, but it is thought to be Abbie Hoffman.

Archived March 15, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Wiener, Jon (1991), Come Together: John Lennon in His Time , University of Illinois Press, p.

40 , ISBN 0-252-06131-4 : "Seven hundred million people heard it in a worldwide TV satellite broadcast. It became the anthem of flower power that summer... The song expressed the highest value of the counterculture...For the hippies, however, it represented a call for liberation from Protestant culture, with its repressive sexual taboos and its insistence on emotional restraint... The song presented the flower power critique of movement politics: there was nothing you could do that couldn't be done by others; thus you didn't need to do anything...John was arguing not only against bourgeois self-denial and future-mindedness but also against the activists' sense of urgency and their strong personal commitments to fighting injustice and oppression..." ^ Yablonsky 1968 , pp. 106–107.

^ Theme appears in contemporaneous interviews throughout Yablonsky (1968) .

^ McCleary 2004 , pp. 50, 166, 323.

^ Dudley 2000 , pp. 203–206.

Timothy Miller notes that the counterculture was a "movement of seekers of meaning and value...the historic quest of any religion." Miller quotes Harvey Cox , William C. Shepard, Jefferson Poland , and Ralph J. Gleason in support of the view of the hippie movement as a new religion. See also Wes Nisker 's The Big Bang, The Buddha, and the Baby Boom : "At its core, however, hippie was a spiritual phenomenon, a big, unfocused, revival meeting." Nisker cites the San Francisco Oracle , which described the Human Be-In as a "spiritual revolution".

^ a b Dodd, David (June 22, 1998), The Annotated Grateful Dead Lyrics: "That's It For The Other One" , University of California, Santa Cruz , archived from the original on May 14, 2008 , retrieved 2008-05-09 ^ "Carl Franzoni, Last of the Freaks" . Archived from the original on 21 June 2006.

^ Carl Franzoni, Last of the Freaks , archived from the original on 21 June 2006 ^ Rogan, Johnny (August 31, 1997), The Byrds: Timeless Flight Revisited : the Sequel , Rogan House, p. 66, ISBN 9780952954019 – via Google Books ^ Walker, Michael (May 1, 2010), Laurel Canyon: The Inside Story of Rock-and-Roll's Legendary Neighborhood , Farrar, Straus and Giroux, p. 14, ISBN 9781429932936 – via Google Books ^ Arnold, Corry; Hannan, Ross (May 9, 2007), The History of The Jabberwock , archived from the original on August 29, 2007 , retrieved 2007-08-31 ^ Hannan, Ross; Arnold, Corry (October 7, 2007), Berkeley Art , archived from the original on October 15, 2018 , retrieved 2007-10-07 ^ a b c d e f g h Works, Mary (Director) (2005), Rockin' At the Red Dog: The Dawn of Psychedelic Rock , Monterey Video ^ Bill Ham Lights , 2001 ^ Lau, Andrew (December 1, 2005), The Red Dog Saloon and the Amazing Charlatans , Perfect Sound Forever, archived from the original on September 30, 2007 , retrieved 2007-09-01 ^ Grunenberg & Harris 2005 , p. 325.

^ Selvin, Joel (June 24, 2011), "Summer of Love: 40 Years Later / 1967: The stuff that myths are made of" , The San Francisco Chronicle ^ Tamony 1981 , p. 98.

^ Dodgson, Rick (2001), "Prankster History Project" , Pranksterweb.org , archived from the original on October 11, 2007 , retrieved 2007-10-19 ^ Perry 2005 , p. 18.

^ Grunenberg & Harris 2005 , p. 156.

^ The college was later renamed San Francisco State University.

^ Perry 2005 , pp. 5–7. Perry writes that San Francisco State College students rented cheap, Edwardian-Victorians houses and apartments in the Haight.

^ a b c d Tompkins 2001b ^ a b Lytle 2006 , pp. 213, 215.

^ a b Farber, David; Bailey, Beth L. (2001), The Columbia Guide to America in the 1960s , Columbia University Press, p. 145, ISBN 0-231-11373-0 ^ Charters, Ann (2003), The Portable Sixties Reader , Penguin Classics, p.

298 , ISBN 0-14-200194-5 ^ Lee & Shlain 1992 , p. 149.

^ a b Rasmussen, Cecilia (August 5, 2007), "Closing of club ignited the 'Sunset Strip riots' " , Los Angeles Times ^ Priore, Domenic (2007), Riot on Sunset Strip: Rock 'n' Roll's Last Stand in Hollywood , Jawbone Press, ISBN 978-1-906002-04-6 ^ David Browne (November 11, 2016), " 'For What It's Worth': Inside Buffalo Springfield's Classic Protest Song" , Rolling Stone , archived from the original on June 12, 2018 , retrieved August 29, 2017 ^ "Chronology of San Francisco Rock 1965-1969" ^ DeCurtis, Anthony (July 12, 2007), "New York", Rolling Stone , no. 1030/1031 For additional sources, see: – McNeill, Don (March 30, 1967), "Central Park Rite is Medieval Pageant" , The Village Voice , pp. 1, 20 – Weintraub, Bernard (March 27, 1967), "Easter: A Day of Worship, a "Be-In" or just Parading in the Sun" ", The New York Times , pp. 1, 24 – McNeill, Don (2017) [March 30, 1967], "Be-In, be-in, Being" , The Village Voice , archived from the original on January 28, 2008 , retrieved 2008-04-18 ^ Dudley 2000 , pp. 254.

^ Stevens 1998 , p. xiv.

^ a b c SFGate.com. Archive. Herb Caen, June 25, 1967.

Small thoughts at large . Retrieved on June 4, 2009.

^ Marty 1997 , pp. 125.

^ "Death of Hippie: An end to the Summer of Love" , · Love on Haight: The Grateful Dead and San Francisco in 1967 , Digital Exhibits UCSC Library , retrieved 20 January 2021 , Sign reads: "Funeral Notice: HIPPIE. In the Haight Ashbury District of this city. Hippie, devoted son of Mass Media. Friends are invited to attend service beginning at sunrise, October 6, 1967 at Buena Vista Park." ^ Sgt. Pepper and the Beatles: It Was Forty Years Ago Today , Julien, Olivier. Ashgate, 2009.

ISBN 978-0754667087 .

^ "The Mystery of the Family Dog, Denver's Most Storied Rock Venue" , Westword , August 16, 2017 ^ Miles, Barry (2003), Hippie , Sterling Press, pp.

210– 211, ISBN 1-4027-1442-4 ^ October Sixth Nineteen Hundred and Sixty Seven , San Francisco Diggers, October 6, 1967 , retrieved 2007-08-31 ^ Bodroghkozy, Aniko (2001), Groove Tube: Sixties Television and the Youth Rebellion , Duke University Press , p.

92 , ISBN 0-8223-2645-0 ^ "The Hippie Dictionary, about the 60s and 70s" , Hippiedictionary.com , retrieved 2012-11-21 ^ "George Harrison dies after long fight with cancer" , SFGate , retrieved 2017-10-26 ^ Muncie, John (2004), Youth & Crime , SAGE Publications , p. 176, ISBN 0-7619-4464-8 , archived from the original on 2007-05-09 ^ "Mondo Mod Worlds Of Hippie Revolt (And Other Weirdness)" , Thesocietyofthespectacle.com , April 5, 2009, archived from the original on November 12, 2013 , retrieved February 3, 2014 ^ " "The Politics of Yip", TIME Magazine , Apr. 5, 1968" , Time , April 5, 1968, archived from the original on April 7, 2008 , retrieved 2014-02-03 ^ a b Carmines, Edward G., and Geoffrey C. Layman. 1997. "Issue Evolution in Postwar American Politics". In Byron Shafer, ed., Present Discontents . NJ: Chatham House Publishers.

^ Kaufman, Cynthia (2 March 2019), Ideas for Action: Relevant Theory for Radical Change , South End Press, p. 275, ISBN 9780896086937 , retrieved 2 March 2019 – via Google Books ^ Todd Gitlin , "The Left's Lost Universalism". In Arthur M. Melzer, Jerry Weinberger and M. Richard Zinman, eds., Politics at the Turn of the Century , pp. 3–26 (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield , 2001).

Grant Farred (2000), "Endgame Identity? Mapping the New Left Roots of Identity Politics", New Literary History , 31 (4): 627– 648, doi : 10.1353/nlh.2000.0045 , JSTOR 20057628 , S2CID 144650061 ^ Wollenberg, Charles (2008), Berkeley, A City in History , University of California Press , ISBN 978-0-520-25307-0 , archived from the original on July 5, 2008 ^ Hayward, Steven F. (2001), The Age of Reagan, 1964-1980: The Fall of the Old Liberal Order , Roseville, California: Prima Publishing, p. 325, ISBN 978-0-7615-1337-7 , OCLC 47667257 , retrieved January 31, 2011 ^ Dean, Maury (2003), Rock 'N' Roll Gold Rush , Algora Publishing, p. 243, ISBN 0-87586-207-1 ^ Mankin, Bill.

We Can All Join In: How Rock Festivals Helped Change America Archived 2013-12-19 at the Wayback Machine . Like the Dew. 2012.

^ Lee, Henry K. (May 26, 2005), "Altamont 'cold case' is being closed" , San Francisco Chronicle , archived from the original on June 26, 2008 , retrieved 2008-09-11 ^ Bugliosi & Gentry 1994 , pp. 638–640.

^ Bugliosi (1994) describes the popular view that the Manson case "sounded the death knell for hippies and all they symbolically represented", citing Joan Didion , Diane Sawyer , and Time . Bugliosi admits that although the Manson murders "may have hastened" the end of the hippie era, the era was already in decline.

^ Deresiewics, William (November 12, 2011), "Generation Sell" , The New York Times , retrieved 2011-12-03 ^ "On This Day: Four Die at Rolling Stones' Altamont Concert" , Findingdulcinea.com , archived from the original on 2011-04-29 , retrieved 2012-11-21 ^ Tompkins 2001a .

^ a b c Morford, Mark (May 2, 2007), The Hippies Were right!

, SF Gate , retrieved 2007-05-25 ^ Childs, Peter; Storry, Mike (1999), Encyclopedia of contemporary British culture , Taylor & Francis, p. 188, ISBN 978-0-415-14726-2 ^ "Eel Pie Dharma - Skinheads - Chapter 19" , Eelpie.org , December 13, 2005 , retrieved 2012-11-21 ^ "Britain: The Skinheads" , Time , June 8, 1970, archived from the original on June 30, 2008 , retrieved 2010-05-04 ^ Lewis & Melton 1992 , p. xi.

^ Lattin 2004 , pp. 74.

^ Heath & Potter 2004 .

^ "In Cave Junction alone there were a number of communes listed" , Cavejunction.com , retrieved 2014-02-03 ^ "Flashbacks" , www.newmexicomagazine.org , 2013-03-08 , retrieved 2024-04-14 ^ Hovey, Kathryn (2005), Anarchy and community in the new American West: Madrid, New Mexico, 1970-2000 , Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, ISBN 978-0-8263-3446-6 ^ Marshall, Jules, " Zippies!

", Wired Magazine , issue 2.05, May 1994 ^ O'Brien, Karen 2001 Joni Mitchell: Shadows and Light . London:Virgin Books, pp.77-78 ^ Greenfield, Robert, The Burden of Being Jerry (interview) , retrieved 2013-09-11 ^ Yablonsky 1968 , pp. 103 et al..

^ " "The Hippies" in Time magazine" , Time , July 7, 1967, archived from the original on May 3, 2007 , retrieved 2014-02-03 ^ Katz 1988 , pp. 120.

^ Katz 1988 , pp. 125.

^ a b c Pendergast, Sara. (2004) Fashion, Costume, and Culture . Volume 5. Modern World Part II: 1946-2003. Thomson Gale.

ISBN 0-7876-5417-5 ^ Pendergast, Sara (2004).

Fashion, Costume, and Culture: Clothing, Headwear, Body Decorations, and Footwear Through the Ages . Detroit: UXL. p. 640.

^ a b c d e Stone 1999 , "Sex, Love and Hippies" ^ Stone 1999 , "Sex, Love and Hippies" , "Again the Beat generation must be credited with living and writing about sexual freedom. Allen Ginsberg, Jack Kerouac, William Burroughs and others lived unusually free, sexually expressive lives." ^ Stone 1999 , "Sex, Love and Hippies" , "But the biggest release of inhibitions came about through the use of drugs, particularly marijuana and the psychedelics. Marijuana is one of the best aphrodisiacs known to man. It enhances the senses, unlike alcohol, which dulls them. As any hippie can tell you, sex is a great high, but sex on pot is fuckin' far out![...] More importantly, the use of psychedelic drugs, especially LSD was directly responsible for liberating hippies from their sexual hang-ups. The LSD trip is an intimate soul wrenching experience that shatters the ego's defenses, leaving the tripper in a very poignant and sensitive state. At this point, a sexual encounter is quite possible if conditions are right. After an LSD trip, one is much more likely to explore one's own sexual nature without inhibitions." ^ Stone 1999 , "Sex, Love and Hippies" , "Many hippies on the spiritual path found enlightenment through sex. The Kama Sutra , the Tantric sexual manual from ancient India is a way to cosmic union through sex. Some gurus like Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh (Osho) formed cults that focused on liberation through the release of sexual inhibitions." ^ Yablonsky 1968 , p. 201 ^ Sharkey, Mr.; Fay, Chris, "Gypsy Faire" , Mrsharkey.com , archived from the original on November 13, 2007 , retrieved 2007-10-19 ^ "Book Review - Roll Your Own" , MrSharkey.com , archived from the original on November 2, 2012 , retrieved 2012-11-21 ^ BBC - On This Day - 1969: Woodstock music festival ends. "An estimated 400,000 youngsters turned up..." Retrieved December 21, 2013.

^ "...nearly 500,000 revellers came together for three days and three nights and showed the world what a generation was made of..." Woodstock 1969 -  The First Festival . Landy, Elliott. Ravette Publishing Ltd, 2009.

ISBN 978-1841613093 .

^ Sherwood, Seth (April 9, 2006), "A New Generation of Pilgrims Hits India's Hippie Trail" , The New York Times , retrieved 2008-09-11 ^ "Have a high time on hippy trail in Katmandu" , Independent Online , January 30, 2001, archived from the original on October 11, 2007 , retrieved 2008-09-11 ^ a b Goldberg, Danny (October 23, 2011), "In Defense of Hippies" , Dissent Magazine Online ^ Bryant 2009, p. xviii.

^ Miller, Timothy (1991), Timothy Miller.

Hippies and American Values . Univ Tennessee Press; 1st edition , Univ. of Tennessee Press, p. 16, ISBN 9780870496943 , retrieved 2014-02-03 ^ Yablonsky 1968 , p. 298 ^ "Communal Religions" , Thefarm.org , October 6, 1966, archived from the original on 1999-02-10 , retrieved 2012-11-21 ^ New Book Tells Inside Story Of Biggest Hippie Commune In U.S. - Toke of the Town - cannabis news, views, rumor and humor , Toke of the Town, December 23, 2010 , retrieved 2012-11-21 ^ Stephen Gaskin (2005), Monday Night Class , Book Publishing Company, ISBN 9781570671814 ^ Sante, Luc (June 26, 2006), "The Nutty Professor" , The New York Times Book Review , 'Timothy Leary: A Biography,' by Robert Greenfield , retrieved 2008-07-12 ^ Start Your Own Religion. Leary, Timothy. Millbrook, New York: Kriya Press. 1967. (The original 1967 version was privately published; it is not to be confused with a compilation of Leary's writings compiled, edited, and published posthumously under the same title.) ^ Greenfield, Robert (2006), Timothy Leary: A Biography , Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, p.

64 , ISBN 9780151005000 , retrieved 2013-10-11 ^ chellow2 (1 May 2008), Timothy Leary: I carried on Aleister Crowley's work , YouTube , archived from the original on 2021-10-30 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ehrlich, Richard, "The man who founded a religion based on 'The Big Lebowski' " , CNN , Turner Broadcasting Systems Inc., archived from the original on April 5, 2012 , retrieved March 22, 2012 ^ Mathijs, Ernest; Sexton, Jamie (2012-03-30), Cult Cinema by Ernest Mathlijs, Jamie Sexton , John Wiley & Sons, p. 78, ISBN 9781444396430 ^ "Behold The Big Lebowski Bungalow, Bible" , www.mediabistro.com , archived from the original on 2011-08-10 ^ "Big Lebowski Spawns Religion" , Dontpaniconline.com , archived from the original on 2014-10-08 , retrieved 2015-12-12 ^ "The Dudely Lama Discusses Dudeism" , We Love Cult , archived from the original on November 10, 2013 , retrieved September 19, 2012 ^ "Cathleen Falsani Interview" , Religion and Ethics Newsweekly , PBS , 2009-10-09 , retrieved September 19, 2012 ^ a b "Ronald Creagh.

Laboratoires de l'utopie. Les communautés libertaires aux États-Unis . Paris. Payot. 1983. pg. 11" , Wikiwix.com , archived from the original on 2016-03-04 , retrieved 2014-02-03 ^ "1968 Democratic Convention" , Chicago Tribune , retrieved 2008-09-08 ^ Shannon, Phil (June 18, 1997), Yippies, politics and the state , Cultural Dissent, Green Left Weekly , archived from the original on January 26, 2009 , retrieved 2008-12-10 ^ Seale 1991 , p. 350.

^ Junker, Detlef; Gassert, Philipp (2004), The United States and Germany in the Era of the Cold War, 1945-1990 , Cambridge University Press , p. 424, ISBN 0-521-83420-1 ^ "Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund Frequently Asked Questions" , www.vvmf.org , retrieved 27 January 2022 ^ Turner 2006 , pp. 32–39.

^ "Overview: who were (are) the Diggers?" , The Digger Archives , retrieved 2007-06-17 ^ Gail Dolgin ; Vicente Franco (2007), American Experience: The Summer of Love , PBS, archived from the original on 2017-03-25 , retrieved 2007-04-23 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Stone 1999 , "The Way of the Hippy" ^ Leland, John (2004), Hip:The History , New York.: Ecco, ISBN 978-0-06-052817-1 ^ Rimbaud, Penny (1982), The Last Of The Hippies - An Hysterical Romance , Crass ^ Shibboleth: My Revolting Life , Rimbaud, Penny, AK Press, 1999.

ISBN 978-1873176405 .

^ Vander Molen, Jodi, Jello Biafra Interview , The Progressive , retrieved February 1, 2002 ^ Colurso, Mary (2007-06-29), "Jello Biafra can ruffle feathers" , The Birmingham News , retrieved June 29, 2007 ^ "Timothy Leary" , Biography , 20 May 2021 , retrieved 27 January 2022 ^ a b Stolley 1998 , pp. 139.

^ Yablonsky 1968 , pp. 243, 257 ^ a b Brand, Stewart (Spring 1995), "We Owe It All to the Hippies" , Time , vol. 145, no. 12, archived from the original on 2011-05-01 , retrieved 2007-11-25 ^ Carlos Santana: I'm Immortal interview by Punto Digital , October 13, 2010 ^ Prichard, Evie (June 28, 2007), "We're all hippies now" , The Times , London, archived from the original on May 14, 2011 , retrieved 2010-05-04 ^ Mary Ann Sieghart (May 25, 2007), "Hey man, we're all kind of hippies now. Far out" , The Times , London , retrieved 2007-05-25 [ dead link ] ^ Kitchell, Mark (Director and Writer) (January 1990), Berkeley in the Sixties (Documentary), Liberation , retrieved 2009-05-10 ^ Barnia, George (1996), The Index of Leading Spiritual Indicators , Dallas TX: Word Publishing, archived from the original on 2011-01-04 , retrieved 2009-05-11 ^ Hip Inc., "Hippies From A to Z by Skip Stone" , Hipplanet.com , retrieved 2012-11-21 ^ Baer, Hans A. (2004), Toward An Integrative Medicine: Merging Alternative Therapies With Biomedicine , Rowman Altamira, pp.

2– 3, ISBN 0-7591-0302-X ^ Eardley-Pryor, Roger (2017), "Love, Peace, and Technoscience" , Distillations , vol. 3, no. 2, pp.

38– 41 ^ Kaiser, David; McCray, W. Patrick (2016), Groovy Science: Knowledge, Innovation, and American Counterculture , University of Chicago Press , ISBN 978-0-226-37291-4 ^ Markoff, John (2005), What the Dormouse Said: How the 60s Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer Industry , Penguin, ISBN 0-670-03382-0 ^ a b Connikie, Yvonne. (1990).

Fashions of a Decade: The 1960s . Facts on File.

ISBN 0-8160-2469-3 ^ Pendergast, Sara. (2004) Fashion, Costume, and Culture . Volume 5. Modern World Part II: 1946–2003. Thomson Gale.

ISBN 0-7876-5417-5 ^ Sewing, Joy ; Houston Chronicle ; January 24, 2008; "Peace sign makes a statement in the fashion world". Retrieved June 10, 2012.

^ The musical Hair and a multitude of well-known contemporary song lyrics such as "The Age of Aquarius" ^ a b Disco Double Take: New York Parties Like It's 1975 Archived 2015-01-30 at the Wayback Machine .

Village Voice .com.

Retrieved on August 9, 2009 .

^ (1998) "The Cambridge History of American Music", ISBN 978-0-521-45429-2 , ISBN 978-0-521-45429-2 , p.372: "Initially, disco musicians and audiences alike belonged to marginalized communities: women, gay, black, and Latinos" ^ (2002) "Traces of the Spirit: The Religious Dimensions of Popular Music", ISBN 978-0-8147-9809-6 , ISBN 978-0-8147-9809-6 , p.117: "New York City was the primary center of disco, and the original audience was primarily gay African Americans and Latinos." ^ Psychedelic soul AllMusic Retirved 17 January 2022 ^ "But the pre-Saturday Night Fever dance underground was actually sweetly earnest and irony-free in its hippie-dippie positivity, as evinced by anthems like M.F.S.B.'s 'Love Is the Message'." — Village Voice , July 10, 2001.

^ Bryan, C. d. b. (August 18, 1968), " 'The Pump House Gang' and 'The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test' " , The New York Times , retrieved 2007-08-21 ^ The Sekhmet Hypothesis , Iain Spence, 1995, Bast's Blend.

ISBN 0952536501 ^ Time Out: Mumbai and Goa , London: Time Out Guides, 2011, p. 184, In 1969, Gilbert Levy left the Haigh Ashbury district of San Francisco and took the overland trail through Afghanistan and Pakistan, first to Bombay and then to Goa...Throughout the 1970s, Gil organized legendary parties at Anjuna- moonlight jams of non-stop music, dancing and chemical experimentation that lasted from Christmas Eve to New Year´s Day for a tribe of fellow overland travellers who called themselves the Goa Freaks...In the 90s, Gil started to use snippets from industrial music, etno techno, acid house and psychedelic rock to help create Goa Trance, dance music with a heavy spiritual accent...For Goa Gil, Goa Trance is a logical continuation of what hippies were doing back in the 60s and 70s. "The Psychedelic Revolution never really stopped" he said, "it just had to go halfway round the world to the end of a dirt road on a deserted beach, and there it was allowed to evolve and mutate, without government or media pressures.

^ JamBands.com - What is a Jam Band? Retrieved from Internet Archive December 23, 2013.

^ Clifton, Chas (2006), Her Hidden Children: The Rise of Wicca and Paganism in America , Rowman Altamira, p. 163, ISBN 9780759102026 ^ Nambassa: A New Direction, edited by Colin Broadley and Judith Jones, A. H. & A. W. Reed, 1979.

ISBN 0-589-01216-9 ^ McCleary, John Bassett.

The Hippie Dictionary: A Cultural Encyclopedia of the 1960s and 1970s , Ten Speed Press, 2004.

ISBN 1580085474 ^ Gates, David (July 12, 2004), "Me Talk Hippie" , Newsweek , retrieved 2008-01-27 ^ Merritt, Byron (August 2004), A Groovy Interview with Author John McCleary , Fiction Writers of the Monterey Peninsula, archived from the original on October 12, 2007 , retrieved 2008-01-27 Works cited [ edit ] Booth, Martin (2004), Cannabis: A History , St. Martin's Press, ISBN 0-312-32220-8 .

Bugliosi, Vincent ; Gentry, Curt (1994), Helter Skelter , V. W. Norton & Company, Inc., ISBN 0-393-32223-8 .

Dudley, William, ed. (2000), The 1960s (America's decades) , San Diego: Greenhaven Press .

Heath, Joseph; Potter, Andrew (2004), Nation of Rebels: Why Counterculture Became Consumer Culture , Collins, ISBN 0-06-074586-X .

Grunenberg, Christoph; Harris, Jonathan (2005), Summer of Love: Psychedelic Art, Social Crisis and Counterculture in the 1960s , Liverpool University Press, ISBN 0-85323-929-0 .

Hirsch, E.D.

(1993), The Dictionary of Cultural Literacy , Houghton Mifflin, ISBN 0-395-65597-8 .

Katz, Jack (1988), Seductions of Crime: Moral and Sensual Attractions in Doing Evil , Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-07616-5 .

Kennedy, Gordon (1998), Children of the Sun: A Pictorial Anthology From Germany To California, 1883–1949 , Nivaria Press, ISBN 0-9668898-0-0 .

Lattin, Don (2004), Following Our Bliss: How the Spiritual Ideals of the Sixties Shape Our Lives Today , HarperCollins, ISBN 0-06-073063-3 .

Lee, Martin A.; Shlain, Bruce (1992), Acid Dreams: The Complete Social History of LSD: The CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond , Grove Press, ISBN 0-8021-3062-3 .

Lewis, James R.; Melton, J. Gordon (1992), "Introduction", in Lewis, James R.; Melton, J. Gordon (eds.), Perspectives on the New Age , Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, pp.

ix– xxi, ISBN 978-0-7914-1213-8 .

Lytle, Mark H. (2006), America's Uncivil Wars: The Sixties Era from Elvis to the Fall of Richard Nixon , Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-517496-8 .

McCleary, John (2004), The Hippie Dictionary , Ten Speed Press, ISBN 1-58008-547-4 .

Marty, Myron A. (1997), Daily life in the United States, 1960–1990 , Westport, CT: The Greenwood Press, ISBN 0-313-29554-9 .

Oldmeadow, Harry (2004), Journeys East: 20th Century Western Encounters with Eastern Religious Traditions , World Wisdom, Inc, ISBN 0-941532-57-7 .

Pendergast, Tom; Pendergast, Sara, eds. (2005), "Sixties Counterculture: The Hippies and Beyond", The Sixties in America Reference Library , vol. 1: Almanac, Detroit: Thomson Gale , pp.

151– 171 .

Perry, Charles (2005), The Haight-Ashbury: A History (Reprint ed.), Wenner Books, ISBN 1-932958-55-X .

Seale, Bobby (1991), Seize the Time: The Story of the Black Panther Party and Huey P. Newton , Black Classic Press, ISBN 0-933121-30-X .

Stevens, Jay (1998), Storming Heaven: LSD and the American Dream , Grove Press, ISBN 0-8021-3587-0 .

Stolley, Richard B. (1998), Turbulent Years: The 60s (Our American Century) , Time-Life Books, ISBN 0-7835-5503-2 .

Stone, Skip (1999), Hippies From A to Z , Hip Inc.

, retrieved 2017-08-13 .

Tamony, Peter (Summer 1981), "Tripping out from San Francisco", American Speech , 56 (2), Duke University Press: 98– 103, doi : 10.2307/455009 , JSTOR 455009 , PMID 11623430 .

Tompkins, Vincent, ed. (2001a), "Assimilation of the Counterculture", American Decades , vol. 8: 1970–1979, Detroit: Thomson Gale .

Tompkins, Vincent, ed. (2001b), "Hippies", American Decades , vol. 7: 1960–1969, Detroit: Thomson Gale .

Turner, Fred (2006), From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism , University Of Chicago Press, ISBN 0-226-81741-5 .

Yablonsky, Lewis (1968), The Hippie Trip , Pegasus, ISBN 0-595-00116-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] This " further reading " section may need cleanup .

Please read the editing guide and help improve the section.

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Binkley, Sam (2002), "Hippies" , St. James Encyclopedia of Pop Culture , archived from the original on 2007-04-22 – via FindArticles.com .

Brand, Stewart (1995), "We Owe it All to the Hippies" , Time , archived from the original on 2011-01-06 , retrieved 2006-09-24 .

Buckley, William F. Jr.; Yablonsky, Lewis; Sanders, Ed; Kerouac, Jack (September 3, 1968), "113 The Hippies" , Firing Line , Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace, Video Library., archived from the original on 2021-10-30 , retrieved 23 October 2021 – via YouTube .

Gaskin, Stephen (1970), Monday Night Class , The Book Farm, ISBN 1-57067-181-8 .

Kent, Stephen A.

(2001), From slogans to mantras: social protest and religious conversion in the late Vietnam war era , Syracuse University Press, ISBN 0-8156-2923-0 .

Mankin, Bill (2012), We Can All Join In: How Rock Festivals Helped Change America , Like the Dew, archived from the original on 2013-12-19 , retrieved 2012-03-16 .

Lemke-Santangelo, Gretchen (2009), Daughters of Aquarius: Women of the Sixties Counterculture , University Press of Kansas, ISBN 978-0700616336 .

MacLean, Rory (2008), Magic Bus: On the Hippie Trail from Istanbul to India , New York: Ig Publishing, ISBN 978-0-14-101595-8 , archived from the original on 2009-05-08 , retrieved 2021-03-30 .

Markoff, John (2006), What the Dormouse Said: How the Sixties Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer Industry , Penguin Books, ISBN 0-14-303676-9 .

Mecchi, Irene (1991), The Best of Herb Caen, 1960–75 , Chronicle Books, ISBN 0-8118-0020-2 .

Stone, Skip (1999), Hippies From A to Z: Their Sex, Drugs, Music and Impact on Society From the Sixties to the Present , Hip Inc., ISBN 1-930258-01-1 .

Young, Shawn David (2005), Hippies, Jesus Freaks, and Music , Ann Arbor: Xanedu/Copley Original Works, ISBN 1-59399-201-7 .

Altman, Robert (Curator) (1997), "The Summer of Love – Gallery", Summer of Love 30th Anniversary Celebration , The Council for the Summer of Love, archived from the original on 2008-01-25 , retrieved 2008-01-21 .

Bissonnette, Anne (Curator) (April 12 – September 17, 2000), Revolutionizing Fashion: The Politics of Style , Kent State University Museum, archived from the original on January 18, 2008 , retrieved 2008-01-21 .

Brode, Douglas (2004), From Walt to Woodstock: How Disney Created the Counterculture , University of Texas Press, ISBN 0-292-70273-6 .

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (2006), Hippie Society: The Youth Rebellion , Life and Society, CBC Digital Archives , retrieved 2008-01-21 .

Charters, Ann (2003), The Portable Sixties reader , New York: Penguin Books , ISBN 0-14-200194-5 .

Curl, John (2007), Memories of DROP CITY: The First Hippie Commune of the 1960s and the Summer of Love, A Memoir , New York: iuniverse, ISBN 978-0595423439 , archived from the original on April 13, 2009 .

Howard, John Robert (March 1969), "The Flowering of the Hippie Movement", Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , 382 (Protest in the Sixties): 43– 55, doi : 10.1177/000271626938200106 , S2CID 146605321 .

Laughead, George (1998), WWW-VL: History: 1960s , European University Institute , archived from the original on 2008-01-10 , retrieved 2008-01-21 .

Lemke-Santangelo, Gretchen (2009), Daughters of Aquarius: Women of the Sixties Counterculture , University Press of Kansas, ISBN 978-0700616336 .

Lund, Jens; Denisoff, R. Serge (Oct–Dec 1971), "The Folk Music Revival and the Counter Culture: Contributions and Contradictions", The Journal of American Folklore , 84 (334), American Folklore Society: 394– 405, doi : 10.2307/539633 , JSTOR 539633 .

MacFarlane, Scott (2007), The Hippie Narrative: A Literary Perspective on the Counterculture , McFarland & Company, Inc., ISBN 978-0-7864-2915-8 .

Neville, Richard (1995), Hippie, Hippie, Shake: The Dreams, the Trips, the Trials, the Love-ins, the Screw ups—the Sixties.

, William Heinemann Australia, ISBN 0-85561-523-0 .

Neville, Richard (1996), Out of My Mind: From Flower Power to the Third Millennium—the Seventies, the Eighties and the Nineties , Penguin, ISBN 0-14-026270-9 .

Partridge, William L. (1973), The Hippie Ghetto: The Natural History of a Subculture , New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, ISBN 0-03-091081-1 .

Pirsig, Robert M.

(2006) [1991], Lila: An Inquiry into Morals , Bantam Books , ISBN 0-553-07873-9 .

Rainbow Family (2004), Rainbow Family of the Living Light , Circle of Light Community Network, archived from the original on 2008-07-19 , retrieved 2008-01-21 . See also: Riser, George (Curator) (1998), The Psychedelic '60s: Literary Tradition and Social Change , Special Collections Department.

University of Virginia Library, archived from the original on January 11, 2008 , retrieved 2008-01-21 .

Staller, Karen M. (2006), Runaways: How the Sixties Counterculture Shaped Today's Practices and Policies , Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-12410-4 .

Stone, Skip (2000), The Way of the Hippy , Hip Inc., archived from the original on 2009-07-05 .

Thompson, Hunter S.

(2000), "Owl Farm – Winter of '68", Fear and Loathing in America: The Brutal Odyssey of an Outlaw Journalist 1968–1976 , Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-684-87315-X Walpole, Andy (2004), "Hippies, Freaks and the Summer of Love", Harold Hill: A People's History , haroldhill.org, archived from the original on 2007-07-12 , retrieved 2008-01-21 .

Wolfe, Tom (1968), The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test , New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux .

External links [ edit ] Hippie at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Summer of Love ( Archived 2017-02-28 at the Wayback Machine ). A film; part of PBS 's American Experience series. Includes the film available to watch online ( Archived 2016-03-05 at the Wayback Machine ) and other information on the San Francisco event known as the Summer of Love as well as other material related to the hippie subculture.

Hippie Society: The Youth Rebellion . A Canadian program by the CBC public network on the hippie rebellion including videos to watch.

70's Origin ( Archived 2021-02-14 at the Wayback Machine ). Seventies Origin History.

Sixtiespix . An archive with photographs of hippie culture.

Hippie Movies & TV Shows . 1960s and early 1970s hippie and youth culture on film and TV.

Hippie Quotes ( Archived 2020-10-24 at the Wayback Machine ). Hippie Quotes from all times.

UKHippy . UK Based Hippy & New Age Traveller website; online since 2005 with historical links to the original UK hippy community.

v t e Hippies History of the hippie movement Etymology Beat Generation / Beatniks Central Park be-ins Counterculture of the 1960s Red Dog Experience San Francisco sound Drop City Sunset Strip curfew riots Love Pageant Rally Haight-Ashbury Human Be-In Mantra-Rock Dance Summer of Love Fantasy Fair Monterey Pop Festival Newport Pop Festival Sky River Rock Festival People's Park Woodstock Glastonbury Festival The Farm Piedra Roja Festival Rock y Ruedas de Avándaro Nambassa People and groups Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters Acid Tests Furthur bus Electrohippies Diggers San Francisco Oracle Haight Ashbury Free Clinic Haight-Ashbury Switchboard Yippies Wavy Gravy Hog Farm The Brotherhood of Eternal Love Rainbow Family Politics and ethics Back-to-the-land movement Free love Anti-authoritarianism Simple living Environmentalism Pacifism Communalism Counterculture Bohemianism Make love, not war Turn on, tune in, drop out Vegetarianism Veganism Culture and fashion Psychedelia Flower power Hippie trail Hippie exploitation films Happening Peace symbols Bell-bottoms Love beads Long hair Tie-dye Intentional community communal living Free festival Music festival Flower child Music Folk music Folk rock Protest song Psychedelic music Psychedelic folk Psychedelic rock Psychedelic soul Psychedelic pop Psychedelic trance Acid rock Space rock Progressive rock Raga rock World music New-age music Jam bands List of jam band music festivals List of historic rock festivals Psychedelics and other drugs Cannabis DMT LSD Psilocybin mushroom Mescaline Peyote Hippie related subcultures Deadhead Feral Flower child Freak scene Housetrucker Jesus freak Jipitecas La Onda Lebensreform Mánička New Age New Age travellers Radical Faeries Rave UK underground Woodstock Nation Zippie Related List of films List of books and other publications Subculture Cannabis culture Cyberdelic Head shop Underground press press syndicate list Legend of the Rainbow Warriors Free Speech Movement Anti-war movement Civil rights movement Protests of 1968 Chicago Seven New Left New social movements Postmaterialism Neotribalism Hungry generation Sexual revolution Second Summer of Love Neo-psychedelia Baby boomers v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface v t e Rock festivals Subtypes List of folk festivals List of gothic festivals List of heavy metal festivals List of industrial music festivals List of jam band music festivals List of punk rock festivals Traveling ( italics = ongoing) Anger Management Tour Area Festival Big Day Out California Jam California Jam II Crüe Fest Deconstruction Tour Doomination Family Values Tour Festival Express Fuji Rock Festival G3 Gigantour Good Things Hard Electric Tour H.O.R.D.E.

Ilosaarirock Knotfest Kuopiorock Lilith Fair Mayhem Festival Magic Circle Festival Monsters of Rock Montebello Rock Nintendo Fusion Tour Provinssirock Qstock Rock am Ring and Rock im Park Rock in Rio Rock in Roma Rock Boat Ruido Fest Ruisrock Ozzfest Projekt Revolution Rock Never Stops Tour Sauna Open Air Metal Festival Sonisphere Festival Soundwave Summer Sanitarium Tour Taste of Chaos Tuska Open Air Metal Festival The Unholy Alliance Tour Uproar Festival Vive Latino Wacken Open Air Warped Tour Culture Deadheads Heavy metal Hippies La Onda Moshing Pogo (dance) Punk rock Headbanging Stage diving Crowd surfing Sign of the horns Summer of Love Rivethead Related events Rock concert Concert tour v t e Sexual revolution Main topics Birth control Male contraceptive Free love Gay liberation Die Sexualität im Kulturkampf Milestones Abortion law Boys in the Sand Blue Movie Myra Breckinridge Deep Throat Divorce law by country Freedom of speech Freedom of the press Golden Age of Porn Loving v. Virginia Miller Test Obergefell v. Hodges " Porno chic " Pornography Pornography in the United States Swinging The Pill (1965) Slogans " Make love, not war " " The personal is political " Events AIDS epidemic Kinsey Reports Masters and Johnson Institute Playboy Protests of 1968 Stonewall riots Summer of Love People Pat Califia Marilyn Chambers Aleister Crowley Gerard Damiano Betty Dodson Larry Flynt Sigmund Freud Ralph Ginzburg Al Goldstein Bob Guccione Terri Hall Fred Halsted Nina Hartley Hugh Hefner Magnus Hirschfeld David Hurles Virginia Johnson Alfred Kinsey Linda Lovelace Robert Mapplethorpe William Margold William Masters Radley Metzger Bettie Page Wilhelm Reich Marquis de Sade Margaret Sanger Annie Sprinkle Andy Warhol Ruth Westheimer Oscar Wilde Places 55th Street Playhouse Caldron (sex club) Catacombs (sex club) Club Baths The Factory Gay bathhouse LGBT culture Dallas-Fort Worth Houston Miami New York City San Francisco Mineshaft (gay club) New Andy Warhol Garrick Theatre Plato's Retreat Sandstone retreat South of Market Related Counterculture of the 1960s Feminist views of pornography Freudo-Marxism Hippie Inside Deep Throat (2005 film) Kinsey (2004 film) LGBT Lust Lovelace (2013 film) Make Love, Not War: The Sexual Revolution: An Unfettered History (2001 book) The Notorious Bettie Page (2005 film) Peace movement Slut-shaming Whatever (1994 novel) v t e Youth empowerment Elements Evolving capacities Free-range parenting Future generations Intergenerational equity Leaving the nest Student voice Youth-adult partnership Youth mainstreaming Youth rights Youth voice Types Anarchistic free school Community youth development Democratic education Popular education Positive youth development Student activism Student-centered learning Student rights Teen court Youth activism Youth council Youth engagement Youth leadership Youth-led media Youth organizations Youth participation Youth philanthropy Youth politics Youth service Youth suffrage Youth vote Youth work Barriers Adultcentrism Adultism Age restrictions Ageism Control freak Eleutherophobia Ephebiphobia Fear of children Gerontocracy Grounding Helicopter parent Infantilization Intrusiveness Narcissism Parental respect Paternalism Patriarchy School-to-prison pipeline Vicariousness Youth control complex Youth exclusion Related topics Age of candidacy Age of consent Age-of-consent reform Age of criminal responsibility Beat Generation Beatnik The Catcher in the Rye Counterculture of the 1960s Greaser Hippies Hungry generation International Youth Year LGBTQ student movement Subcultures of the 1950s Taking Children Seriously The Teenage Liberation Handbook Teenage rebellion UK underground Voting age Index of youth rights–related articles v t e Recreational drug use Major recreational drugs Depressants Barbiturates Benzodiazepines Carbamates Ethanol (alcohol) Alcoholic beverage Beer Wine Gabapentinoids GHB Inhalants Medical Nitrous oxide ( recreational use ) Hazardous solvents contact adhesives Gasoline nail polish remover Paint thinner Other Freon Kava Nonbenzodiazepines Quinazolinones Quaaludes Opioids Buprenorphine Suboxone Subutex Codeine Lean Desomorphine Krokodil Dextropropoxyphene Darvocet Darvon Fentanyl Diamorphine Heroin Hydrocodone Hydromorphone Dilaudid Methadone Mitragyna speciosa Kratom Morphine Opium Oxycodone /paracetamol Tramadol Stimulants Amphetamine Arecoline Areca Betel Caffeine Coffee Energy drinks Tea Cathinone Khat Cocaine Coca Cocaine paste Crack Ephedrine Ephedra MDPV Mephedrone Methamphetamine Methylone Methylphenidate Modafinil Nicotine Polacrilex Salt Tobacco Theobromine Cocoa Chocolate Entactogens 2C series 6-APB Benzofury AMT MDA MDMA Ecstasy Molly Hallucinogens Psychedelics 2C-B 25I-NBOMe 4-AcO-DMT 5-MeO-DMT Psychoactive toads Bufotenin Vilca Yopo DMT Ayahuasca LSA and iso-LSA Morning glory Ergot LSD Mescaline Peruvian torch Peyote San Pedro Psilocybin and psilocin Psilocybin mushrooms Dissociatives DXM ( recreational use ) Inhalants Nitrous oxide ( recreational use ) Ketamine MXE PCP Deliriants Atropine and Scopolamine Atropa belladonna Datura Hyoscyamus niger Mandragora officinarum Dimenhydrinate Diphenhydramine Cannabinoids THC Cannabis (Marijuana) Hashish Hash oil Synthetic cannabinoids JWH-018 APICA APINACA Spice Others Ibogaine Tabernanthe iboga Muscimol Amanita muscaria Oneirogens Calea zacatechichi Silene capensis Salvinorin A Salvia divinorum Drug culture Cannabis culture 420 Cannabis consumption Cannabis cultivation Cannabis edible Cannabis rights Cannabis rights leaders List of cannabis rights organizations Cannabis smoking Cannabis Social Club Cannabis tea Cannabis vaping Head shop Legal history of cannabis in the United States Legality of cannabis Marijuana Policy Project Medical cannabis NORML Cannabis and religion Stoner film Coffee culture Coffee break Coffeehouse Latte art Teahouse Drinking culture Bartending Beer culture Beer festival Binge drinking Diethyl ether Drinking games Drinking song Happy hour Hip flask Nightclub Oktoberfest Pub Pub crawl Sommelier Sports bar Tailgate party Wine bar Wine tasting Psychedelia Psychonautics Art Drug Era Experience Literature Music Microdosing Smart shop Therapy Trip report Smoking culture Cigarette card Fashion cigarettes Cloud-chasing Loosie Smokeasy Smoking fetishism Tobacco smoking Other Chasing the dragon Club drug Counterculture of the 1960s Dance party Drug paraphernalia Drug tourism Entheogen Hippie Needle sharing Nootropic Party and play Poly drug use Rave Religion and drugs Self-medication Sex and drugs Urban legends about drugs Whoonga Legality of drug use International International drug control conventions 1961 Narcotic Drugs 1971 Psychotropic Substances 1988 Drug Trafficking Other treaties addressing drugs Law of the Sea Convention Convention Against Doping Council of the European Union decisions on designer drugs State level Drug policy Decriminalization Legalization Prohibition Regulation Supply reduction Policy reform Demand reduction Drug Policy Alliance Harm reduction Law Enforcement Action Partnership Liberalization Latin America Students for Sensible Drug Policy Drug policy by country Australia Canada China Czech Republic Germany India Laos Netherlands Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia South Korea Soviet Union Sweden Switzerland United States Just Say No Office of National Drug Control Policy School district drug policies California Colorado Maryland Oregon Virginia United Kingdom Drug legality Alcohol legality Anabolic steroid legality Cannabis legality Cocaine legality Methamphetamine legality Psilocybin decriminalization in the U.S.

Psilocybin mushrooms legality Salvia legality Other Arguments for and against drug prohibition Cannabis rights Capital punishment for drug trafficking Cognitive liberty Designer drug Drug court Drug possession Drug test Narc Politics of drug abuse War on drugs Mexican drug war Plan Colombia Philippine drug war Zero tolerance Other Drug production and trade Drug production Coca production in Colombia Drug precursors Opium production in Afghanistan Rolling meth lab Drug trade Illegal drug trade Afghanistan Aruba Australia Bangladesh Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Brazil Burma Cambodia Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Cyprus Dominican Republic El Salvador Estonia Finland Germany Haiti Honduras India Indian Ocean region Iran Italy Japan Kenya Kosovo Kyrgyzstan Laos Latin America Latvia Malaysia Mauritius Moldova Nigeria Norway Oman Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Russia Saint Kitts and Nevis Seychelles Slovakia South Africa South Korea Spain Suriname Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Turkey Turks and Caicos Islands United Arab Emirates United States Venezuela Darknet market Pharmaceutical distribution Beer shop Cannabis shop Liquor store Liquor license Issues with drug use Abuse Addiction Date rape drug Dependence Driving impaired Drug harmfulness Effects of cannabis Drug-related crime Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Long-term effects of cannabis Neurotoxicity Overdose Passive smoking of tobacco or other substances Harm reduction Drug checking Drug legalization Drug rehabilitation Needle and syringe programmes Opioid replacement therapy Pharmacovigilance Reagent testing Regulation of therapeutic goods Responsible drug use Substance abuse prevention Supervised injection site Trip killer Countries by drug use Alcohol consumption Cocaine use Cannabis Annual use Lifetime use Opiates use Tobacco consumption v t e Anti-war and peace movement Peace advocates Anti-nuclear organizations Anti-war movement Anti-war organizations Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions Coalition of Women for Peace Code Pink Conscientious objectors Counterculture Culture of Peace ECOPEACE Party Greenham Common Women's Peace Camp Iraq War resisters in Canada List of pacifist organisations List of peace activists New Socialist Party of Japan Pacifist Socialist Party Peace and conflict studies Peace camp Peace churches Peace commission Peace conference Peace congress Peace education Peace movement Peace psychology Peace treaty Peaceworker React, Include, Recycle Social Democratic Party (Japan) Unity The Women's Peace Crusade War resisters Women's International League for Peace and Freedom Ideologies Ahimsa Anarchism Anarcho-pacifism Anarcho-punks Christian anarchism Anti-imperialism Anti-nuclear movement Antimilitarism Appeasement Christian pacifism Deterrence theory Direct action Finvenkismo Green politics Hippie Isolationism Modern-war pacifism Non-interventionism Nonkilling Nonviolence Pacificism Pacifism Peace Satyagraha Soviet influence on the peace movement Testimony of peace World peace Media and cultural Art Books Concert Yutel for Peace Dances of Universal Peace Festival for Peace Films Imagine Piano Peace Project International Day of Non-Violence International Day of Peace Dialogue Among Civilizations List of peace prizes List of places named Peace Monuments and memorials Mother's Day Proclamation Nobel Peace Prize Concert Museums Peace & Love (festival) Peace journalism Peace News Promoting Enduring Peace Peace One Day Plays Promoting Enduring Peace Show of Peace Concert Songs Symbols The Non-Violence Project University for Peace World Peace Bell Association Japanese Peace Bell Women in Black World March for Peace and Nonviolence Slogans and tactics Bed-in Central Park be-ins Civil disobedience Conflict resolution Counter-recruitment De-escalation Demilitarisation Department of Peace Desertion Draft evasion Die-in Economic sanctions Flower power Global Day of Action on Military Spending Human Be-In Lesson of Munich " Make love, not war " Non-aggression principle Nonviolent resistance Non Violent Resistance (psychological intervention) Peace walk Peacebuilding Refusal to serve in the Israel Defense Forces " Soldiers are murderers " Swords to ploughshares Teach-in " The whole world is watching " Third Party Non-violent Intervention " Turn the other cheek " " Violence begets violence " War tax resisters Opposition to specific wars or their aspects War of 1812 ( UK ; US ) American Civil War Second Boer War World War I World War II Vietnam War list of protests War on Terror Iraq War Criticism Protests Afghanistan War Military action in Iran Sri Lankan Civil War 2011 intervention in Libya Anti-war protests in Russia (2014) 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine in Russia in Russian Far East Gaza War in the U.S.

Calls for a ceasefire Landmines Military taxation Nuclear disarmament International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons Nuclear weapons convention Countries Canada Costa Rica Germany Israel Japan Netherlands Spain Sudan Switzerland United Kingdom United States Peacebuilding in Jammu and Kashmir Category v t e Counterculture of the 1960s ( timeline ) Arts Black Arts Movement Psychedelic art Psychedelic music Youthquake Cultural events San Francisco Renaissance Beatlemania British Invasion Mods and rockers Swinging Sixties Hippie movement Human Be-In Summer of Love Bed-Ins for Peace Woodstock Social and political movements American Indian Movement Anti-nuclear movement Back-to-the-land movement Black Power movement Civil rights movement Dialoguero Free school movement Free Speech Movement Gay liberation Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War protests Second-wave feminism Women's liberation movement Sexual revolution United States Media Underground press newspapers Subcultures Discordianism Freak scene Hippie Mod Rocker Rude boy UK underground Yippies v t e German Youth Movement Culture Jugendburg Ludwigstein Castle Kohte Light Prayer Lute guitar Wandervogel Wanderungen durch die Mark Brandenburg " Wild Geese " " Wir sind des Geyers schwarzer Haufen " Groups Artaman League Berneuchen Movement Bruderhof Communities Deutsche Freischar Deutsche Jungenschaft vom 1.11.1929 Deutscher Pfadfinderbund Freideutsche Jugend Sturmtrupp-Pfadfinder People Hans Blüher Fidus Hans Freyer Fritz Klatt Eberhard Koebel Alexander Lion Martin Luserke Hans Paasche Karl Otto Paetel Alexander Schwab Related Back-to-the-land movement Edelweiss Pirates Freikörperkultur German Forest Hippie Hitler Youth Kreisau Circle Lebensreform Leipzig Meuten Swingjugend Völkisch movement White Rose Zionist youth movement Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7f95766c99‐x6flw
Cached time: 20250813154411
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.194 seconds
Real time usage: 2.527 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14043/1000000
Revision size: 152403/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 570704/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10142/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 39/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 750465/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.282/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13085377/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1886.684      1 -total
 48.95%  923.569    175 Template:Citation
 41.50%  782.899      1 Template:Reflist
  4.90%   92.436      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  3.91%   73.779      1 Template:Sfn
  3.85%   72.597      1 Template:Psychedelic_sidebar
  3.61%   68.108      1 Template:Short_description
  2.64%   49.763      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  2.38%   44.991      8 Template:Navbox
  2.35%   44.405      4 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47646:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813154411 and revision id 1305698547. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hippie&oldid=1305698547 " Categories : Hippie movement 1960s fashion 1960s in music 1970s fashion 1970s in music Culture of California Cannabis culture Counterculture of the 1960s Counterculture of the 1970s Free love advocates Lifestyles Music and fashion Sexual revolution Socioeconomic stereotypes Subcultures in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Articles with empty listen template Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from August 2022 Articles with incomplete citations from October 2024 All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup CS1: long volume value Wikipedia spam cleanup from October 2024 Wikipedia further reading cleanup Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hippie 75 languages Add topic

