Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 Human development 3 Examples and decline in usage of term 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Second World 38 languages العربية Bikol Central Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the Western political concept. For the Maoist political concept, see Three Worlds Theory . For the album by The Foreshadowing, see Second World (album) .

The " Three Worlds " of the Cold War (between 30 April and 24 June 1975) First World : Countries aligned with the Western Bloc (i.e., NATO and allies), led by the United States Second World : Countries aligned with the Eastern Bloc (i.e., Warsaw Pact , China , and allies), led by the Soviet Union Third World : The Non-Aligned Movement , led by Egypt and Yugoslavia , and other neutral countries Geopolitical concept The Second World was one of the " Three Worlds " formed by the global political landscape of the Cold War , as it grouped together those countries that were aligned with the Eastern Bloc of the Soviet Union and allies in Warsaw Pact . This grouping was directly opposed to the First World , which similarly grouped together those countries that were aligned with the Western Bloc of the United States and allies in NATO . It included communist states that were originally under the Soviet sphere of influence , though some eventually broke away from the Soviet ideology (e.g., Yugoslavia's split and China's split ) to develop their own path as socialist states while retaining their communist governments. Most communist states remained under Soviet influence until the Revolutions of 1989 . In 1991, upon the dissolution of the Soviet Union , only five communist states remained: China , Cuba , Laos , North Korea , and Vietnam . Though the terms "First World" and " Third World " continue to see present-day relevance in colloquial speech, albeit with a repurposed definition, the term "Second World" is obsolete outside of a Cold War context.

Concept [ edit ] The concept of "Second World" was a construct of the Cold War and the term is still largely used to describe former communist countries that are between poverty and prosperity, many of which are now capitalist states , such as Eastern Europe. Subsequently, the actual meaning of the terms "First World", "Second World," and "Third World" changed from being based on political ideology to an economic definition.

[ 1 ] The three-world theory has been criticized as crude and relatively outdated for its nominal ordering, and some sociologists have instead used the words "developed", "developing", and "underdeveloped" as replacement terms for global stratification (which have been criticized as displaying a colonialist mindset); [ 2 ] nevertheless, the three-world theory is still popular in contemporary literature and media. This might also cause semantic variation of the term between describing a region's political entities and its people.

[ 3 ] Human development [ edit ] The Three Worlds Model was used to rank the development of countries and their economies during the Cold War. First World countries were capitalist and industrial; they shared similar political and economic institutions, and retained influence over parts of the former colonial world. Second World countries advocated socialism and shared certain characteristics such as centrally planned economic systems, single-party states, and mainly medium income levels.

[ 4 ] The First World and the Second World were competing for political and economic influence over developing nations known as the Third World.

The Human Development Index is an index used to rank countries and is quantified by looking at a country's human development such as life expectancy, education, and per capita income indicators. The scale is 0–1 and they are put into one of four categories; 0-.55 is low, .55-.70 is medium, .70-.80 is high and very high tops out at .80–1.0.  The Second World countries from the Cold War era currently range from medium human development to very high human development in terms of HDI.

[ 5 ] Examples and decline in usage of term [ edit ] Some examples of Cold-War definition Second World countries were Bulgaria , Czechoslovakia , Hungary , Mongolia , North Korea , Poland , Romania , the Soviet Union , and the German Democratic Republic .

The powerful economies of the West are still sometimes described as "First World", but the term "Second World" became largely obsolete following the collapse of the Soviet Union.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] BRICS Eurasian Economic Union Socialist state Developing country Third world Fourth World References [ edit ] ^ Andersen, Margaret L.; Taylor, Howard Francis (2006).

Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society .

Thomson/Wadsworth . p. 250.

ISBN 978-0-534-61716-5 .

^ Silver, Marc (4 January 2015).

"If You Shouldn't Call It The Third World, What Should You Call It?" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2020 . Retrieved 17 March 2018 .

^ Giddens, Anthony (2006).

Sociology . Polity. p.

42 .

ISBN 978-0-7456-3379-4 .

second world countries communist.

^ Bankoff, Greg; Oven, Katie (24 June 2019).

"What happened to the Second World? Earthquakes and postsocialism in Kazakhstan" .

Disasters .

44 (1): 3– 24.

doi : 10.1111/disa.12362 .

PMID 31231813 .

S2CID 195327230 .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 24 June 2021 .

^ "Second World Countries Population" .

World Population Review . 24 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 21 February 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2020 .

^ Andrews, Evan (22 August 2018).

"Why are countries classified as First, Second or Third World?" .

History . A&E Television Networks.

Archived from the original on 21 February 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2020 .

v t e Economic classification of countries Developed country Developing country Heavily indebted poor countries Least developed countries Newly industrialized country World Bank high-income economy Three/Four-World Model First World Second World Third World Fourth World Gross domestic product (GDP) Nominal By country past and projected per capita per capita Purchasing power parity (PPP) By country future estimates per capita per capita per person employed Gross national income and Income Disposable income GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita Per capita growth Income inequality Median income Real income Wages and salary Average wage Europe Employee compensation (per hour) Labour productivity Minimum wage Canada Europe United States Wealth Wealth inequality Wealth per adult Europe Financial assets per capita Other national accounts Gross National Happiness Net material product Research and development spending Stock market capitalization Patents, trademarks, and industrial design filing activity Human development Human Development Index by country inequality-adjusted planetary pressures–adjusted HDI Human Poverty Index Percentage living in poverty Human Capital Index Household income Social Progress Index Digital divide ICT Development Index Number of broadband Internet subscriptions Number of Internet users Smartphone penetration Net international investment position (NIIP) Per capita (creditors) Per capita (debtors) Economics portal World portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Second_World&oldid=1290412267 " Categories : Economic country classifications Politics by region Imperialism studies Cold War terminology Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from June 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 17:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Second World 38 languages Add topic

