Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 References 3 Sources 4 Works Toggle the table of contents Janus Pannonius 25 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Hrvatski Italiano Кырык мары Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands Polski Română Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Croatian-Hungarian poet The native form of this personal name is Csezmiczei János . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Janus Pannonius Janus Pannonius ( Hungarian : Csezmiczei János or Kesencei János , Latin : Ioannes Pannonius , Croatian : Ivan Česmički ; 29 August 1434 – 27 March 1472) was an influential intellectual in the Kingdom of Hungary , a Latinist , poet , diplomat and Bishop of Pécs . He was the most significant poet of the Renaissance in the Kingdom of Hungary and one of the better-known figures of humanist poetry in Europe.

Life [ edit ] Born in Slavonia , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Janus's father's social status and relation to the nobility is unclear.

[ 3 ] His mother, Borbála Vitéz, was the sister of John Vitéz .

Pope Pius II wrote that Pannonius was of Slavonian origin ( de origine Slavonica ). His biographer and friend Vespasiano da Bisticci said that he was of Slavic nationality. According to Ronsano of Palermo, he was from Dalmatia ( di natione Dalmata ). M. Franičević, in citing Ronsano, notes that many Italians saw all “Croats” as Dalmatians.

Ludovik Tuberon Crijević , writing of Pannonius, says that he was born a Slav ( genere itidem Sclavenum ) in that part of interior Dalmatia that lies between the Sava and Drava rivers.

[ 4 ] Pannonius was brought up by his mother; in 1447 his uncle sent him to Italy for a humanist schooling. He attended the School of Guarino da Verona at Ferrara , where the pupils were educated in Latin and Greek authors under the guidance of a noted teacher of the Italian Renaissance . The boy was considered the brightest pupil of his generation by both his teachers and fellow-students. He wrote poetry according to the rules of classical prosody; he was around thirteen when he wrote his first epigrams. His higher education was completed at the University of Padua in canon law.

[ 5 ] After making an educational tour of Rome, he returned to Hungary in 1458, the year of Matthias's accession to the throne.

For a time, he worked at the Royal Chancery, and soon was appointed as the Bishop of Pécs and later Vice-Chancellor of the country. Janus Pannonius was an influential intellectual in the kingdom; he kept his connections with some of the leading philosophers of his time. He also collected a significant library of humanist works (probably dispersed in 1526).

[ 6 ] He served as the Ban of Slavonia in 1469.

[ 7 ] He died in the Medvedgrad castle near Zagreb .

[ 5 ] János Zsambóky (Johannes Sambucus) [ 8 ] and Count Sámuel Teleki [ 9 ] prepared the first editions of the poet’s opera omnia.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Birnbaum 1981 , p. 10.

^ Ádám Makkai, In quest of the 'miracle stag': the poetry of Hungary : an anthology of Hungarian poetry in English translation from the 13th century to the present in commemoration of the 1100th anniversary of the foundation of Hungary and the 40th anniversary of the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 , University of Illinois Press, 1996, p. 41 ^ Birnbaum 1981 , p. 18.

^ V. A. Fine 2010 , p. 147.

^ a b Milorad Živančević (1971). Živan Milisavac (ed.).

Jugoslovenski književni leksikon [ Yugoslav Literary Lexicon ] (in Serbo-Croatian).

Novi Sad ( SAP Vojvodina , SR Serbia ): Matica srpska . p. 70.

^ Konstantinos Staikos (2012), History of the Library in Western Civilization: From Petrarch to Michelangelo , New Castle, DE: Oak Knoll Press, ISBN 9781584561828 ^ Bietenholz & Deutscher 2003 , p. 234.

^ Jani Pannonii episcopi quinqueeccles: illius antiquis vatibus comparandi, recentioribus arte anteponendi, quae usipam reperiri adhuc potuerunt omnia opera Joannis Sambuci , ed. Johannes Sambucus (János Zsámboky), Vienna 1569.

^ Ianni Pannonii Poemata quae uspiam reperiri potuerunt omnia , ed. S. Teleki, Utrecht 1784. A facsimile edition: Jani Pannonii Opera omnia , ed. P. Koőszeghy et al., Budapest 2002.

^ Sánchez, Alfonso Lombana (2024-12-20).

"Sámuel Teleki and Janus Pannonius" .

Terminus (in Polish).

2024 (Tom 26, Zeszyt 3-4 (72-73) 2024): 295– 309.

doi : 10.4467/20843844te.24.017.20394 .

Sources [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Janus Pannonius .

Bietenholz, Peter G.; Deutscher, Thomas Brian, eds. (2003). "Janus Pannonius".

Contemporaries of Erasmus: A Biographical Register of the Renaissance and Reformation . University of Toronto Press. pp.

233– 234.

ISBN 978-0-8020-8577-1 .

Birnbaum, Marianna D. (1981).

Janus Pannonius, poet and politician . Works of the Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts philology department. Vol. 56.

Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts .

OCLC 461824985 .

Sánchez, Alfonso Lombana (2023).

Un libro sobre Janus Pannonius (in Spanish).

ISBN 978-84-19782-33-5 .

V. A. Fine, John Jr. (2010).

When Ethnicity Did Not Matter in the Balkans: A Study of Identity in Pre-Nationalist Croatia, Dalmatia, and Slavonia in the Medieval and Early-Modern Periods . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-02560-2 .

Works [ edit ] Opera , Basel, 1555 v t e Croatian literature Renaissance Džore Držić Šiško Menčetić Dominko Zlatarić Hanibal Lucić - Dinko Ranjina Janus Pannonius Mikša Pelegrinović Mavro Vetranović Nikola Nalješković Marko Marulić Juraj Šižgorić Petar Hektorović Marin Držić Brne Karnarutić Petar Zoranić Jeronim Vidulić Marin Kaboga Nikola Dimitrović Baroque Ivan Gundulić Ivan Bunić Vučić Ignjat Đurđević Stijepan Đurđević Junije Palmotić Fran Krsto Frankopan Petar Zrinski Katarina Zrinska Ivan Belostenec Pavao Ritter Vitezović Juraj Habdelić Matija Divković Bartol Kašić Petar Kanavelović Antun Kanižlić Katarina Patačić Enlightenment Matija Antun Reljković Andrija Kačić Miošić Filip Gotovac Matija Petar Katančić Tituš Brezovački Romanticism Dimitrija Demeter Ljudevit Gaj Ivan Mažuranić Matija Mažuranić Petar Preradović Pavao Štoos Stanko Vraz Realism Eugen Kumičić Ante Kovačić Ksaver Šandor Gjalski Vjenceslav Novak Josip Kozarac Silvije Strahimir Kranjčević Modernism and Postmodernism Ivo Vojnović Antun Gustav Matoš Vladimir Vidrić Dragutin Domjanić Milan Begović Vladimir Nazor Janko Polić Kamov Fran Galović Vladimir Čerina Tin Ujević Miroslav Krleža Antun Branko Šimić Ivan Goran Kovačić Marija Jurić Zagorka Ivo Andrić Vladan Desnica Dragutin Tadijanović Ranko Marinković Tomislav Ladan v t e Hungarian literature The list is by chronological order.

Early sources Old Hungarian script Establishing charter of the abbey of Tihany Urgesta Funeral Sermon and Prayer Anonymus (notary of Béla III) Gesta Hungarorum Ákos (chronicler) Simon of Kéza Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum Lamentations of Mary 14th century Minorite Chronicle of Buda John of Küküllő Mark of Kalt Chronicon Pictum 15th century John Vitéz Hussite Bible Andreas Pannonius Janus Pannonius Johannes Thuróczy Codex of Bécs Codex of Munich Zirc Bestiary Buda Chronicle Chronica Hungarorum Epitome rerum Hungarorum Antonio Bonfini Rerum Hungaricarum decades Corvina Library 15th – 16th century Gáspár Heltai Nicolaus Olahus 16th century Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos Tripartitum Érdy Codex Péter Bornemisza Bálint Balassi 16th – 17th century Péter Pázmány 17th century Miklós Zrínyi István Gyöngyösi Nádasdy Mausoleum 17th – 18th century Kelemen Mikes 18th century József Kármán 18th – 19th century Ferenc Kazinczy János Batsányi Mihály Fazekas Sándor Kisfaludy Mihály Csokonai Vitéz Dániel Berzsenyi Károly Kisfaludy Ferenc Kölcsey István Széchenyi József Katona 19th century Mihály Vörösmarty József Bajza János Garay József Eötvös Ede Szigligeti Zsigmond Kemény János Arany Mihály Tompa Sándor Petőfi Imre Madách János Vajda Gergely Csiky 19th – 20th century Mór Jókai Kálmán Mikszáth Elek Benedek Zoltán Ambrus Sándor Bródy Géza Gárdonyi Ferenc Herczeg Ignotus Miklós Bánffy Endre Ady Miksa Fenyő Ferenc Molnár Gyula Krúdy Dezső Szabó Zsigmond Móricz Ferenc Móra Menyhért Lengyel Margit Kaffka Lajos Nagy Gyula Juhász Mihály Babits Károly Kós Géza Gyóni Béla Balázs Árpád Tóth Géza Csáth Dezső Kosztolányi Lajos Kassák Frigyes Karinthy Lajos Áprily Milán Füst József Nyírő Sándor Reményik Lajos Zilahy Tibor Déry Béla Hamvas Sándor Szathmári Áron Tamási János Kodolányi 20th century István Fekete Lőrinc Szabó Sándor Márai László Németh Antal Szerb Gyula Illyés Jolán Földes Sándor Török Jenő Rejtő Attila József Albert Wass Miklós Szentkuthy Mária Szepes Géza Képes Miklós Radnóti István Örkény Géza Ottlik László Kálnoky Sándor Weöres Iván Mándy Ferenc Karinthy János Pilinszky Ágnes Nemes Nagy László Nagy Éva Janikovszky Péter Zsoldos Ervin Lázár Gáspár Nagy 20th – 21st century György Faludy Magda Szabó András Sütő Ferenc Juhász Sándor Kányádi Imre Kertész Gábor Görgey Sándor Csoóri Anna Jókai György Konrád György Moldova István Csukás Tamás Cseh Péter Esterházy György Károly Erno Polgar Contemporary Ágnes Gergely László L. Lőrincz Endre Kukorelly Péter Nádas György Spiró Ádám Nádasdy Miklós Vámos Zsuzsa Rakovszky Béla Markó Lajos Parti Nagy László Krasznahorkai Attila Bartis György Dragomán Category:Hungarian writers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel People Trove 2 Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Janus_Pannonius&oldid=1304210447 " Categories : 1432 births 1472 deaths 15th-century Roman Catholic bishops in Hungary 15th-century writers in Latin 15th-century Croatian poets 15th-century Croatian nobility Hungarian male poets Hungarian people of Croatian descent Baranya (region) History of Baranya (region) People from Čazma Bishops of Pécs Royal treasurers (Kingdom of Hungary) Chief justices of Hungary Hungarian book and manuscript collectors Croatian male poets 15th-century Hungarian poets Hidden categories: CS1 Serbo-Croatian-language sources (sh) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Croatian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 17:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Janus Pannonius 25 languages Add topic

