Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History and usage Toggle History and usage subsection 2.1 Buddhist usage and significance 2.2 Buddha Dhamma and its modern Indian usage 2.3 Other uses and similar symbols 3 Gallery Toggle Gallery subsection 3.1 Historical and archeological examples 3.2 Contemporary examples 3.3 National flags and official symbolism 4 Notes 5 References 6 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Dharmachakra 39 languages العربية বাংলা भोजपुरी Български བོད་ཡིག Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Symbol in Dharmic religions Wheel of Dharma symbol Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e The dharmachakra ( Sanskrit : धर्मचक्र, Pali : dhammacakka ) or wheel of dharma is a symbol used in the Dharmic religions . It has a widespread use in Buddhism.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In Hinduism , the symbol is particularly used in places that underwent religious transformation.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The symbol also finds its usage in modern India.

Historically, the dharmachakra was often used as a decoration in East Asian statues and inscriptions , beginning with the earliest period of East Asian culture to the present.

[ 7 ] It remains a major symbol of the Buddhist religion today.

Etymology [ edit ] The Sanskrit noun dharma ( धर्म ) is a derivation from the root dhṛ 'to hold, maintain, keep', [ 8 ] and means 'what is established or firm'. The word derives from the Vedic Sanskrit n -stem dharman- with the meaning "bearer, supporter". The historical Vedic religion apparently conceived of dharma as an aspect of Ṛta .

[ 9 ] History and usage [ edit ] Ten Indus characters from the northern gate of Dholavira , dubbed the Dholavira Signboard .

Similar chakra (spoked-wheel) symbols are one of the most ancient in all Indian history. Madhavan and Parpola note that a wheel symbol appears frequently in Indus Valley civilization artifacts, particularly on several seals .

[ 10 ] [ note 1 ] Notably, it is present in a sequence of ten signs on the Dholavira Signboard .

[ 10 ] [ 12 ] Some historians associate the ancient chakra symbols with solar symbolism .

[ 13 ] In the Vedas , the god Surya is associated with the solar disc, which is said to be a chariot of one wheel (cakra).

Mitra , a form of Surya, is described as "the eye of the world", and thus the sun is conceived of as an eye (cakṣu) which illuminates and perceives the world.

[ 14 ] Such a wheel is also the main attribute of Vishnu .

[ 12 ] Thus, a wheel symbol might also be associated with light and knowledge.

Buddhist usage and significance [ edit ] Dharmachakra in front of a statue of Padmasambhava .

Lake Rewalsar , Himachal Pradesh , India Worshipers and Dharmachakra, Sanchi Stupa , South Face, West Pillar.

In Buddhism, the Dharma Chakra is widely used to represent the Buddha's Dharma ( Buddha 's teaching and the universal moral order), Gautama Buddha himself and the walking of the path to enlightenment , since the time of Early Buddhism .

[ 15 ] [ 1 ] [ note 2 ] The symbol is also sometimes connected to the Four Noble Truths , the Noble Eightfold Path and Dependent Origination.

The pre-Buddhist dharmachakra ( Pali : dhammacakka ) is considered one of the ashtamangala (auspicious signs) in Hinduism and Buddhism and often used as a symbol of both faiths.

[ 16 ] [ note 3 ] It is one of the oldest known Indian symbols found in Indian art , appearing with the first surviving post- Indus Valley Civilisation Indian iconography in the time of the Buddhist king Ashoka .

[ 15 ] [ note 2 ] The Buddha is said to have set the "wheel of dharma" in motion when he delivered his first sermon, [ 17 ] which is described in the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta . This "turning of the wheel" signifies a great and revolutionary change with universal consequences, brought about by an exceptional human being. Buddhism adopted the wheel as a symbol from the Indian mythical idea of the ideal king, called a chakravartin ("wheel-turner", or "universal monarch"), [ 12 ] [ 17 ] who was said to possess several mythical objects, including the ratana cakka (the ideal wheel). The Mahā Sudassana Sutta of the Digha Nikaya describes this wheel as having a nave (nābhi), a thousand spokes (sahassārāni) and a felly (nemi), all of which are perfect in every respect.

[ 14 ] Siddhartha Gautama was said to have been a "mahapurisa" (great man) who could have chosen to become a wheel turning king, but instead became the spiritual counterpart to such a king, a wheel turning sage, that is, a Buddha .

[ 18 ] In his explanation of the term "turning the wheel of Dharma", the Theravada exegete Buddhaghosa explains that this "wheel" which the Buddha turned is primarily to be understood as wisdom, knowledge, and insight ( ñāṇa ). This wisdom has two aspects, paṭivedha-ñāṇa, the wisdom of self-realisation of the Truth and desanā-ñāṇa, the wisdom of proclamation of the Truth.

[ 14 ] The dharmachakra symbol also points to the central Indian idea of " Dharma ", a complex and multivalent term which refers to the eternal cosmic law, universal moral order and in Buddhism, the very teaching and path expounded by the Buddha.

[ 19 ] The original Lion Capital of Ashoka , from Sarnath. It originally supported a large dharmachakra on the top (reconstitution).

In the Buddhist Art at early sites such as Bharhut and Sanchi , the dharmachakra was often used as a symbol of Gautama Buddha himself.

[ 18 ] [ 14 ] The symbol is often paired with the triratna (triple jewel) or trishula (trident) symbolizing the triple gem , umbrellas ( chatra ), symbols of sovereignty and royal power, gems and garlands. It is also sometimes depicted alongside animals such as lions, [ 14 ] or deer.

There are different designs of the Buddhist dharmachakra with 8, 12, 24 or more spokes . In different Buddhist traditions, the different number of spokes may represent different aspects of the Buddha's Dharma (teaching). In the Indo-Tibetan Buddhist tradition for example, the 8 spoked wheel represents the noble eightfold path , and the hub, rim and spokes are also said to represent the three trainings ( sila , prajña and samadhi ).

[ 20 ] In Buddhism, the cyclical movement of a wheel is also used to symbolize the cyclical nature of life in the world (also referred to as the "wheel of samsara ", samsara-chakra or the "wheel of becoming" , bhava-cakra ).

[ 14 ] This wheel of suffering can be reversed or "turned" through the practice of the Buddhist path. The Buddhist terms for "suffering" ( dukkha ) and happiness ( sukha ) may also originally be related to the proper or improper fitting of wheels on a chariot's axle .

[ 21 ] The Indo-Tibetan tradition has developed elaborate depictions called Bhavacakras which depict the many realms of rebirth in Buddhist cosmology .

The spokes of a wheel are also often used as symbols of the Buddhist doctrine of dependent origination . According to the Theravada scholar Buddhaghosa : “It is the beginningless round of rebirths that is called the ’Wheel of the round of rebirths’ (saṃsāracakka). Ignorance (avijjā) is its hub (or nave) because it is its root. Ageing-and-death (jarā-maraṇa) is its rim (or felly) because it terminates it. The remaining ten links [of Dependent Origination] are its spokes [i.e. saṅkhāra up to the process of becoming, bhava].” [ 14 ] The earliest Indian monument featuring dharmachakras are the Ashokan Pillars , such as the lion pillar at Sanchi, built at the behest of the Mauryan emperor Ashoka . According to Benjamin Rowland: [ 14 ] ”The Sārnāth column may be interpreted, therefore, not only as a glorification of the Buddha’s preaching symbolised by the crowning wheel, but also through the cosmological implications of the whole pillar as a symbol of the universal extension of the power of the Buddha’s Law as typified by the sun that dominates all space and all time, and simultaneously an emblem of the universal extension of Mauryan imperialism through the Dharma. The whole structure is then a translation of age-old Indian and Asiatic cosmology into artistic terms of essentially foreign origin and dedicated, like all Asoka’s monuments, to the glory of Buddhism and the royal house.” According to Harrison, the symbolism of "the wheel of the law" and the order of Nature is also visible in the Tibetan prayer wheels . The moving wheels symbolize the movement of cosmic order ( ṛta ).

[ 22 ] Buddha Dhamma and its modern Indian usage [ edit ] Wheel of the chariot of the sun, Konark Sun Temple .

The State Emblem of India features the 24 spoke Dharmachakra from the Lion Capital of Ashoka .

Jain illustration with dharmachakra and the motto Ahiṃsā Paramo Dharma (non-violence is the highest dharma).

The dharmachakra is a symbol in the sramana religion of Budhha Dhamma.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Wheel symbolism was also used in Indian temples in places that underwent a religious transformation from Buddhism, [ 25 ] [ 26 ] such as Jagannath temple, whose deity is believed by some scholars to have a Buddhist origin .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] It also finds use in other ancient temples of Odisha, the most famous of which is the Konark Sun Temple .

The 24 spoke Ashoka dharmachakra is present in the modern flag of India , representing the pan-Indian concept of Dharma .

[ 29 ] The modern State Emblem of India is a depiction of the Lion Capital of Ashoka (Sanchi), which includes the dharmachakra. An integral part of the emblem is the motto inscribed in Devanagari script: Satyameva Jayate (English: Truth Alone Triumphs ).

[ 30 ] This is a quote from the Mundaka Upanishad , [ 31 ] the concluding part of the Vedas .

Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan , the first Vice President of India, stated that the Ashoka Chakra of India represents the "wheel of the law of dharma ", as well as "Truth or satya ", "Virtue" as well as "motion", as in the "dynamism of a peaceful change".

[ 29 ] Other uses and similar symbols [ edit ] The main attribute of Vishnu is a wheel like weapon called the Sudarśanacakra .

[ 12 ] Similar wheel symbols were used as a solar symbol by the Ancient Egyptians .

[ 32 ] Some Buddha statues also depict the related Dharmachakra Mudrā , a hand sign depicting the turning of the Dharma wheel.

A very similar wheel symbol also appears in the flag of the Romani people , hinting to their nomadic history.

In non-Buddhist cultural contexts, an eight-spoked wheel resembles a traditional ship's wheel . As a nautical emblem, this image is a common sailor tattoo , which may be misidentified as a dharmachakra or vice versa.

The sonnenrad is a similar symbol used by occultists and neo-nazis.

Falun Gong uses the concept of a similar wheel as a central concept.

In the Unicode computer standard, the dharmachakra is called the "Wheel of Dharma " and found in the eight-spoked form. It is represented as U+2638 (☸) . As emoji : ☸️.

Gallery [ edit ] Historical and archeological examples [ edit ] Reconstitution of approximate layout of Sanchi at the time of the Mauryas , showing the pillar topped by a dharmachakra.

Sandstone depiction, c. 2nd Century BCE, Bharhut , Indian Museum – Kolkata .

Illustrated reconstruction of the pinnacles at Bharhut by Alexander Cunningham Eastern gateway of Bharhut stupa topped with a dharmachakra pinnacle Buddha represented by Dharmacakra, Sanchi Stupa no. 3.

Dharmacakra on Pillar, Sanchi Stupa no. 3 Adoration of the pillar of Ashoka, Sanchi Stupa no. 3.

Illustration from Sanchi Stupa Limestone Pilaster, 2nd century CE, Amaravathi , Indian Museum, Kolkata.

Buddha footprints with dharmachakras, Archaeological Museum, Amaravati 1st century Gandhara Buddha footprint Gandharan Stele illustrating the first sermon at Sarnath , 2nd century, Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Stele from Gandhara A sculpture depicting the Dharmachakra in the museum of Amaravathi Taxila coin with wheel and Buddhist symbols Coin found in Afghanistan , 50 BCE – c. 30 CE, at the latest before 50 CE.

Three Jewels, or Triratna. Eastern Afghanistan.

Kushan period . 2–3 century.

Dharmachakra Pravartana Mudra , Gupta period, 5th CE.

Dhammacakka, National Museum, Bangkok, Thailand Dhammacakka, National Museum, Bangkok , Thailand Khao Klang Nai, Si Thep Historical Park , Thailand.

Mon dharmachakra, VII or IX century, Sandstone Dharma wheel, Japan, Kamakura period , 1200s CE, bronze – Tokyo National Museum .

Part of a Buddha-statue, showing the first five disciples of the Buddha at Sarnath and dharmachakra.

Japanese dharmachakra, late 13th century.

Mandala Base, China, Ming dynasty, Cleveland Museum of Art.

Dharma wheel, China, Qing dynasty, Qianlong period, 1736–1795 CE.

Box with Ink Cakes: Yellow Ink Stick, China, Qing dynasty (1644–1912).

Dharmachakra Pravartana at National Museum, New Delhi Contemporary examples [ edit ] Shanti Stupa , Leh Jokhang Monastery Wat Phothivihan, Tumpat, Kelantan Entrance to Wat Phra Sing Seal of Chai Nat Province (a garuda upholding the dhammacakka in front of the mountain and river), Wat Sri Suphan , Chiang Mai Dharmachakra at Boudanath Dhammacakka on Main Gable, Wat Phra Putthabat Tak Pha, Lamphun Entrance to the Global Vipassana Pagoda Lok Sabha chamber of the New Parliament building, New Delhi National flags and official symbolism [ edit ] The Emblem of Mongolia includes the dharmachakra, a cintamani , a padma , blue khata and the Soyombo symbol The Emblem of Sri Lanka , featuring a blue dharmachakra as the crest The Emblem of India , featuring the Ashoka Chakra on the base panel representing the Dharmachakra Emblem of the Supreme Court of India, which shows the dharmachakra on top of the Lion Capital. It was found broken during the excavations.

The Flag of India has the Ashoka Chakra at its center representing the Dharmachakra.

[ 29 ] The flag of the former Kingdom of Sikkim featured a version of the Dharmachakra Emblem of Central Tibetan Administration with Tibetan Buddhist style Dharmachakra The dhammacakka flag, the symbol of Buddhism in Thailand The seal of Thammasat University in Thailand consisting of a Constitution on phan with a twelve-spoked dhammacakka Colours of the National Scout Organization of Thailand Flag used by the Indian Dalit Buddhist Movement The insignia for Buddhist chaplains in the United States Armed Forces .

Wheel in Jain Symbol of Ahimsa represents dharmachakra USVA headstone emblem 2 Flag of the Romani People . It contains blue and red colour to represent the heaven and earth respectively, and uses a 16 spoke Dharmachakra to symbolise their tradition and to pay homage to their Indian origin.

Notes [ edit ] ^ These symbols, however, are elongated and not circular. Spoked wheel vehicle are virtually absent in Harappan civilisation .

[ 11 ] Therefore interpreting these symbols as spoked wheel is a matter of debate.

^ a b Grünwedel e.a.:"The wheel ( dharmachakra ) as already mentioned, was adopted by Buddha's disciples as the symbol of his doctrine, and combined with other symbols—a trident placed above it, etc.—stands for him on the sculptures of the Asoka period." [ 15 ] ^ Goetz: "dharmachakra, symbol of the Buddhist faith".

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b John C. Huntington, Dina Bangdel, The Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art, p. 524.

^ "Buddhist Symbols" .

Ancient-symbols.com . Retrieved 22 June 2018 .

^ Mansinha, Mayadhar (10 September 2021) [1960].

"CHAPTER VIII. THE POST SARALA PERIOD - A PERIOD OF EXPERIMENTS: I.The Buddhist Influence - The Metaphysical Poets " .

History of Oriya Literature . Creative Media Partners, LLC.

ISBN 978-1015025486 .

^ Nayak, Dr. Ganeswar (11 March 2014).

"History of Odisha (From earliest times to 1434 A.D)" (PDF) . Paralakhemundi: Shri Krushna Chandra Gajapati Autonomous College . p. 107.

^ Misra, Bijoy M. (2007). Bryant, Edwin Francis (ed.).

Krishna: A Sourcebook . Oxford University Press. p. 141.

ISBN 978-0195148923 .

^ Sahu, Nabin Kumar (1958).

"Sailodbhavas, Bhaumakaras and Somavamśīs" .

Buddhism in Orissa . Bhubaneshwar: Utkal University. p. x.

OCLC 1391872675 .

^ "Dharma And Ethics The Indian Ideal Of Human Perfection 1st Published" .

priscilla.work . Archived from the original on 29 October 2021 . Retrieved 29 October 2021 .

^ Monier Williams , A Sanskrit Dictionary (1899): "to hold, bear (also: bring forth), carry, maintain, preserve, keep, possess, have, use, employ, practise, undergo" ^ Day, Terence (1 January 2006) [1982]. "The Concept of Obligation".

The Conception of Punishment in Early Indian Literature . Editions SR (volume 2). Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press. p. 42.

ISBN 9780889208384 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 .

The importance of the conception of Dharma in early brāhmanic thought is so considerable that it has seemed either that it replaced Ṛta as the leading philosophical and religious conception or that the earlier concept was at some time absorbed into it. It is probably more true that Dharma was conceived as an aspect of Ṛta which became so useful for framing religious, moral and social regulations, that interest in it and discussion of its applications to social and moral order eclipsed all discussions of metaphysical and theological ideas.

^ a b The Ancient Indus Valley: New Perspectives
By Jane McIntosh. p. 377 ^ Shahane, Girish (8 October 2014).

"What the absence of chariots in ancient Harappa means for Modi's Clean India plan" .

Scroll.in . Archived from the original on 10 October 2014 . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ a b c d Beer 2003 , p. 14.

^ Issitt, Micah. Main, Carlyn. (2014).

Hidden Religion: The Greatest Mysteries and Symbols of the World's Religious Beliefs, ABC-CLIO, p. 185.

^ a b c d e f g h T. B. Karunaratne (1969), The Buddhist Wheel Symbol , The Wheel Publication No. 137/138, Buddhist Publication Society, Kandy • Sri Lanka.

^ a b c Grünwedel, Gibson & Burgess 1901 , p. 67.

^ a b Goetz 1964 , p. 52.

^ a b Pal 1986 , p. 42.

^ a b Ludowyk, E.F.C. (2013) The Footprint of the Buddha, Routledge, p. 22.

^ Issitt, Micah. Main, Carlyn. (2014).

Hidden Religion: The Greatest Mysteries and Symbols of the World's Religious Beliefs, ABC-CLIO, p. 186.

^ A Lamp Illuminating the Path to Liberation: An Explanation of Essential Topics for Dharma Students by Khenpo Gyaltsen (translated by Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, Nepal: 2014, pp. 247–248).

^ Sargeant, Winthrop (2009), The Bhagavad Gita, SUNY Press, p. 303.

^ Harrison 2010 , p. 526.

^ Asha Kalia, Art of Osian Temples: Socio-economic and Religious Life in India, 8th–12th Centuries A.D.

Abhinav Publications, 1982, chapter 16.

^ Sharma, Savita (1990).

Early Indian Symbols: Numismatic Evidence, Agam Kala Prakashan, 1990 p. 51.

^ Misra 2007 .

^ Sahu 1958 .

^ Nayak 2014 .

^ Mansinha 2021 .

^ a b c "The national flag code" (PDF) .

Mahapolice.gov.in . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 December 2017 . Retrieved 22 June 2018 .

^ Kamal Dey v. Union of India and State of West Bengal (Calcutta High Court 2011-07-14), Text .

^ "Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Standing Committee On Home Affairs: 116th Report on The State Emblem Of India (Prohibition Of Improper Use) Bill, 2004" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 March 2013.

^ Hall, Adelaide S. (2005).

A Glossary of Important Symbols in Their Hebrew: Pagan and Christian Forms . Cosimo. p. 56.

ISBN 978-1-59605-593-3 .

Sources [ edit ] Anthony, David W. (2007), The Horse The Wheel and Language. How Bronze-Age Riders From The Eurasian Steppes Shaped The Modern World , Princeton University Press Beer, Robert (2003), The Handbook of Tibetan Buddhist Symbols , Serindia Publications, Inc., ISBN 978-1932476033 Day, Terence P. (1982), The Conception of Punishment in Early Indian Literature , Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, ISBN 0-919812-15-5 Goetz, Hermann (1964), The art of India: five thousand years of Indian art , Crown Grünwedel, Albert; Gibson, Agnes C.; Burgess, James (1901), Buddhist art in India , Bernard Quaritch Harrison, Jane Ellen (2010) [1912], Themis: A Study of the Social Origins of Greek Religion , Cambridge University Press Hiltebeitel, Alf (2007), Hinduism. In: Joseph Kitagawa, "The Religious Traditions of Asia: Religion, History, and Culture". Digital printing 2007 , Routledge, ISBN 9781136875908 Inden, Ronald (1998), Ritual, Authority, And Cycle Time in Hindu Kingship. In: JF Richards, ed., "Kingship and Authority in South Asia" , New Delhi: Oxford University Press Mallory, J.P. (1997), Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture , London: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, ISBN 978-1-884964-98-5 Nath, Vijay (March–April 2001), "From 'Brahmanism' to 'Hinduism': Negotiating the Myth of the Great Tradition", Social Scientist , 29 (3/4): 19– 50, doi : 10.2307/3518337 , JSTOR 3518337 Pal, Pratapaditya (1986), Indian Sculpture: Circa 500 B.C.–A.D. 700 , University of California Press, ISBN 9780520059917 Queen, Christopher S.; King, Sallie B. (1996), Engaged Buddhism: Buddhist liberation movements in Asia.

, SUNY Press, ISBN 9780791428443 Samuel, Geoffrey (2010), The Origins of Yoga and Tantra. Indic Religions to the Thirteenth Century , Cambridge University Press Yan, Xiaojing (2009), The confluence of East and West in Nestorian Arts in China. In: Dietmar W. Winkler, Li Tang (eds.), Hidden Treasures and Intercultural Encounters: Studies on East Syriac Christianity in China and Central Asia , LIT Verlag Münster, ISBN 9783643500458 Further reading [ edit ] Dorothy C. Donath (1971).

Buddhism for the West: Theravāda, Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna; a comprehensive review of Buddhist history, philosophy, and teachings from the time of the Buddha to the present day . Julian Press.

ISBN 0-07-017533-0 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Dharmachakra at Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote has quotations related to Dharmachakra .

Buddhist Wheel Symbol (Dharmachakra) v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal Authority control databases National United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐hxsmd
Cached time: 20250814215114
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.027 seconds
Real time usage: 1.253 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3706/1000000
Revision size: 31150/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 145372/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3711/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 174816/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.600/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25306922/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1054.455      1 -total
 19.47%  205.304      2 Template:Reflist
 13.16%  138.757      1 Template:Buddhism
 12.94%  136.443      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.65%  122.813      6 Template:Cite_web
 10.63%  112.107      2 Template:Langx
  9.29%   97.952     14 Template:Citation
  7.84%   82.633      1 Template:Short_description
  6.25%   65.884     16 Template:Sfn
  5.86%   61.774      1 Template:Buddhism_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4313861:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215114 and revision id 1302113284. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dharmachakra&oldid=1302113284 " Categories : Buddhist symbols Tibetan Buddhist practices Culture of India Romani culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2015 Use Indian English from December 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles containing Pali-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 12:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dharmachakra 39 languages Add topic

