Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Academic positions 2.2 Writing, television 2.3 Awards 3 Books 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Nader El-Bizri 3 languages العربية فارسی مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lebanese academic This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Nader El-Bizri Education BArch (architecture), American University of Beirut (1989) M.Arch II, Harvard University (1994) Graduate studies (philosophy), Harvard University (1995) PhD (philosophy), New School for Social Research (1999) Occupation(s) Professor of philosophy and civilization studies, American University of Beirut Website aub.edu.lb Nader El-Bizri ( Arabic : نادر البزري , nādir al-bizrĩ ) served as the dean of the College of Arts, Humanities, and Social Sciences at the University of Sharjah .

[ 1 ] He is currently a Senior Research Fellow at The Warburg Institute at the School of Advanced Study, University of London, [ 2 ] and an Affiliated Scholar with the Department of History and Philosophy of Science at the University of Cambridge .

[ 3 ] He was before that a tenured longstanding full professor of philosophy and civilization studies at the American University of Beirut , where he also acted as an associate dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, and as the director of the General Education program.

[ 4 ] El-Bizri specializes in phenomenology , Islamic science and philosophy , and architectural theory . He is the author or editor of several books, including The Phenomenological Quest between Avicenna and Heidegger (2000).

Education [ edit ] El-Bizri received a degree in architecture from the Harvard Graduate School of Design and a PhD in philosophy from the New School for Social Research .

[ 5 ] Career [ edit ] Academic positions [ edit ] American University of Beirut El-Bizri is a professor of philosophy and civilization studies at the American University of Beirut , where he is also an associate dean of the faculty of arts and sciences, and the director of the general education program. He was formerly a director of the civilization studies program at the AUB and the coordinator of Islamic studies , [ 4 ] and also oversees the Anis Makdisi Program in Literature.

[ 6 ] He was previously a visiting professor of visual studies at the University of Lincoln and a principal lecturer (reader) in architecture.

[ 7 ] He was an affiliated senior research fellow in philosophy at the Institute of Ismaili Studies , London, and is general editor (and managing editor ex officio ) of an Oxford University Press book series published in association with the Institute of Ismaili Studies, London, entitled: Epistles of the Brethren of Purity Series رسائل إخوان الصفاء .

[ 8 ] He was a co-manager of a joint project between the Institute of Ismaili Studies and the Institut Français du Proche Orient , formerly based in Damascus and now in Beirut .

El-Bizri was an affiliated research scholar in the department of history and philosophy of science at the University of Cambridge from 1999 to 2010, primarily lecturing on medieval Islamic sciences and philosophy.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] He has also been a visiting lecturer at the faculty of architecture at the University of Cambridge on Islamic architecture. He holds a Chercheur associé position in history of science and philosophy at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique in Paris (Denis-Diderot, Paris VII, UMR 7219, SPHERE) [ 11 ] since 2006, and he was previously a lecturer in architecture at the University of Nottingham , and taught at Harvard University .

[ 12 ] He is a member of the Ordered Universe research team on mediaeval science that is supported by the British Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC), which is based at the University of Durham and Oxford University.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] El-Bizri is an elected member of the Steering Committee of the Société Internationale d'Histoire des Sciences et des Philosophies Arabes et Islamiques ( Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique , Paris).

[ 15 ] 2022 Dean of College of Arts, Humanities & Social Sciences University of Sharjah Writing, television [ edit ] El-Bizri is co-editor of a book series in phenomenology (Springer, formerly Kluwer Academic Publishers; Dordrecht, Netherlands), [ 16 ] and as section editor (Islam) of the Encyclopedia of Sciences and Religions (SPRINGER, Dordrecht & Berlin). He is on the editorial boards of series and journals, such as the Cambridge University Press journal Arabic Sciences and Philosophy , Toposophia (series on philosophy and architecture; Lexington Books/Rowman & Littlefield), [ 17 ] Institute of Ismaili Studies Texts and Translations Series (London: I. B. Tauris), [ 18 ] the Encyclopaedia Islamica (Leiden: E. J. Brill), [ 19 ] the Journal of World Philosophies (Indiana University Press), [ 20 ] [ 21 ] and the Fundamentals of Scientific Research at The Arab Organization for Translation in Beirut (linked to the Centre for Arab Unity Studies).

[ 22 ] He is the European representative of the Equipe d’Etude et de Recherche sur le Patrimoine Scientifique Arabe, which is part of the Lebanese Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS). He has written for Al-Hayat .

[ 9 ] [ 15 ] [ 23 ] El-Bizri has made several contributions to BBC radio and television cultural programs, including a discussion about the Persian philosopher Avicenna with Melvin Bragg and other guests on BBC Radio 4 's In Our Time , [ 24 ] and an interview with Jim Al-Khalili about Ibn al-Haytham for BBC Four 's Science and Islam series.

[ 25 ] He also recently took part in a panel on philosophy that was aired on France Culture in Paris in the series Les Chemins de la philosophie that is moderated by Adèle Van Reeth .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Awards [ edit ] El-Bizri has received several awards, including the Kuwait Prize 2014 from the Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Sciences.

[ 28 ] He has been also ranked as one of the "Thought Leaders" in the Arab world via the Berggruen Institute and its various partners.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Books [ edit ] As author and co-author (2000).

The Phenomenological Quest between Avicenna and Heidegger (Binghamton, N.Y.: Global Publications, SUNY); reprinted with an updated preface in 2014.

(2004).

L'expérience (Paris: Editions la Découverte), co-authored with Jean-Pierre Cléro, Martin Jay , G-K Karanth, and Achille Mbembe , with a foreword by Nadia Tazi.

As editor and co-editor (2008).

Epistles of the Brethren of Purity. The Ikhwan al-Safa' and their Rasa'il: An Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Contributor of the "Prologue", 1–32, and chapter 7: "Epistolary Prolegomena: On Arithmetic and Geometry", 180–213.

(2012).

Epistles of the Brethren of Purity. On Arithmetic and Geometry. Arabic Edition and English Translation of EPISTLES 1 & 2 (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

(2012).

Founding Figures and Commentators in Arabic Mathematics , by Roshdi Rashed (London: Routledge).

(2013). ‘Islam Division’ of the Encyclopedia of Sciences and Religions , eds. Anne Runehov, Lluis Oviedo et al.

(Dordrecht-Berlin: Springer).

(2014).

Recto Verso: Redefining the Sketchbook , co-edited with Angela Bartram and Douglas Gittens (Farnham: Ashgate).

(2015).

Asad Rustum: Mu'assis 'ilm al-tarikh fi al-'alam al-'arabi , co-edited with Lamia Shehadeh, Souad Sleem, Maher Jarrar (Beirut: Dar al-Farabi).

(2017).

Practicing Philosophy in Lebanon (Pratiquer la philosophie au Liban [Mumârasat al-falsafa fî lubnân]) , a trilingual volume ed. Nader El-Bizri (Beirut-Bonn: German Orient-Institut Beirut, in association with Dar al-Farabi).

(2018).

Epistles of the Brethren of Purity.  On Composition and the Arts. Arabic Edition and English Translation of EPISTLES 6-8 ; co-edited with Godefroid de Callataÿ (Oxford: Oxford University Press).

(2018) The Occult Sciences in Pre-modern Islamic Cultures , eds. Nader El-Bizri and Eva Orthmann. Würzburg: Ergon Verlag (Orient-Institut series BTS 138).

(2022) On Being and Time: The Section on Heidegger in Charles Malik's 1937 Harvard Thesis , ed. Nader El-Bizri. Würzburg: Ergon Verlag (Orient-Institut series BTS 143).

See also [ edit ] Alhazen Architectural theory Avicenna Book of Optics Brethren of Purity Contemporary Islamic philosophy Jacques Derrida Martin Heidegger Khôra Maurice Merleau-Ponty Phenomenology (architecture) References [ edit ] ^ University of Sharjah official webpage of Nader El-Bizri ^ The Warburg Institute official webpage of Nader El-Bizri ^ University of Cambridge HPS official webpage of Nader El-Bizri ^ a b AUB official webpage of Nader El-Bizri ^ Catherine Ward (3 March 2017).

"Ath Speaker Explores Arabic Traditions in History of Natural Sciences" . The Student Life.

^ "Anis Makdisi Program in Literature – Home" . AUB . Retrieved 4 July 2017 .

^ [1] His profile when he was at Lincoln in 2010 is noted in the Literary Encyclopedia , retrieved from archives on 9 July 2017 ^ [2] Oxford University Press - See series editorial board ^ a b "Nader El-Bizri — Department of History and Philosophy of Science" .

University of Cambridge . 3 December 2008. Archived from the original on 14 July 2009.

^ "Annual Report — Department of History and Philosophy of Science" (PDF) .

University of Cambridge . 2008. pp. 3, 39.

^ "Sciences, Philosophie, Histoire – UMR 7219, laboratoire SPHERE — EL-BIZRI Nader" .

Universite Paris Diderot (in French) . Retrieved 17 July 2017 .

^ "Center for Arab and Middle Eastern Studies - Faculty and Staff" .

American University of Beirut . Archived from the original on 29 August 2017 . Retrieved 28 August 2017 .

^ Ordered Universe (4 December 2015).

"Kuwait honours Professor Nader El-Bizri: Arabic Science and Philosophy – Ordered Universe" . Ordered-universe.com . Retrieved 4 July 2017 .

^ "2015 – Three AUB academics awarded for the Advancement of Sciences" . AUB. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 July 2017 .

^ a b "Sciences, Philosophie, Histoire – UMR 7219, laboratoire SPHERE – EL-BIZRI Nader" .

www.chspam.univ-paris-diderot.fr .

^ Islamic Philosophy and Occidental Phenomenology in Dialogue . Springer.com . Retrieved 4 July 2017 .

^ Toposophia series Rowman & Littlefield (formerly Lexington books) ^ Texts and Translations Series I.B. Tauris, London ^ E. J. Brill: Encyclopaedia Islamica ^ [3] Archived 4 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Indiana University Press ^ "Nader El-Bizri profile (in 2013) at the Islamic thought think-tank "Kalam Research & Media" " . Archived from the original on 22 July 2015 . Retrieved 20 July 2015 .

^ Centre for Arab Unity Studies ^ "Nader El-Bizri - American University of Beirut - Academia.edu" .

Ulincoln.academia.edu .

^ "Avicenna" , In our Time , BBC Radio 4, 8 November 2007.

^ "The Empire of Reason" , Science and Islam , 12 January 2009.

^ [4] Les Chemins de la Philosophie sur France Culture, « Philosopher en Méditerranée » (Paris, 22 November 2018).

^ "Nader El-Bizri, 'A Levantine Reception of Heidegger', Night of Philosophy (Nuit de la Philosophie) UNESCO Paris 16 November 2018" .

nightofphilosophy.com . 27 October 2018.

^ "Kuwait honours Professor Nader El-Bizri: Arabic Science and Philosophy" .

Ordered Universe . 4 December 2015 . Retrieved 4 July 2017 .

^ "Thought Leaders - El-Bizri ranked 59 in the Arab World" . Archived from the original on 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 25 December 2016 .

^ Berggruen Institute, LA, California Webpage of Nader El-Bizri, University of Cambridge Webpage of Nader El-Bizri, University of Sharjah Webpage of Nader El-Bizri, American University of Beirut Webpage of Nader El-Bizri, Academia.edu Webpage of Nader El-Bizri, Arabic Wikipedia Webage of Nader El-Bizri, ‘Author’, Jesus & Mary School Life & Works Interview with Nader El-Bizri, Al Ghad TV Webpage of Nader El-Bizri, Linkedin Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Sweden Israel Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH PhilPeople People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nader_El-Bizri&oldid=1299963198 " Categories : Academics of the University of Nottingham Phenomenologists Metaphysicians Historians of science Epistemologists Heidegger scholars Harvard Graduate School of Design alumni 21st-century philosophers The New School alumni American University of Beirut alumni Living people Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from February 2019 Articles lacking reliable references from February 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use British English from September 2014 Use dmy dates from July 2017 Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 12:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nader El-Bizri 3 languages Add topic

