Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Life and career 3 Personal life 4 Novels and fictional works 5 Critical appraisal by other authors 6 Ethical, political and religious beliefs Toggle Ethical, political and religious beliefs subsection 6.1 Schopenhauer 6.2 Christianity 6.3 Christian anarchism 6.4 Pacificism 6.5 Georgism 6.6 Hunting 6.7 Vegetarianism 7 Death 8 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 8.1 In Soviet Russia 8.2 Influence 8.3 In film and television 9 Bibliography 10 See also 11 Notes 12 Citations 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Leo Tolstoy 183 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch Алтай тил አማርኛ Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 گیلکی 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Тыва дыл Удмурт Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian writer (1828–1910) "Tolstoy" and "Lev Tolstoy" redirect here. For other uses, see Tolstoy (disambiguation) and Lev Tolstoy (disambiguation) .

Leo Tolstoy Tolstoy in 1908 Native name Лев Толстой Born ( 1828-09-09 ) 9 September 1828 Yasnaya Polyana , Russia Died 20 November 1910 (1910-11-20) (aged 82) Astapovo , Russia Occupation Writer religious thinker Education Imperial Kazan University (dropped out) Period Modern Genres Novel novella short story sketch play children's literature song polemic essay treatise epistle literary and art criticism textbook autobiography diary translation correspondence Subjects Christian anarchism pacifism Literary movement Realism Years active 1847–1910 Notable works List Notable awards Griboyedov Prize (1892) Spouse Sophia Behrs ​ ( m.

1862 ) ​ Children 14 Signature Leo Tolstoy's voice recorded 1908 Count Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy [ note 1 ] ( / ˈ t oʊ l s t ɔɪ , ˈ t ɒ l -/ ; [ 1 ] Russian: Лев Николаевич Толстой , [ note 2 ] IPA: [ˈlʲef nʲɪkɐˈla(j)ɪvʲɪtɕ tɐlˈstoj] ⓘ ; 9 September [ O.S.

28 August] 1828 –  20 November [ O.S.

7 November] 1910), [ 2 ] usually referred to in English as Leo Tolstoy , was a Russian writer. He is regarded as one of the greatest and most influential authors of all time.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Born to an aristocratic family, Tolstoy achieved  acclaim in his twenties with his semi-autobiographical trilogy, Childhood , Boyhood and Youth (1852–1856), and with Sevastopol Sketches (1855), based on his experiences in the Crimean War . His War and Peace (1869), Anna Karenina (1878), and Resurrection (1899), which is based on his youthful sins, [ 5 ] are often cited as pinnacles of realist fiction [ 2 ] and three of the greatest novels ever written.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] His oeuvre includes short stories such as " Alyosha the Pot " (1911) and " After the Ball " (1911) and novellas such as Family Happiness (1859), The Death of Ivan Ilyich (1886), The Kreutzer Sonata (1889), The Devil (1911),  and Hadji Murat (1912). He also wrote plays and essays concerning philosophical, moral and religious themes.

In the 1870s, Tolstoy experienced a profound moral crisis, followed by what he regarded as an equally profound spiritual awakening, as outlined in his non-fiction work Confession (1882). His literal interpretation of the ethical teachings of Jesus, centering on the Sermon on the Mount , caused him to become a fervent Christian anarchist and pacifist .

[ 2 ] His ideas on nonviolent resistance , expressed in such works as The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1894), had a profound impact on such pivotal 20th-century figures as Mahatma Gandhi , [ 6 ] Ludwig Wittgenstein , [ 7 ] Martin Luther King Jr.

, [ 8 ] and James Bevel .

[ 9 ] He also became a dedicated advocate of Georgism , the economic philosophy of Henry George , which he incorporated into his writing, particularly in his novel Resurrection (1899).

Tolstoy received praise from countless authors and critics, both during his lifetime and after.

Virginia Woolf called Tolstoy "the greatest of all novelists", [ 10 ] and Gary Saul Morson referred to War and Peace as the greatest of all novels.

[ 11 ] He received nominations for the Nobel Prize in Literature every year from 1902 to 1906 and for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1901, 1902, and 1909. Tolstoy never being awarded a Nobel Prize remains a major Nobel Prize controversy .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Origins Main article: Tolstoy family The Tolstoys were a well-known family of old Russian nobility who traced their ancestry to a mythical [ 14 ] nobleman named Indris described by Pyotr Tolstoy as arriving "from Nemec, from the lands of Caesar" to Chernigov in 1353 along with his two sons Litvinos (or Litvonis) and Zimonten (or Zigmont) and a druzhina of 3000 people.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Indris was then converted to Eastern Orthodoxy , under the name of Leonty, and his sons as Konstantin and Feodor. Konstantin's grandson Andrei Kharitonovich was nicknamed Tolstiy (translated as fat ) by Vasily II of Moscow after he moved from Chernigov to Moscow.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Because of the pagan names and the fact that Chernigov at the time was ruled by Demetrius I Starshy , some researchers concluded that they were Lithuanians who arrived from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania .

[ 15 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] At the same time, no mention of Indris was ever found in the 14th-to-16th-century documents, while the Chernigov Chronicles used by Pyotr Tolstoy as a reference were lost.

[ 15 ] The first documented members of the Tolstoy family also lived during the 17th century, thus Pyotr Tolstoy himself is generally considered the founder of the noble house, being granted the title of count by Peter the Great .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Life and career Leo Tolstoy at age 20, c.

1848 Tolstoy was born at Yasnaya Polyana , a family estate 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) southwest of Tula , and 200 kilometres (120 mi) south of Moscow. He was the fourth of five children of Count Nikolai Ilyich Tolstoy (1794–1837), a veteran of the Patriotic War of 1812 , and Princess Mariya Tolstaya (née Volkonskaya ; 1790–1830). His mother died when he was two and his father when he was nine.

[ 21 ] Tolstoy and his siblings were brought up by relatives.

[ 2 ] In 1844, he began studying law and oriental languages at Kazan University , where teachers described him as "both unable and unwilling to learn".

[ 21 ] Tolstoy left the university in the middle of his studies, [ 21 ] returned to Yasnaya Polyana and then spent much time in Moscow, Tula and Saint Petersburg, leading a lax and leisurely lifestyle.

[ 2 ] He began writing during this period, [ 21 ] including his first novel Childhood , a fictitious account of his own youth, which was published in 1852.

[ 2 ] In 1851, after running up heavy gambling debts, he went with his older brother to the Caucasus and joined the army . Tolstoy served as a young artillery officer during the Crimean War and was in Sevastopol during the 11-month-long siege of Sevastopol in 1854–55, [ 22 ] including the Battle of the Chernaya . During the war he was recognised for his courage and promoted to lieutenant.

[ 22 ] He was appalled by the number of deaths involved in warfare, [ 21 ] and left the army after the end of the Crimean War.

[ 2 ] His experience in the army, and two trips around Europe in 1857 and 1860–61 converted Tolstoy from a dissolute and privileged society author to a non-violent and spiritual anarchist . Others who followed the same path were Alexander Herzen , Mikhail Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin . During his 1857 visit, Tolstoy witnessed a public execution in Paris, a traumatic experience that marked the rest of his life. In a letter to his friend Vasily Botkin , Tolstoy wrote: "The truth is that the State is a conspiracy designed not only to exploit, but above all to corrupt its citizens ... Henceforth, I shall never serve any government anywhere." [ 23 ] Tolstoy's concept of non-violence or ahimsa was bolstered when he read a German version of the Tirukkural .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] He later instilled the concept in Mahatma Gandhi through his " A Letter to a Hindu " when young Gandhi corresponded with him seeking his advice.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] His European trip in 1860–61 shaped both his political and literary development when he met Victor Hugo . Tolstoy read Hugo's newly finished Les Misérables . The similar evocation of battle scenes in Hugo's novel and Tolstoy's War and Peace indicates this influence. Tolstoy's political philosophy was also influenced by a March 1861 visit to French anarchist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , then living in exile under an assumed name in Brussels. Tolstoy reviewed Proudhon's forthcoming publication, La Guerre et la Paix (" War and Peace " in French), and later used the title for his masterpiece. The two men also discussed education, as Tolstoy wrote in his educational notebooks: "If I recount this conversation with Proudhon, it is to show that, in my personal experience, he was the only man who understood the significance of education and of the printing press in our time." Fired by enthusiasm, Tolstoy returned to Yasnaya Polyana and founded 13 schools for the children of Russia's peasants, who had just been emancipated from serfdom in 1861 . Tolstoy described the schools' principles in his 1862 essay "The School at Yasnaya Polyana".

[ 28 ] His educational experiments were short-lived, partly due to harassment by the Tsarist secret police. However, as a direct forerunner to A.S. Neill 's Summerhill School , the school at Yasnaya Polyana [ 29 ] can justifiably be claimed the first example of a coherent theory of democratic education .

Personal life The death of his brother Nikolay in 1860 had an impact on Tolstoy, and led him to a desire to marry.

[ 21 ] On 23 September 1862, Tolstoy married Sophia Andreevna Behrs , who was sixteen years his junior and the daughter of a court physician. She was called Sonya, the Russian diminutive of Sofia, by her family and friends.

[ 30 ] They had 13 children, eight of whom survived childhood: [ 31 ] Tolstoy's wife Sophia and their daughter Alexandra Count Sergei Lvovich Tolstoy (1863–1947), composer and ethnomusicologist Countess Tatyana Lvovna Tolstaya (1864–1950), wife of Mikhail Sergeevich Sukhotin Count Ilya Lvovich Tolstoy (1866–1933), writer Count Lev Lvovich Tolstoy (1869–1945), writer and sculptor Countess Maria Lvovna Tolstaya (1871–1906), wife of Nikolai Leonidovich Obolensky Count Peter Lvovich Tolstoy (1872–1873), died in infancy Count Nikolai Lvovich Tolstoy (1874–1875), died in infancy Countess Varvara Lvovna Tolstaya (1875–1875), died in infancy Count Andrei Lvovich Tolstoy (1877–1916), served in the Russo-Japanese War Count Michael Lvovich Tolstoy (1879–1944) Count Alexei Lvovich Tolstoy (1881–1886) Countess Alexandra Lvovna Tolstaya (1884–1979) Count Ivan Lvovich Tolstoy (1888–1895) The marriage was marked from the outset by sexual passion and emotional insensitivity when Tolstoy, on the eve of their marriage, gave her his diaries detailing his extensive sexual past and the fact that one of the serfs on his estate had borne him a son.

[ 30 ] Even so, their early married life was happy and allowed Tolstoy much freedom and the support system to compose War and Peace and Anna Karenina , with Sonya acting as his secretary, editor, and financial manager. Sonya was copying and hand-writing his epic works time after time. Tolstoy would continue editing War and Peace and had to have clean final drafts to be delivered to the publisher.

[ 30 ] [ 32 ] However, their later life together has been described by A.N. Wilson as one of the unhappiest in literary history. Tolstoy's relationship with his wife deteriorated as his beliefs became increasingly radical. This saw him seeking to reject his inherited and earned wealth, including the renunciation of the copyrights on his earlier works.

When he was finishing up the last installments of Anna Karenina Tolstoy was in an anguished state of mind and he began putting away guns and ropes out of fear that he would kill himself.

[ 33 ] Some members of the Tolstoy family left Russia in the aftermath of the 1905 Russian Revolution , or after the establishment of the Soviet Union following the 1917 October Revolution , and many of Leo Tolstoy's relatives and descendants today live in Sweden, Germany, the United Kingdom, France and the United States. Tolstoy's son, Count Lev Lvovich Tolstoy , settled in Sweden and married a Swedish woman, and their descendants with family names including Tolstoy, Paus and Ceder still live in Sweden. The Paus branch of the family is also closely related to Henrik Ibsen .

[ 34 ] Leo Tolstoy's last surviving grandchild, Countess Tatiana Tolstoy-Paus , died in 2007 at Herresta manor in Sweden, which is owned by Tolstoy's descendants.

[ 35 ] Swedish writer Daria Paus and jazz singer Viktoria Tolstoy are among Leo Tolstoy's Swedish descendants.

[ 36 ] One of his great-great-grandsons, Vladimir Tolstoy (born 1962), has been a director of the Yasnaya Polyana museum since 1994 and an adviser to the President of Russia on cultural affairs since 2012.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Ilya Tolstoy 's great-grandson, Pyotr Tolstoy , is a well-known Russian journalist and TV presenter as well as a State Duma deputy since 2016. His cousin Fyokla Tolstaya (born Anna Tolstaya in 1971), daughter of the acclaimed Soviet Slavist Nikita Tolstoy ( ru ) (1923–1996), is also a Russian journalist, TV and radio host.

[ 39 ] Novels and fictional works Portrait of Leo Tolstoy by Ivan Kramskoi , 1873 Tolstoy is considered one of the giants of Russian literature; his works include the novels War and Peace and Anna Karenina and novellas such as Hadji Murad and The Death of Ivan Ilyich . Tolstoy's earliest works, the autobiographical novels Childhood , Boyhood , and Youth (1852–1856), tell of a rich landowner's son and his slow realization of the chasm between himself and his peasants. Though he later rejected them as sentimental, a great deal of Tolstoy's own life is revealed. They retain their relevance as accounts of the universal story of growing up. Tolstoy served as a second lieutenant in an artillery regiment during the Crimean War , recounted in his Sevastopol Sketches . His experiences in battle helped stir his subsequent pacifism and gave him material for realistic depiction of the horrors of war in his later work.

[ 40 ] His fiction consistently attempts to convey realistically the Russian society in which he lived.

[ 41 ] The Cossacks (1863) describes the Cossack life and people through a story of a Russian aristocrat in love with a Cossack girl.

Anna Karenina (1877) tells parallel stories of an adulterous woman trapped by the conventions and falsities of society and of a philosophical landowner (much like Tolstoy), who works alongside the peasants in the fields and seeks to reform their lives. Tolstoy not only drew from his own life experiences but also created characters in his own image, such as Pierre Bezukhov and Prince Andrei in War and Peace , Levin in Anna Karenina and to some extent, Prince Nekhlyudov in Resurrection .

Richard Pevear , who translated many of Tolstoy's works, said of Tolstoy's signature style, "His works are full of provocation and irony, and written with broad and elaborately developed rhetorical devices." [ 42 ] The Power of Darkness 2015 at Vienna's Akademietheater War and Peace is generally thought to be one of the greatest novels ever written, remarkable for its dramatic breadth and unity. Its vast canvas includes 580 characters, many historical with others fictional. The story moves from family life to the headquarters of Napoleon , from the court of Alexander I of Russia to the battlefields of Austerlitz and Borodino . Tolstoy's original idea for the novel was to investigate the causes of the Decembrist revolt , to which it refers only in the last chapters, from which can be deduced that Andrei Bolkonsky 's son will become one of the Decembrists. The novel explores Tolstoy's theory of history, and in particular the insignificance of individuals such as Napoleon and Alexander. Somewhat surprisingly, Tolstoy did not consider War and Peace to be a novel (nor did he consider many of the great Russian fictions written at that time to be novels). This view becomes less surprising if one considers that Tolstoy was a novelist of the realist school who considered the novel to be a framework for the examination of social and political issues in nineteenth-century life.

[ 43 ] War and Peace (which is to Tolstoy really an epic in prose) therefore did not qualify. Tolstoy called Anna Karenina his first novel.

[ 44 ] After Anna Karenina , Tolstoy concentrated on Christian themes, and his later novels such as The Death of Ivan Ilyich (1886) and What Is to Be Done?

develop a radical anarcho-pacifist Christian philosophy which led to his excommunication from the Russian Orthodox Church in 1901.

[ 45 ] After his religious conversion, Tolstoy came to reject most modern Western culture, including his novels War and Peace and Anna Karenina , as elitist "counterfeit art" with different aims from the Christian art of universal brotherly love he sought to express.

[ 46 ] In his novel Resurrection , Tolstoy attempts to expose the injustice of man-made laws and the hypocrisy of an institutionalized church. Tolstoy also explores and explains the economic philosophy of Georgism , of which he had become a very strong advocate towards the end of his life.

Tolstoy also tried writing poetry, with several soldier songs written during his military service, and fairy tales in verse such as Volga-bogatyr and Oaf stylized as national folk songs. They were written between 1871 and 1874 for his Russian Book for Reading , a collection of short stories in four volumes (total of 629 stories in various genres) published along with the New Azbuka textbook and addressed to schoolchildren. Nevertheless, he was skeptical about poetry as a genre. As he famously said, "Writing poetry is like ploughing and dancing at the same time." According to Valentin Bulgakov , he criticised poets, including Alexander Pushkin , for their "false" epithets used "simply to make it rhyme." [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Critical appraisal by other authors Tolstoy's contemporaries paid him lofty tributes.

Fyodor Dostoyevsky , who died thirty years before Tolstoy, admired and was delighted by Tolstoy's novels (and, conversely, Tolstoy also admired Dostoyevsky's work).

[ 49 ] Gustave Flaubert , on reading a translation of War and Peace , exclaimed, "What an artist and what a psychologist!" Anton Chekhov , who often visited Tolstoy at his country estate, wrote, "When literature possesses a Tolstoy, it is easy and pleasant to be a writer; even when you know you have achieved nothing yourself and are still achieving nothing, this is not as terrible as it might otherwise be, because Tolstoy achieves for everyone. What he does serves to justify all the hopes and aspirations invested in literature." The 19th-century British poet and critic Matthew Arnold wrote that "A novel by Tolstoy is not a work of art but a piece of life." [ 2 ] Isaac Babel said that "if the world could write by itself, it would write like Tolstoy." [ 2 ] Later novelists continued to appreciate Tolstoy's art, but sometimes also expressed criticism.

Arthur Conan Doyle wrote, "I am attracted by his earnestness and by his power of detail, but I am repelled by his looseness of construction and by his unreasonable and impracticable mysticism." [ 50 ] Virginia Woolf declared him "the greatest of all novelists." [ 2 ] James Joyce noted that, "He is never dull, never stupid, never tired, never pedantic, never theatrical!" Thomas Mann wrote of Tolstoy's seemingly guileless artistry: "Seldom did art work so much like nature." Vladimir Nabokov heaped superlatives upon The Death of Ivan Ilyich and Anna Karenina ; he questioned, however, the reputation of War and Peace and sharply criticized Resurrection and The Kreutzer Sonata . However, Nabokov called Tolstoy the "greatest Russian writer of prose fiction".

[ 51 ] Critic Harold Bloom called Hadji Murat "my personal touchstone for the sublime in prose fiction, to me the best story in the world." [ 52 ] When William Faulkner was asked to list what he thought were the three greatest novels, he replied: " Anna Karenina, Anna Karenina , and Anna Karenina ".

[ 10 ] Critic Gary Saul Morson referred to War and Peace as the greatest of all novels.

[ 11 ] Ethical, political and religious beliefs Schopenhauer After reading Schopenhauer 's The World as Will and Representation , Tolstoy gradually became converted to the ascetic morality upheld in that work as the proper spiritual path for the upper classes. In 1869 he writes: "Do you know what this summer has meant for me? Constant raptures over Schopenhauer and a whole series of spiritual delights which I've never experienced before....no student has ever studied so much on his course, and learned so much, as I have this summer." [ 53 ] In Chapter VI of Confession , Tolstoy quoted the final paragraph of Schopenhauer's work. It explains how a complete denial of self causes only a relative nothingness which is not to be feared. Tolstoy was struck by the description of Christian, Buddhist, and Hindu ascetic renunciation as being the path to holiness. After reading passages such as the following, which abound in Schopenhauer's ethical chapters, the Russian nobleman chose poverty and formal denial of the will: But this very necessity of involuntary suffering (by poor people) for eternal salvation is also expressed by that utterance of the Savior ( Matthew 19:24 ): "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God." Therefore, those who were greatly in earnest about their eternal salvation, chose voluntary poverty when fate had denied this to them and they had been born in wealth. Thus Buddha Sakyamuni was born a prince, but voluntarily took to the mendicant's staff; and Francis of Assisi , the founder of the mendicant orders who, as a youngster at a ball, where the daughters of all the notabilities were sitting together, was asked: "Now Francis, will you not soon make your choice from these beauties?" and who replied: "I have made a far more beautiful choice!" "Whom?" " La povertà (poverty)": whereupon he abandoned every thing shortly afterwards and wandered through the land as a mendicant.

[ 54 ] Christianity In 1884, Tolstoy wrote a book called What I Believe , in which he openly confessed his Christian beliefs. He affirmed his belief in Jesus Christ's teachings and was particularly influenced by the Sermon on the Mount , and the injunction to turn the other cheek , which he understood as a "commandment of non-resistance to evil by force" and a doctrine of pacifism and nonviolence . In his work The Kingdom of God Is Within You , he explains that he considered mistaken the Church's doctrine because they had made a "perversion" of Christ's teachings. Tolstoy also received letters from American Quakers who introduced him to the non-violence writings of Quaker Christians such as George Fox , William Penn , and Jonathan Dymond . Later, various versions of "Tolstoy's Bible" were published, indicating the passages Tolstoy most relied on, specifically, the reported words of Jesus himself.

[ 55 ] Mohandas K. Gandhi and other residents of Tolstoy Farm , South Africa, 1910 Tolstoy believed that a true Christian could find lasting happiness by striving for inner perfection through following the Great Commandment of loving one's neighbor and God, rather than guidance from the Church or state. Another distinct attribute of his philosophy based on Christ's teachings is nonresistance during conflict. This idea in Tolstoy's book The Kingdom of God Is Within You directly influenced Mahatma Gandhi and therefore also nonviolent resistance movements to this day.

Tolstoy believed that the aristocracy was a burden on the poor.

[ 56 ] He opposed private land ownership and the institution of marriage, and valued chastity and sexual abstinence (discussed in Father Sergius and his preface to The Kreutzer Sonata ), ideals also held by the young Gandhi. Tolstoy's passion from the depth of his austere moral views is reflected in his later work.

[ 57 ] One example is the sequence of the temptation of Sergius in Father Sergius .

Maxim Gorky relates how Tolstoy once read this passage before him and Chekhov, and Tolstoy was moved to tears by the end of the reading. Later passages of rare power include the personal crises faced by the protagonists of The Death of Ivan Ilyich , and of Master and Man , where the main character in the former and the reader in the latter are made aware of the foolishness of the protagonists' lives.

In 1886, Tolstoy wrote to the Russian explorer and anthropologist Nicholas Miklouho-Maclay , who was one of the first anthropologists to refute polygenism , the view that the different races of mankind belonged to different species: "You were the first to demonstrate beyond question by your experience that man is man everywhere, that is, a kind, sociable being with whom communication can and should be established through kindness and truth, not guns and spirits." [ 58 ] Christian anarchism This article is part of a series on Christian socialism Variants Christian anarchism Christian communism Catholic Camilism Calderonism Distributism Concepts Liberation theology Latin American Black Dalit Palestinian Theology of struggle Personalism Popular front Postcolonial theology Separation of church and state Two kingdoms doctrine History Diggers Antigonish Movement Tolstoyan movement Social Gospel movement People Abe Arrupe Betto Boer Bruenig Bulgakov Câmara Cardenal Cardenal Coady Cone Costa Day Dimakos Douglas Eagleton Everard Freire Guterres Gutiérrez Hart Hedges Johnson Katayama King Kingsley MacIntyre Maurice Müntzer Nyerere Péguy Pintassilgo Rhodakanaty Scholl Sölle Seassaro Tawney Temple Thomas Torres Tolstoy Tompkins West Wilson Winstanley Peron Major writings Sermon on the Mount Matthew 6:24 Cleansing of the Temple Jesus and the rich young man Acts 2 Epistle of James The Kingdom of God Is Within You Pedagogy of the Oppressed A Theology of Liberation Political parties AGROunia Christian Democracy Canadian Socialist League Christian Social Party (Netherlands) Christian Socialist Party (Hungary) Christian Workers' Union of Finland Citizen Left Community Democratic League Parti du socialisme chrétien Party of Christian Socialists Party of the Christian Left Popular Unitary Action Movement Samoobrona Social Christian Party Social Christians Social-Democratic Party of Wisconsin League of Christian Socialists Workers' Political Movement Organizations Catholic Worker Movement newspaper Christians for National Liberation Christians for Socialism Christians on the Left Christian Socialist Fellowship Covenant of Religious Socialists of Germany Guild of St Matthew Montoneros National Liberation Army PAX Association Sandinistas Society of Christian Socialists United Front of the People Labour Church The Left in the Church of Sweden Related topics Catholic social teaching Social teachings of the papacy Option for the poor Universal destination of goods Social mortgage Catholicism and socialism Christian left Social gospel Sabbath economics Early Christian community of goods Koinonia Omnia sunt communia United Order Christian humanism Christianity portal Socialism portal v t e Tolstoy had a profound influence on the development of Christian anarchist thought.

[ 59 ] Tolstoy believed being a Christian required him to be a pacifist; the apparently inevitable waging of war by governments is why he is considered a philosophical anarchist. The Tolstoyans were a small Christian anarchist group formed by Tolstoy's companion, Vladimir Chertkov (1854–1936), to spread Tolstoy's religious teachings. From 1892, he regularly met with the student-activist Vasily Maklakov who would defend several Tolstoyans; they discussed the fate of the Doukhobors . Philosopher Peter Kropotkin wrote of Tolstoy in the article on anarchism in the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica : Without naming himself an anarchist, Leo Tolstoy, like his predecessors in the popular religious movements of the 15th and 16th centuries, Chojecki , Denk and many others, took the anarchist position as regards the state and property rights , deducing his conclusions from the general spirit of the teachings of Jesus and from the necessary dictates of reason.

With all the might of his talent, Tolstoy made (especially in The Kingdom of God Is Within You ) a powerful criticism of the church, the state and law altogether, and especially of the present property laws .
He describes the state as the domination of the wicked ones, supported by brutal force.
Robbers, he says, are far less dangerous than a well-organized government.
He makes a searching criticism of the prejudices which are current now concerning the benefits conferred upon men by the church, the state, and the existing distribution of property, and from the teachings of Jesus he deduces the rule of nonresistance and the absolute condemnation of all wars.

His religious arguments are, however, so well combined with arguments borrowed from a dispassionate observation of the present evils, that the anarchist portions of his works appeal to the religious and the non-religious reader alike.

[ 60 ] Tolstoy organising famine relief in Samara, 1891 Film by Aleksandr Osipovich Drankov of Tolstoy's 80th birthday (1908) at Yasnaya Polyana, showing his wife Sofya (picking flowers in the garden) daughter Aleksandra (sitting in the carriage in the white blouse); his aide and confidante V. Chertkov (bald man with the beard and mustache); and students.

In hundreds of essays over the last 20 years of his life, Tolstoy reiterated the anarchist critique of the state and recommended books by Kropotkin and Proudhon to his readers, while rejecting anarchism's espousal of violent revolutionary means . In the 1900 essay, "On Anarchy," he wrote: "The Anarchists are right in everything; in the negation of the existing order, and in the assertion that, without Authority, there could not be worse violence than that of Authority under existing conditions. They are mistaken only in thinking that Anarchy can be instituted by a revolution. But it will be instituted only by there being more and more people who do not require the protection of governmental power ... There can be only one permanent revolution – a moral one: the regeneration of the inner man." Despite his misgivings about anarchist violence , Tolstoy took risks to circulate the prohibited publications of anarchist thinkers in Russia , and corrected the proofs of Kropotkin's "Words of a Rebel", illegally published in St Petersburg in 1906.

[ 61 ] Tolstoy in his study in 1908 (age 80) Pacificism In 1908, Tolstoy wrote A Letter to a Hindu , [ 62 ] outlining his belief in non-violence as a means for India to gain independence from colonial rule . In 1909, Gandhi read a copy of the letter when he was becoming an activist in South Africa. He wrote to Tolstoy seeking proof that he was the author, which led to further correspondence.

[ 24 ] Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is Within You also helped to convince Gandhi of nonviolent resistance , a debt Gandhi acknowledged in his autobiography, calling Tolstoy "the greatest apostle of non-violence that the present age has produced". Their correspondence lasted only a year, from October 1909 until Tolstoy's death in November 1910, but led Gandhi to give the name Tolstoy Colony to his second ashram in South Africa.

[ 63 ] Both men also believed in the merits of vegetarianism , the subject of several of Tolstoy's essays.

[ 64 ] The Boxer Rebellion stirred Tolstoy's interest in Chinese philosophy.

[ 65 ] He was a famous sinophile , and read the works of Confucius [ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] and Laozi . Tolstoy wrote Chinese Wisdom and other texts about China. Tolstoy corresponded with the Chinese intellectual Gu Hongming and recommended that China remain an agrarian nation, and not reform as Japan had done. Tolstoy and Gu opposed the Hundred Days' Reform by Kang Youwei and believed that the reform movement was perilous.

[ 69 ] Tolstoy's ideology of non-violence shaped the thought of the Chinese anarchist group Society for the Study of Socialism.

[ 70 ] Tolstoy denounced the intervention by the Eight-Nation Alliance (which included Russia) in the Boxer Rebellion in China , [ 71 ] [ 72 ] the Filipino-American War , and the Second Boer War .

[ 73 ] Tolstoy praised the Boxer Rebellion and harshly criticized the atrocities of the Russian, German, American, Japanese, and other troops of the Eight-Nation alliance. He heard about the looting, rapes, and murders, and accused the troops of slaughter and "Christian brutality." He named the monarchs most responsible for the atrocities as Tsar Nicholas II and Kaiser Wilhelm II .

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] He described the intervention as "terrible for its injustice and cruelty".

[ 76 ] The war was also criticized by other intellectuals such as Leonid Andreyev and Gorky. As part of the criticism, Tolstoy wrote an epistle called To the Chinese people .

[ 77 ] In 1902, he wrote an open letter describing and denouncing Nicholas II's activities in China.

[ 78 ] Tolstoy also became a major supporter of the Esperanto movement. He was impressed by the pacifist beliefs of the Doukhobors and brought their persecution to the attention of the international community, after they burned their weapons in peaceful protest in 1895.

[ 79 ] He aided the Doukhobors to migrate to Canada.

[ 80 ] He also provided inspiration to the Mennonites , another religious group with anti-government and anti-war sentiments.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] In 1904, Tolstoy condemned the ensuing Russo-Japanese War and wrote to the Japanese Buddhist priest Soyen Shaku in a failed attempt to make a joint pacifist statement.

Georgism Towards the end of his life, Tolstoy became occupied with the economic theory and social philosophy of Georgism .

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] He incorporated it approvingly into works such as Resurrection (1899), the book that was a major cause for his excommunication.

[ 86 ] He spoke with great admiration of Henry George , stating once that "People do not argue with the teaching of George; they simply do not know it. And it is impossible to do otherwise with his teaching, for he who becomes acquainted with it cannot but agree." [ 87 ] He also wrote a preface to George's journal Social Problems .

[ 88 ] Tolstoy and George both rejected private property in land (the most important source of income for Russian aristocracy that Tolstoy heavily criticized). They also rejected a centrally planned economy . Because Georgism requires an administration to collect land rent and spend it on infrastructure, some assume that this embrace moved Tolstoy away from his anarchist views; however, anarchist versions of Georgism have been proposed since then.

[ 89 ] Resurrection , in which the nobleman Dmitri Ivanovich Nekhlyudov realizes that the earth cannot really be owned and that everyone should have equal access to its resources and advantages, hints that Tolstoy had such a view. Other works, such as Tolstoy's unfinished play The Light that Shines in the Darkness and the short story "How Much Land Does a Man Need?”, suggest Tolstoy's approval of small communities with local governance to manage the collective land rents for common goods, and heavily criticize state institutions such as the justice system .

Hunting Tolstoy was introduced to hunting by his father, who was an avid huntsman.

[ 90 ] He was trained to hunt from a young age and became a passionate huntsman himself. He was known to shoot duck , quail , snipe, woodcock and otters.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] For example, Tolstoy wrote in his diary on 23 March 1852, "the weather was marvellous; went out hunting, rode up and down the undulating country till one. Killed two ducks." [ 93 ] His novel War and Peace includes hunting scenes.

[ 90 ] Tolstoy spent decades hunting, but stopped sometime in the 1880s and became a staunch opponent of hunting due to ethical concerns about killing.

[ 94 ] In 1890 Tolstoy wrote a preface for Vladimir Chertkov 's anti-hunting pamphlet Zlaia zabava: Mysli ob okhote (An Evil Pastime: Thoughts about Hunting).

[ 95 ] Although Tolstoy in his later life opposed hunting, he never abandoned his love for horse-riding .

[ 90 ] Vegetarianism Tolstoy first became interested in vegetarianism in 1882; however, his conversion to a vegetarian diet was a long and gradual process.

[ 94 ] William Fay (Vladimir Konstantinovich Geins), who visited Tolstoy in Autumn 1885,  influenced Tolstoy to become vegetarian.

[ 94 ] In 1887, Tolstoy was lapsing from a vegetarian diet by occasionally eating meat .

[ 94 ] It was only from 1890 that Tolstoy adopted a strict vegetarian diet which he was alleged to have never consciously betrayed.

[ 94 ] Tolstoy's wife Sophia argued that his vegetarian diet did not provide him enough nourishment and contributed to his digestive ailments, however, Tolstoy stated that his health was not deprived on the diet but had improved.

[ 94 ] Critics of Tolstoy such as I. S. Listovsky suggested that Tolstoy's writing talent went into decline after he adopted a meatless diet.

[ 94 ] Tolstoy became a vegetarian for ethical and spiritual reasons, associating a meatless diet with "high moral views on life".

[ 94 ] He viewed both hunting and eating meat as a moral evil as they involve unnecessary cruelty to animals and regretted his former habits.

[ 94 ] In 1891, Tolstoy obtained a copy of Howard Williams 's book The Ethics of Diet from Chertkov. His daughters translated the book into Russian and Tolstoy wrote an introductory essay titled " The First Step ", published in 1893.

[ 96 ] In his introductory essay, he described a cruel experience he had witnessed at a visit to a slaughterhouse in Tula. The cruelty he had witnessed confirmed his belief that meat should be removed from the diet.

[ 94 ] In the essay he wrote that meat eating is "simply immoral, as it involves the performance of an act which is contrary to moral feeling – killing".

[ 97 ] Whilst on his vegetarian diet, Tolstoy was eating eggs daily but was questioned by one of his friends if eating eggs amounts to taking life. He commented that "Yes, I ought to have stopped taking eggs. At least from now I shall stop it".

[ 98 ] By 1903, Tolstoy had removed eggs from his diet.

Vasily Rozanov who had visited Tolstoy noted that vegetarianism was a way of living for Tolstoy and at the dinner table surrounded by family and guests who were eating meat and scrambled eggs, Tolstoy was eating kasha .

[ 99 ] In a letter to A. D. Zutphen (a Dutch medical student), Tolstoy wrote that "My health not only has not suffered; it has in fact improved significantly since I have given up milk, butter and eggs, as well as sugar, tea, and coffee." [ 95 ] Tolstoy described his vegetarian diet consisting of oatmeal porridge, whole wheat bread, cabbage or potato soup, buckwheat , a boiled or fried potato and an apple prune compote .

[ 100 ] Death Tolstoy's grave with flowers at Yasnaya Polyana Tolstoy died on 20 November 1910 at the age of 82. Just before his death, his health was of concern to his family, who cared for him daily. In his last days, he spoke and wrote about dying. Renouncing his aristocratic lifestyle, he left home one winter night.

[ 101 ] His secretive departure was an apparent attempt to escape from his wife's tirades. She spoke out against many of his teachings, and in recent years had grown envious of his attention to Tolstoyan followers. Tolstoy died of pneumonia , [ 102 ] at Astapovo railway station, after a day's train journey south.

[ 103 ] The stationmaster took Tolstoy to his apartment, and his personal doctors arrived and gave him injections of morphine and camphor . The police took extra precautions to minimize dissent during the funeral ceremonies. They were inconspicuous but looming during the funeral itself, which two thousand people attended without incident. Three choirs sang. There were no eulogies, per the family's request, although 100 students had asked to speak.

[ 104 ] According to some sources, Tolstoy spent the last hours of his life preaching love, non-violence, and Georgism to fellow passengers on the train.

[ 86 ] Legacy Statue of Tolstoy in Castlegar, British Columbia Bust of Tolstoy in Mariupol , Ukraine, 2011 Bust of Tolstoy in Montevideo , Uruguay Although Tolstoy was primarily regarded as a Christian anarchist , his ideas and works still influenced other socialist thinkers throughout history. He held an unromantic view of governments as being essentially violent forces held together by intimidation from state authority, corruption on behalf of officials, and the indoctrination of people from a young age.

[ 105 ] In regard to his view of economics, he advocated for a return to subsistence agriculture .

[ 106 ] In his view, a simplified economy would afford a lesser need for the exchange of goods, and as such, factories and cities – the centers of industry – would become obsolete.

[ 106 ] In 1944, literary historian and Soviet medievalist Nikolai Gudzii wrote a biography of Tolstoy that spanned 80 pages. It was designed to show readers that Tolstoy would have revised his pacifistic and anti-patriotic sentiments if he were alive amid World War II.

[ 107 ] At around the same time, literary scholar and historian Boris Eikhenbaum – in a stark contrast from his earlier works on Tolstoy – portrayed the Russian novelist as someone whose ideas aligned with those of early utopian socialists , such as Robert Owen and Henri Saint-Simon . Eikenbaum suggested that these influences can be seen in Tolstoy's emphases on individual happiness and peasant welfare.

[ 108 ] The discrepancies in Eikenbaum's portrayals of Tolstoy can be attributed to the political pressure in Soviet Russia at the time, when public officials pressured literary scholars to conform with party doctrine.

[ 108 ] In Soviet Russia From Tolstoy's writings the Tolstoyan movement was birthed, and its members used his works to promote non-violence, anti-urbanism and opposition to the state.

[ 109 ] While Tolstoy himself never associated with the movement, as he was opposed to joining any organization or group, he named his thirteenth child Alexandra (Sasha) L'vovna Tolstaya the heir to his works with the intention that she would publish them for the Russian people.

[ 109 ] Meanwhile, Tolstoy designated Vladimir Chertkov – who kept many of Tolstoy's manuscripts – as the editor of his works. Originally, Tolstoy wanted to make the Russian people the heirs to his writings; however, Russian law at the time decreed that property could only be inherited by one individual.

[ 109 ] Following the Russian Civil War in 1917, writings that were formerly censored could now be published, since all literary works were nationalized in November 1918.

[ 109 ] Alexandra worked during these years to publish sets of Tolstoy's works, and she worked with Zadruga Publishing House from 1917 to 1919 to publish thirteen booklets on Tolstoy's writings, which had previously been censored under Russia's imperial rule; however, publishing a complete collection of Tolstoy's works proved to be more difficult. In December 1918, the Commissariat of Education granted Chertkov a 10 million rouble subsidy to publish a complete edition of his works, which never materialized due to government control of publication rights.

[ 109 ] Cooperatives were additionally made illegal in Russia in 1921, creating another obstacle for Alexandra and Chertkov.

[ 109 ] In the 1920s, Tolstoy's estate, Yasnaya Polyana , was sanctioned by the Soviet state to exist as a commune for Tolstoyans. The government permitted this Christian-oriented community because they felt that religious sects like the Tolstoyans were models for the Russian peasantry.

[ 109 ] The Soviet government owned the estate, which was deemed a memorial for the late Russian writer, but Alexandra had jurisdiction over the education offered at Yasnaya Polyana. Unlike most Soviet schools, the schooling at Yasnaya Polyana did not offer militaristic training and did not teach atheism. Over time, though, local communists – as opposed to the state government, which financially supported the institution – often denounced the estate and called for frequent inspections. After 1928, a change in cultural policy in the Soviet regime led to a takeover of local institutions, including Tolstoy's estate. When Alexandra stepped down from her role as head of Yasnaya Poliana in 1929, the Commissariat of Education and Health took control.

[ 109 ] In 1925, the Soviet government created its first Jubilee Committee to celebrate the centennial of Tolstoy's birth, which originally consisted of 13 members but grew to 38 members after a second committee formed in 1927.

[ 109 ] Alexandra was not content with the funds provided by the government and met with Stalin in June 1928. During the meeting, Stalin said the government could not provide the one million roubles requested by the committee; [ 109 ] however, an agreement was reached with the State Publishing House in April 1928 for the publishing of a 92-volume collection of Tolstoy's works.

[ 109 ] During the Jubilee Celebration, Anatoly Luncharsky – the head of the People's Commissariat for Education – gave a speech in which he denied reports that claimed the Soviet government was hostile towards Tolstoy and his legacy. Instead of focusing on the aspects of Tolstoy's works that pitted him against the Soviet regime, he instead focused on the unifying aspects, such as Tolstoy's love for equality and labor as well as his disdain for the state and private property.

[ 109 ] More than 400 million copies of Tolstoy's works were printed in the Soviet Union, making him the best-selling author in Soviet Russia.

[ 110 ] Influence Vladimir Lenin wrote several essays about Tolstoy, suggesting that a contradiction exists within his critique of Russian society.
According to Lenin, Tolstoy – who adored the peasantry and voiced their discontent with imperial Russian society – may have been revolutionary in his critiques but his political consciousness was not fully developed for a revolution.

[ 111 ] Lenin uses this line of thinking to suggest that the 1905 Russian Revolution , which he called a "peasant bourgeois revolution", failed because of its backwardness; the revolutionaries wanted to dismantle the existing medieval forms of oppression and replace them with an old and patriarchal village-commune.

[ 111 ] Additionally, Lenin thought Tolstoy's concept of nonresistance to evil hindered the 1905 revolution's success because the movement was not militant and had thus allowed the autocracy to crush them.

[ 111 ] Nevertheless, Lenin concludes in his writings that despite the many contradictions in Tolstoy's critiques, his hatred for feudalism and capitalism mark the prelude to proletarian socialism.

[ 111 ] Tolstoy's philosophy of nonresistance to evil made an impact on Mahatma Gandhi 's political thinking.
Gandhi was deeply moved by Tolstoy's concept of truth, which, in his view, constitutes any doctrine that reduces suffering.

[ 112 ] For both Gandhi and Tolstoy, truth is God, and since God is universal love, truth must therefore also be universal love. The Gujarati word for Gandhi's non-violent movement is satyagraha , derived from the word sadagraha – the sat portion translating to "truth", and the agraha translating to "firmness".

[ 112 ] Gandhi's conception of satyagraha was birthed from Tolstoy's understanding of Christianity rather than from Hindu tradition.

[ 112 ] In film and television The Death of Ivan Ilyich was adapted by Akira Kurosawa as Ikiru (1952).

[ 113 ] It was also the basis for Living (2022), with a screenplay by Kazuo Ishiguro . In the George Lucas television show The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles , later retitled The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones, a fictional Tolstoy appears as a mentor figure and friend of Indiana Jones . In the made-for-TV movie Travels with Father (1996), he is portrayed by Michael Gough .

[ 114 ] A 2009 film about Tolstoy's final year, The Last Station , based on the 1990 novel by Jay Parini , was made by director Michael Hoffman with Christopher Plummer as Tolstoy and Helen Mirren as Sofya Tolstoya. Both performers were nominated for Oscars for their roles. There have been other films about the writer, including Departure of a Grand Old Man , made in 1912 just two years after his death, How Fine, How Fresh the Roses Were (1913), and Lev Tolstoy , directed by and starring Sergei Gerasimov in 1984. There is also a famous lost film of Tolstoy made a decade before he died. In 1901, the American travel lecturer Burton Holmes visited Yasnaya Polyana with Albert J. Beveridge , the U.S. senator and historian. As the three men conversed, Holmes filmed Tolstoy with his 60-mm movie camera. Afterwards, Beveridge's advisers succeeded in having the film destroyed, fearing that the meeting with the Russian author might hurt Beveridge's chances of running for the U.S. presidency.

[ 115 ] Bibliography Main article: Leo Tolstoy bibliography See also Anarchism and religion Christian vegetarianism Leo Tolstoy and Theosophy List of peace activists Henry David Thoreau War & Peace (2016 TV series) Notes ^ In this name that follows East Slavic naming customs , the patronymic is Nikolayevich and the family name is Tolstoy .  Tolstoy pronounced his first name as [lʲɵf] , which corresponds to the romanization Lyov . ( Nabokov, Vladimir.

Lectures on Russian literature . p. 216.

) ^ Throughout Tolstoy's whole life, his name was written as Левъ Николаевичъ Толстой using pre-reform Russian orthography .

Citations ^ "Tolstoy" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

"Tolstoy" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Leo Tolstoy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2018 . Retrieved 4 September 2018 .

^ a b Burt, Daniel S.

(2009).

The Literary 100, Revised Edition: A Ranking of the Most Influential Novelists, Playwrights, and Poets of All Time . Facts On File. pp.

13– 16.

^ a b Popova, Maria (30 January 2012).

"The Greatest Books of All Time, as Voted by 125 Famous Authors" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2020 . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

^ Beard, Mary (5 November 2013).

"Facing death with Tolstoy" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2023 . Retrieved 4 September 2018 .

^ Hellman, Martin E.

"Resist Not Evil" . Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2012 . Retrieved 6 September 2023 .

Originally published in Gandhi, Arun , ed. (1994).

World Without Violence . M. K. Gandhi Institute for Nonviolence.

^ Monk, Ray (1991).

Ludwig Wittgenstein: the duty of genius . New York: Penguin Books. p. 115 et passim.

ISBN 978-0-14-015995-0 .

^ King, Martin Luther Jr.; Carson, Clayborne; et al. (2005).

The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr . Vol. V: Threshold of a New Decade, January 1959 – December 1960. University of California Press. pp. 149, 269, 248.

ISBN 978-0-520-24239-5 .

^ The Children , 1999, David Halberstam ^ a b Tolstoy, Leo (2023).

"First Recollections" .

New England Review .

44 (2): 180– 182.

doi : 10.1353/ner.2023.a901453 .

ISSN 2161-9131 .

^ a b Morson, Gary Saul (2019).

"The greatest of all novels" .

The New Criterion .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

^ Hedin, Naboth (1 October 1950).

"Winning the Nobel Prize" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2020 . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

^ Lichtman, Marshall A. (31 July 2022).

"Controversies in Selecting Nobel Laureates: An Historical Commentary" .

Rambam Maimonides Medical Journal .

13 (3): e0022.

doi : 10.5041/RMMJ.10479 .

ISSN 2076-9172 .

PMC 9345763 .

PMID 35921488 .

^ Bartlett, Rosamund (2011).

Tolstoy: A Russian Life . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0547545875 .

^ a b c d Vitold Rummel, Vladimir Golubtsov (1886) .

Genealogical Collection of Russian Noble Families in 2 Volumes. Volume 2 Archived 12 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine – The Tolstoys, Counts and Noblemen. Saint Petersburg: A.S. Suvorin Publishing House, p. 487 ^ a b Ivan Bunin , The Liberation of Tolstoy: A Tale of Two Writers , p. 100 ^ Troyat, Henri (2001).

Tolstoy . Grove Press.

ISBN 978-0-8021-3768-5 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Robinson, Harlow (6 November 1983).

"Six Centuries of Tolstoys" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2017 . Retrieved 10 February 2017 .

^ Tolstoy coat of arms Archived 12 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine by All-Russian Armorials of Noble Houses of the Russian Empire. Part 2, 30 June 1798 (in Russian) ^ The Tolstoys Archived 6 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine article from Brockhaus and Efron Encyclopedic Dictionary , 1890–1907 (in Russian) ^ a b c d e f "Author Data Sheet, Macmillan Readers" (PDF) . Macmillan Publishers Limited. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 October 2010 .

^ a b " Ten Things You Didn't Know About Tolstoy Archived 19 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine ". BBC.

^ A.N. Wilson, Tolstoy (1988), p. 146 ^ a b Rajaram, M. (2009).

Thirukkural: Pearls of Inspiration . New Delhi: Rupa Publications. pp.

xviii– xxi.

ISBN 978-81-291-1467-9 .

^ a b Walsh, William (2018).

Secular Virtue: for surviving, thriving, and fulfillment . Will Walsh.

ISBN 978-06-920-5418-5 .

^ Tolstoy, Leo (14 December 1908).

"A Letter to A Hindu: The Subjection of India-Its Cause and Cure" . The Literature Network.

Archived from the original on 10 November 2006 . Retrieved 12 February 2012 .

The Hindu Kural ^ Parel, Anthony J.

(2002), "Gandhi and Tolstoy" , in M.P. Mathai; M.S. John; Siby K. Joseph (eds.), Meditations on Gandhi: a Ravindra Varma festschrift , New Delhi: Concept, pp.

96– 112 , retrieved 8 September 2012 ^ Tolstoy, Lev N. (1904).

The School at Yasnaya Polyana – The Complete Works of Count Tolstoy: Pedagogical Articles. Linen-Measurer, Volume IV . Translated by Wiener, Leo. Dana Estes & Company. p. 227.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ Wilson, A.N. (2001).

Tolstoy . W.W. Norton. p. xxi.

ISBN 978-0-393-32122-7 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ a b c Jacoby, Susan (19 April 1981).

"The Wife of the Genius" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2010 . Retrieved 30 August 2022 .

^ Feuer, Kathryn B.

Tolstoy and the Genesis of War and Peace , Cornell University Press, 1996, ISBN 0-8014-1902-6 ^ War and Peace and Sonya . Archived from the original on 23 December 2019 . Retrieved 8 July 2017 .

^ MacFarquhar, Larissa (2015).

Strangers Drowning : Impossible Idealism, Drastic Choices, and the Urge to Help .

Penguin Books . p. 277.

ISBN 9780143109785 .

^ Jørgen Haave , Familien Ibsen , Museumsforlaget, 2017, ISBN 9788283050455 ^ "Tanja Paus och Sonja Ceder till minne," Svenska Dagbladet , 11 March 2007 ^ Nikolaj Pavlovič Puzin, The Lev Tolstoy House-Museum In Yasnaya Polyana (with a list of Leo Tolstoy's descendants), 1998 ^ Vladimir Ilyich Tolstoy Archived 23 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine at the official Yasnaya Polyana website ^ "Persons ∙ Directory ∙ President of Russia" .

President of Russia .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2015 . Retrieved 27 February 2018 .

^ "Толстые / Телеканал "Россия – Культура" " .

tvkultura.ru . Archived from the original on 9 August 2013 . Retrieved 27 February 2018 .

^ Leo Tolstoy (1990), Government is Violence: essays on anarchism and pacifism . Phoenix Press.

^ Edward Crankshaw (1974), Tolstoy: The Making of a Novelist , Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

^ Tolstoy, L. (2011).

War and Peace (Vintage Classic Russians Series) . United Kingdom: Random House. p. xviii.

ISBN 978-1446484166 .

^ G. Lukacs. "Tolstoy and the Development of Realism".

Marxists on Literature: An Anthology , London: Penguin, 1977.

^ Christian, R. F. (2015).

Tolstoy's Letters, Volume 1: 1828–1879 . London: Faber & Faber. p. 261.

ISBN 9780571324071 . Retrieved 8 December 2024 .

^ L. Tolstoy, Church and State . – On Life and Essays on Religion, 1934.

^ Bartlett 2011 , p. 369.

^ Leo Tolstoy (1874) .

Russian Book for Reading in 4 Volumes Archived 22 March 2024 at the Wayback Machine .  Moscow: Aegitas, 381 pages.

^ Valentin Bulgakov (2017).

Diary of Leo Tolstoy's Secretary Archived 22 March 2024 at the Wayback Machine . Moscow: Zakharov, 352 pages, p. 29.

ISBN 978-5-8159-1435-3 .

^ Aimée Dostoyevskaya (1921).

Fyodor Dostoyevsky: A Study . Honolulu, Hawaii: University Press of the Pacific. p.

p. 218 .

^ Doyle, Arthur Conan (January 1898).

"My Favourite Novelist and His Best Book" .

Munsey's Magazine .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2017 . Retrieved 6 October 2017 .

^ Frank, Joseph (15 November 1981).

"Vladimir Nabokov Reads the Russian Masters" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

^ Bloom, Harold (1994).

The Western Canon . New York: Harcourt Brace .

^ Tolstoy's Letter to A.A. Fet, 30 August 1869 ^ Schopenhauer, Parerga and Paralipomena , Vol. II, § 170 ^ Orwin, Donna T.

The Cambridge Companion to Tolstoy . Cambridge University Press, 2002 ^ Andrew, Joe (18 June 1982).

Russian Writers and Society in the Second Half of the Nineteenth Century . Springer.

ISBN 978-1349044184 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 January 2022 .

^ Sommers, Aaron (8 September 2009).

"Why Leo Tolstoy Wouldn't Supersize It" . Coastlinejournal.com. Archived from the original on 23 November 2017 . Retrieved 16 May 2010 .

^ "Nicholas Maclay: Russian Polymath" .

Harbourtrust.gov.au . 29 September 2020.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2022 . Retrieved 10 August 2022 .

^ Christoyannopoulos, Alexandre (2009).

The Contemporary Relevance of Leo Tolstoy's Late Political Thought . International Political Science Association.

Tolstoy articulated his Christian anarchist political thought between 1880 and 1910, yet its continuing relevance should have become fairly self-evident already.

^ Kropotkin, Peter Alexeivitch (1911).

"Anarchism" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

914– 919, see page 918.

^ Woodcock, G.; Avakumović, I. (1990).

Peter Kropotkin: From Prince to Rebel .

^ Parel, Anthony J.

(2002), "Gandhi and Tolstoy" , in Mathai, M. P.; John, M.S.; Joseph, Siby K. (eds.), Meditations on Gandhi: a Ravindra Varma festschrift , New Delhi: Concept, pp.

96– 112 ^ Green, M. B. (1983).

Tolstoy and Gandhi, men of peace: a biography . Basic Books.

^ Tolstoy, Leo (1892).

"The First Step" .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 May 2016 .

... if [a man] be really and seriously seeking to live a good life, the first thing from which he will abstain will always be the use of animal food, because ... its use is simply immoral, as it involves the performance of an act which is contrary to the moral feeling – killing . Preface to the Russian translation of Howard William's The Ethics of Diet Archived 24 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bodde, Derk (1967).

Tolstoy and China . Johnson Reprint Corporation. pp. 25, 44, 107.

ISBN 9780384048959 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Lukin, Alexander (2003).

The Bear Watches the Dragon . M. E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0-7656-1026-3 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Tussing Orwin, Donna (2002).

The Cambridge companion to Tolstoy . Cambridge University Press. p. 37.

ISBN 978-0-521-52000-3 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Bodde, Derk (1950).

Tolstoy and China . Princeton University Press. p. 25.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

(Original from the University of Michigan) ^ Lee, Khoon Choy (2005).

Pioneers of Modern China: Understanding the Inscrutable Chinese . World Scientific. p. 10.

ISBN 978-981-256-618-8 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Campbell, Heather M. (2009).

The Britannica Guide to Political and Social Movements That Changed the Modern World . The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 194.

ISBN 978-1-61530-016-7 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Tussing Orwin, Donna (2002).

The Cambridge Companion to Tolstoy . Cambridge University Press. pp. 37–.

ISBN 978-0-521-52000-3 .

^ Tolstoy, Leo; Christian, Reginald Frank (1978).

Tolstoy's Letters: 1880–1910 . Continuum International Publishing Group, Limited. p. 580.

ISBN 978-0-485-71172-1 .

^ Apollon Davidson, Irina Filatova.

The Russians and the Anglo Boer War.

Cape Town: Human & Rousseau, 1998. p. 181 ^ Chamberlin, William Henry; Von Mohrenschildt, Dimitri Sergius (1960). Karpovich, Michael (ed.).

The Russian review . Vol. 19. Blackwell. p. 115.

(Original from the University of Michigan) ^ Moss, Walter G. (2008).

An age of progress?: clashing twentieth-century global forces . Anthem Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-84331-301-4 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Cohen, Robert S.; Stachel, J.J.; Wartofsky, Marx W. (1974).

For Dirk Struik: Scientific, Historical and Political Essays in Honour of Dirk J. Struik . Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 606–.

ISBN 978-90-277-0393-4 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Gamsa, Mark (2008).

The Chinese Translation of Russian Literature: Three Studies . Brill. pp. 14–.

ISBN 978-90-04-16844-2 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Flath, James; Smith, Norman (2011).

Beyond Suffering: Recounting War in Modern China . UBC Press. pp. 125–.

ISBN 978-0-7748-1957-2 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Bartolf, Christian / Dominique Miething: "Flame of Truth": the global significance of Doukhobor Pacifism.

Russian Journal of Church History . 2023;4(4):6-27.

https://doi.org/10.15829/2686-973X-2023-142 ^ Mays, H.G. (October–November 1999). "Resurrection: Tolstoy and Canada's Doukhobors".

The Beaver . No. 79. pp.

38– 44.

^ Kropotkin, Peter (March 1898).

"Some of the Resources of Canada" .

revoltlib.com . The Nineteenth Century. pp.

494– 514.

Archived from the original on 3 November 2019 . Retrieved 3 November 2019 .

^ Miller, Levi (1 January 1998).

"Leo Tolstoy and the Mennonites" .

jms.uwinnipeg.ca . Journal of Mennonite Studies.

Archived from the original on 3 November 2019 . Retrieved 3 November 2019 .

^ Redfearn, David.

Tolstoy: Principles For A New World Order .

^ "Tolstoy" .

www.wealthandwant.com .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2016 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 .

^ "Leo Tolstoy" .

Prosper Australia .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2015 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 .

^ a b Wenzer, Kenneth C. (October 1997). "Tolstoy's Georgist Spiritual Political Economy (1897–1910): Anarchism and Land Reform".

The American Journal of Economics and Sociology .

56 (4): 639– 667.

doi : 10.1111/j.1536-7150.1997.tb02664.x .

JSTOR 3487337 .

OCLC 5550194757 .

^ "A Great Iniquity", letter to The Times of London (1905).

^ Tolstoy, Leo.

"Preface to the book Social Problems by Henry George " . Archived from the original on 15 January 2013 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 .

^ Foldvary, Fred E.

(15 July 2001).

"Geoanarchism" . anti-state.com. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 April 2009 .

^ a b c Bartlett, Rosamund (2011).

Tolstoy: A Russian Life . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. pp. 37-38.

ISBN 978-0547545875 ^ Tolstoy, Sergei (1961).

Tolstoy Remembered by His Son . Weidenfeld and Nicolson. p. 73 ^ Citati, Pietro (1986).

Tolstoy . Schocken Books. p. 22, p. 153.

ISBN 978-0805240214 ^ Christian, Reginald Frank (1985).

Tolstoy's Diaries: Volume 1 . Athlone Press. p. 47 ^ a b c d e f g h i j LeBlanc, Ronald D.

Tolstoy's Way of No Flesh: Abstinence, Vegetarianism and Christian Physiology . In Musya Glants, Joyce Toomre (1997).

Food in Russian History and Culture . Indiana University Press. pp. 81-91.

ISBN 0-253-33252-4 ^ a b LeBlanc, Ronald D.

Tolstoy's Way of No Flesh: Abstinence, Vegetarianism and Christian Physiology . In Musya Glants, Joyce Toomre (1997).

Food in Russian History and Culture . Indiana University Press. p. 98.

ISBN 0-253-33252-4 ^ LeBlanc, Ronald D.

Tolstoy's Way of No Flesh: Abstinence, Vegetarianism and Christian Physiology . In Musya Glants, Joyce Toomre (1997).

Food in Russian History and Culture . Indiana University Press. pp. 99-100.

ISBN 0-253-33252-4 ^ Portmess, Lisa (1999).

Ethical Vegetarianism: From Pythagoras to Peter Singer . State University of New York Press. p. 97.

ISBN 0-7914-4043-5 ^ Satchidananda, Swami (1979).

Gospel of Swami Ramdas . Praja Printers Private. p. 202 ^ Glants, Musya; Toomre, Joyce (1997).

Introduction . In Food in Russian History and Culture . Indiana University Press. p. xvi.

ISBN 0-253-33252-4 ^ LeBlanc, Ronald Denis (2009).

Slavic Sins of the Flesh: Food, Sex, and Carnal Appetite in Nineteenth-Century Russian Fiction . University of New Hampshire Press. p. 279.

ISBN 978-1-58465-767-5 ^ The last days of Tolstoy . VG Chertkov. 1922. Heinemann ^ Leo Tolstoy . EJ Simmons – 1946 – Little, Brown and Company ^ Meek, James (22 July 2010).

"James Meek reviews 'The Death of Tolstoy' by William Nickell, 'The Diaries of Sofia Tolstoy' translated by Cathy Porter, 'A Confession' by Leo Tolstoy, translated by Anthony Briggs and 'Anniversary Essays on Tolstoy' by Donna Tussing Orwin · LRB 22 July 2010" .

London Review of Books . pp.

3– 8.

Archived from the original on 28 March 2013 . Retrieved 11 April 2013 .

^ Nickell 2011 , p.

125 .

^ Higgs, Robert (2015).

"Tolstoy's Manifesto on the State, Christian Anarchy, and Pacifism" .

The Independent Review .

19 (3): 471– 479.

ISSN 1086-1653 .

JSTOR 24564569 .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ a b McLean, Hugh (2008). "A Clash of Utopias".

In Quest of Tolstoy . Academic Studies Press. pp.

181– 194.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1zxsjx2.15 .

ISBN 978-1-934843-02-4 .

JSTOR j.ctt1zxsjx2.15 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

^ Emerson, Caryl (2016).

"Remarkable Tolstoy, from the Age of Empire to the Putin Era (1894–2006)" .

The Slavic and East European Journal .

60 (2): 252– 271.

doi : 10.30851/60.2.007 .

ISSN 0037-6752 .

JSTOR 26633177 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ a b Any, Carol (1990).

"Boris Eikhenbaum's Unfinished Work on Tolstoy: A Dialogue with Soviet History" .

PMLA .

105 (2): 233– 244.

doi : 10.2307/462559 .

ISSN 0030-8129 .

JSTOR 462559 .

S2CID 163911913 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Croskey, Robert M. (c. 2008).

The legacy of Tolstoy :Alexandra Tolstoy and the Soviet regime in the 1920s / . Donald W. Treadgold studies on Russia, East Europe, and Central Asia. Seattle.

hdl : 2027/mdp.39015080856431 .

ISBN 978-0295988771 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2024 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ New York Times February 15, 1987 ^ a b c d Boer, Roland (2014).

"Lenin on Tolstoy: Between Imaginary Resolution and Revolutionary Christian Communism" .

Science & Society .

78 (1): 41– 60.

doi : 10.1521/siso.2014.78.1.41 .

ISSN 0036-8237 .

JSTOR 24583606 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ a b c Gray, Stuart; Hughes, Thomas M. (2015).

"Gandhi's Devotional Political Thought" .

Philosophy East and West .

65 (2): 375– 400.

doi : 10.1353/pew.2015.0051 .

ISSN 0031-8221 .

JSTOR 43830813 .

S2CID 142595907 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ Simone, R. Thomas (1975).

"The Mythos of "The Sickness Unto Death" Kurosawa's "Ikiru" and Tolstoy's "The Death of Ivan Ilyich" " .

Literature/Film Quarterly .

3 (1): 2– 12.

JSTOR 43795380 . Retrieved 27 April 2024 .

^ "The Adventures of Young Indiana Jones: Travels with Father (1996)" .

The A.V. Club .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2023 . Retrieved 28 August 2023 .

^ Wallace, Irving, 'Everybody's Rover Boy', in The Sunday Gentleman . New York: Simon & Schuster, 1965. p. 117.

Further reading Bayley, John (1997).

Leo Tolstoy .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-07463-0744-1 .

Bloom, Harold, ed. (2009) [2003].

Leo Tolstoy .

Infobase Publishing .

ISBN 978-14381-1328-9 .

Dillon, Emile Joseph (1934).

Count Leo Tolstoy: A New Portrait . Hutchinson.

Moulin, Daniel (2014).

Leo Tolstoy .

Bloomsbury Publishing .

ISBN 978-14725-0484-5 .

Rowe, William W. (1986).

Leo Tolstoy .

Twayne Publishers .

ISBN 978-08057-6623-3 .

Simmons, Ernest Joseph (1946).

Leo Tolstoy .

Little, Brown and Company .

Zorin, Andrei (2020).

Leo Tolstoy . Reaktion Books.

ISBN 978-17891-4256-3 .

Craraft, James.

Two Shining Souls: Jane Addams, Leo Tolstoy, and the Quest for Global Peace (Lanham: Lexington, 2012). 179 pp.

Lednicki, Waclaw (April 1947).

"Tolstoy through American eyes" .

The Slavonic and East European Review .

25 (65).

Leon, Derrick (1944).

Tolstoy His Life and Work . London: Routledge.

Trotsky's 1908 tribute to Leo Tolstoy Published by the International Committee of the Fourth International (ICFI).

The Life of Tolstoy: Later years by Aylmer Maude , Dodd, Mead and Company, 1911 at Internet Archive Why We Fail As Christians by Robert Hunter, The Macmillan Company, 1919 at Google Books Nickell, William S. (2011).

The Death of Tolstoy: Russia on the Eve, Astapovo Station, 1910 . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-6254-2 .

External links Leo Tolstoy at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata The Complete Works of Count Tolstoy (28 volumes published by Dana Estes & Company at Internet Archive Works by Leo Tolstoy in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Leo Tolstoy at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Leo Tolstoy at the Internet Archive Works by Leo Tolstoy at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Leo Tolstoy at the Internet Book List Tolstoy by Romain Rolland Newspaper clippings about Leo Tolstoy in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Wright, Charles Theodore Hagberg (1911).

"Tolstoy, Leo" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

1053– 1061.

Waltz in F major ( Page on Russian Wikipedia ), Tolstoy's only known musical composition.

v t e Leo Tolstoy Bibliography Novels Childhood (1852) Boyhood (1854) Youth (1856) The Cossacks (1863) War and Peace (1869) Anna Karenina (1878) Resurrection (1899) Hadji Murat (1912) Novellas A Landowner's Morning (1856) Two Hussars (1856) Family Happiness (1859) Polikúshka (1860) The Death of Ivan Ilyich (1886) Walk in the Light While There is Light (1888) The Kreutzer Sonata (1889) The Devil (1889) Master and Man (1895) Father Sergius (1898) The Forged Coupon (1904) Short stories " The Raid " (1852) " The Cutting of the Forest " (1855) " Sevastopol Sketches " (1855) " Recollections of a Billiard-marker " (1855) " The Snowstorm " (1856) " Lucerne " (1857) " Albert " (1858) " Three Deaths " (1859) " The Porcelain Doll " (1863) " God Sees the Truth, But Waits " (1872) " The Prisoner of the Caucasus " (1872) " The Bear Hunt " (1872) " What Men Live By " (1881) " Diary of a Lunatic " (1884) " Quench the Spark " (1885) " An Old Acquaintance " (1885) " Where Love Is, God Is " (1885) " Ivan the Fool " (1885) " Evil Allures, But Good Endures " (1885) " Wisdom of Children " (1885) " The Three Hermits " (1886) " Promoting a Devil " (1886) " How Much Land Does a Man Need?

" (1886) " The Grain " (1886) " Repentance " (1886) " Croesus and Fate " (1886) " Kholstomer " (1886) " The Two Brothers and the Gold " (1886) " A Lost Opportunity " (1889) " A Dialogue Among Clever People " (1892) " The Coffee-House of Surat " (1893) " The Young Tsar " (1894) " Too Dear!

" (1897) " Work, Death, and Sickness " (1903) " Three Questions " (1903) " Alyosha the Pot " (1905) " After the Ball " (1911) Plays The Power of Darkness (1886) The First Distiller (1886) The Light Shines in the Darkness (1890) The Fruits of Enlightenment (1891) The Living Corpse (1900) The Cause of It All (1910) Non-fiction A History of Yesterday (1851) Confession (1882) The Gospel in Brief (1883) What I Believe (1884) What Is to Be Done?

(1886) " The First Step " (1891 essay) The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1894) What Is Art?

(1897) " A Letter to a Hindu " (1908) The Inevitable Revolution (1909) A Calendar of Wisdom (1910) Unfinished The Decembrists (1884) " Posthumous Notes of the Hermit Fëdor Kuzmich " (1905) Family Sophia (wife) Alexandra (daughter) Ilya (son) Lev Lvovich (son) Tatyana (daughter) Tatiana Tolstoy-Paus (granddaughter) Life and legacy Yasnaya Polyana Tolstoyan movement Christian anarchism Departure of a Grand Old Man (1912 film) Lev Tolstoy and the Russia of Nicholas II (1928 documentary) Lev Tolstoy (1984 film) The Last Station (1990 novel, 2009 film) Story of One Appointment (2018 film) A Couple (2022 film) Honors Tolstoy Farm Tolstoj quadrangle crater Related The Triumph of the Farmer or Industry and Parasitism (1888) Vladimir Chertkov Aylmer and Louise Maude Translators of Tolstoy Tolstoy scholars Category Associated subjects v t e Leo Tolstoy 's War and Peace (1869) Fictional characters Pierre Bezukhov Andrei Bolkonsky Natasha Rostova Marya Bolkonskaya Nikolai Rostov Hélène Kuragina Sonya Anatole Kuragin Petya Rostov All characters Historical characters Napoleon Mikhail Kutuzov Barclay de Tolly Pyotr Bagration Fyodor Rostopchin Alexander I of Russia Aleksey Petrovich Yermolov Events Napoleonic Wars Battle of Schöngrabern Battle of Austerlitz Treaties of Tilsit French invasion of Russia Battle of Borodino Fire of Moscow Battle of Krasnoi Great Comet of 1811 Film War and Peace (1915) War and Peace (1956) War and Peace (1966–67 series) TV War and Peace (1972 series) War and Peace (2007 miniseries) War & Peace (2016 series) Other adaptations War and Peace (1942 opera) Natasha, Pierre & The Great Comet of 1812 (2012 musical) Related War and Peace (1980 board game) War and Peace: 1796–1815 (2002 video game) v t e Leo Tolstoy 's Anna Karenina (1877) Film 1911 1914 1915 1918 1920 Love (1927) 1935 1948 1953 Panakkaari (1954) The River of Love (1960) 1961 1967 1975 1985 1997 2012 soundtrack Vronsky's Story (2017) TV series 1977 2000 The Beautiful Lie (2015) Volver a caer (2023) Stage 1978 opera 1992 musical 2005 ballet 2007 opera Related Android Karenina Anna Karenina principle Adaptations v t e Leo Tolstoy 's The Kreutzer Sonata (1889) Films The Kreutzer Sonata (1911) The Kreutzer Sonata (1915) The Kreutzer Sonata (1920) The Kreutzer Sonata (1922) The Kreutzer Sonata (1927) The Kreutzer Sonata (1937) Celos (1946) Prelude to Madness (1948) The Kreutzer Sonata (1987) The Kreutzer Sonata (2008) Other The Kreutzer Sonata (painting) String Quartet No. 1 v t e Leo Tolstoy 's Resurrection (1899) Film Resurrection (1909) Resurrection (1912) A Woman's Resurrection (1915) Resurrection (1918) Resurrection (1927) Resurrection (1931 Spanish) Resurrection (1931 English) We Live Again (1934) Resurrection (1943) Resurrection (1944) Resurrection (1958) Resurrection (1960) Anantha Rathriya (1996) Opera Risurrezione (1904) Vzkriesenie (1960) Other performances Redemption (1947) (radio) Related Siberia " Katyusha's Song " v t e Leo Tolstoy 's The Living Corpse Films The Weakness of Man (1916) Bigamy (1922) The Living Corpse (1929) Redemption (1930) Nights of Fire (1937) The Living Corpse (1968) v t e Leo Tolstoy 's " Father Sergius " (1911) Films Father Sergius (1918 Russian silent) Father Serge (1945 French) Father Sergius (1978 Soviet) The Sun Also Shines at Night (1990 Italian) v t e Leo Tolstoy 's The Death of Ivan Ilyich (1886) Films Ikiru (1952 Japanese) A Simple Death (1985 Soviet) Ivans Xtc (2000 American) The Last Step (2012 Iranian) Living (2022 British) Portals : Anarchism Biography Christianity Literature Politics Russia Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Romania Portugal 2 Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Google Scholar Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav Musée d'Orsay Discography of American Historical Recordings FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC 2 RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐42nb8
Cached time: 20250817045402
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.896 seconds
Real time usage: 2.203 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9677/1000000
Revision size: 97603/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 369200/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 41768/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 462034/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.239/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 32520874/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1862.432      1 -total
 37.82%  704.391      3 Template:Reflist
 18.99%  353.762     46 Template:Cite_book
 13.91%  259.007      1 Template:Infobox_writer
 13.66%  254.482      1 Template:Infobox
  6.63%  123.462      3 Template:Br_separated_entries
  6.29%  117.143     16 Template:Cite_web
  5.51%  102.545      1 Template:Birth_date
  5.49%  102.308      1 Template:Langx
  4.98%   92.664      1 Template:Christian_socialism_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18622119:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045402 and revision id 1306051450. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leo_Tolstoy&oldid=1306051450 " Categories : Leo Tolstoy 1828 births 1910 deaths 19th-century dramatists and playwrights from the Russian Empire 19th-century Eastern Orthodox Christians 19th-century educators from the Russian Empire 19th-century essayists 19th-century journalists from the Russian Empire 19th-century letter writers 19th-century male writers from the Russian Empire 19th-century non-fiction writers from the Russian Empire 19th-century novelists from the Russian Empire 19th-century short story writers from the Russian Empire 20th-century anarchists 20th-century Eastern Orthodox Christians 20th-century letter writers 20th-century Russian essayists 20th-century Russian diarists 20th-century Russian dramatists and playwrights 20th-century Russian educators 20th-century Russian journalists 20th-century Russian male writers 20th-century Russian novelists 20th-century Russian short story writers Anarchist writers Anarcho-pacifists Art critics from the Russian Empire Children's writers from the Russian Empire Christian anarchists Christian vegetarians Christian writers Corresponding members of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences Counts of the Russian Empire Deaths from pneumonia in Russia Eastern Orthodox writers Epistemologists Essayists from the Russian Empire Foreign members of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts Georgists Honorary members of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences Letter writers from the Russian Empire Literary critics from the Russian Empire Members of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts Metaphysicians Nonviolence advocates Novelists from the Russian Empire Ontologists People excommunicated by the Russian Orthodox Church People from Tula Oblast People from Tula Governorate Philanthropists from the Russian Empire Philosophers from the Russian Empire Philosophers of culture Philosophers of education Philosophers of history Philosophers of literature Philosophers of mind Russian philosophers of religion Russian political philosophers Recipients of the Order of St. Anna, 4th class Russian-language writers Russian anarchists Russian Christian pacifists Russian Esperantists Russian historical novelists Russian magazine editors Russian male dramatists and playwrights Russian male essayists Russian male journalists Russian male novelists Russian male short story writers Russian military personnel of the Caucasian War Russian military personnel of the Crimean War Russian opinion journalists Russian vegetarianism activists Schoolteachers from the Russian Empire Social philosophers Tolstoy family Tolstoyans Translators from the Russian Empire Writers about activism and social change Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with Russian IPA Articles containing Russian-language text CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from March 2021 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages including recorded pronunciations Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 16:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leo Tolstoy 183 languages Add topic

