Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Perspective 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Pre-Modern era 2.2 Modern period 2.3 19th century 2.3.1 "No Irish need apply" 2.4 20th century 2.5 21st century 2.6 Northern Ireland 3 Discrimination against Irish Travellers 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Irish sentiment 6 languages العربية Deutsch Español Հայերեն हिन्दी Монгол Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hostility or prejudice towards Irish people American political cartoon by Thomas Nast titled "The Usual Irish Way of Doing Things", depicting a drunken Irishman sitting on a barrel of gunpowder while lighting a powder keg and swinging a bottle in the air. Nast was an anti-Catholic immigrant from Germany. Published 2 September 1871 in Harper's Weekly Anti-Irish sentiment , also Hibernophobia , is bigotry against the Irish people or individuals. It can include hatred, oppression, persecution, as well as simple discrimination. Generally, it could be bigotry against people from the island of Ireland , the Republic of Ireland , or Northern Ireland . Specifically, it could be directed against Irish immigrants, or their descendants, throughout the world, who are known as the Irish diaspora .

It occurred in the Middle Ages , the Early Modern Age and the Age of Enlightenment . Also instances recorded during Irish immigration to Great Britain , North America, and Australia are notable. Anti-Irish sentiment can include internal conflict dealing with social, racial and cultural discrimination within Ireland itself.

Sectarianism and cultural, religious or political conflicts are referred to as the Troubles in Northern Ireland.

Perspective [ edit ] Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Hostility increased towards the Irish over the centuries, as they steadfastly remained Roman Catholic despite the fact that Edward VI and subsequent rulers used coercion to convert them to Protestantism .

[ 1 ] The religious majority of the Irish nation was ruled by a religious minority, leading to perennial social conflict. During the Great Famine in the middle of the 19th century, some evangelical Protestants sought to convert the starving Catholics as part of their relief efforts.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Pre-Modern era [ edit ] Negative English attitudes towards the Gaelic Irish and their culture date as far back as the reign of Henry II of England . In 1155, Pope Adrian IV (himself an Englishman) issued the papal bull called Laudabiliter , that gave Henry permission to conquer Ireland as a means of strengthening the Papacy's control over the Irish Church, although the very existence of the bull is disputed by modern historians.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Pope Adrian called the Irish a "rude and barbarous" nation. The Norman invasion of Ireland began in 1169 with the backing of Pope Alexander III , who was Pope at the time of the invasion and ratified the Laudabiliter , giving Henry dominion over Ireland. He likewise called the Irish a "barbarous nation" with "filthy practices".

[ 5 ] Gerald of Wales accompanied King Henry's son, John , on his 1185 trip to Ireland . As a result of this he wrote Topographia Hibernica ("Topography of Ireland") and Expugnatio Hibernia ("Conquest of Ireland"), both of which remained in circulation for centuries afterwards. Ireland, in his view, was rich; but the Irish were backward and lazy: They use their fields mostly for pasture. Little is cultivated and even less is sown. The problem here is not the quality of the soil but rather the lack of industry on the part of those who should cultivate it. This laziness means that the different types of minerals with which hidden veins of the earth are full are neither mined nor exploited in any way. They do not devote themselves to the manufacture of flax or wool, nor to the practice of any mechanical or mercantile act. Dedicated only to leisure and laziness, this is a truly barbarous people. They depend on animals for their livelihood and they live like animals.

[ 6 ] Gerald's views were not atypical, and similar views may be found in the writings of William of Malmesbury and William of Newburgh . When it comes to Irish marital and sexual customs Gerald is even more biting: "This is a filthy people, wallowing in vice. They indulge in incest , for example in marrying – or rather debauching – the wives of their dead brothers". Even earlier than this Archbishop Anselm accused the Irish of wife swapping , "exchanging their wives as freely as other men exchange their horses".

[ citation needed ] Ireland in 1450. The Statutes of Kilkenny decreed that intermarriage between English settlers and Irish natives was forbidden. It also forbade the settlers from using the Irish language and adopting Irish modes of dress or other customs.

One will find these views echoed centuries later in the words of Sir Henry Sidney , twice Lord Deputy of Ireland during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I , and in those of Edmund Tremayne, his secretary. In Tremayne's view the Irish "commit whoredom, hold no wedlock, ravish, steal and commit all abomination without scruple of conscience".

[ 7 ] In A View of the Present State of Ireland , circulated in 1596 but not published until 1633, the English official and renowned poet Edmund Spenser wrote "They are all papists by profession but in the same so blindingly and brutishly informed that you would rather think them atheists or infidels". In a "Brief Note on Ireland", Spenser argued that "Great force must be the instrument but famine must be the means, for till Ireland be famished it cannot be subdued ... There can be no conformity of government where is no conformity of religion ... There can be no sound agreement between two equal contraries viz: the English and Irish".

[ 8 ] Anti-Irish sentiments played a role in atrocities which were perpetrated against the Irish. For instance, in 1305, Piers Bermingham received a financial bonus and accolades in verse after beheading thirty members of the O'Conor clan and sending them to Dublin. In 1317, one Irish chronicler opined that it was just as easy for an Englishman to kill an Irishman or English woman to kill an Irish woman as he would a dog. The Irish were thought of as the most barbarous people in Europe, and such ideas were modified to compare the Scottish Highlands or Gàidhealtachd where traditionally Scottish Gaelic is spoken to medieval Ireland.

[ 9 ] To prevent the English from integrating into Irish society, the Parliament passed the Statutes of Kilkenny in 1366.

[ 10 ] These acts forbade the speaking of the Irish language among English settlers and any Irish living with them. They also prevented marriages between English and Irish and segregated the churches.

[ 10 ] These were limited in area to the Pale and enforcement is debated. The first diligent attempt to phase out the Irish language and culture across the island came from Henry VIII in 1537.

[ 11 ] The 'Act for English Order, Habit and Language' required the Irish parishes to contain an English grammar school and required everyone to do their best to speak English and teach their children English language. The schools were not fully implemented till the National Schools in 1833.

[ 10 ] The act stated that the Irish possess "a certain savage and wild kind and manner of living" which it sought to remove.

[ 12 ] Modern period [ edit ] After the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland , huge areas of land were confiscated and the Irish Catholics were banished to the lands of Connacht .

In the Early Modern period which followed the advent of Protestantism in Great Britain, Irish Catholics were subjected to social and political discrimination because they refused to renounce Catholicism . Irish Catholics lost many rights concerning land, inheritance, voting, and they lost more rights under the Penal laws .

[ 13 ] This discrimination sometimes manifested itself in areas with large Puritan or Presbyterian populations such as the northeastern parts of Ireland, the Central Belt of Scotland, and parts of Canada .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 16 ] Thinly veiled nationalism under the guise of religious conflict has occurred in both the UK and Ireland.

[ 17 ] The Act for the Settlement of Ireland 1652 barred Irish Catholics from most public offices and confiscated large amounts of their land, much of which was given to Protestant settlers .

[ 18 ] Anti-Irish sentiment is found in works by several 18th-century writers such as the French philosopher Voltaire , who depicted the Catholic Irish as savage and backward, and defended British rule in the country.

[ 19 ] 19th century [ edit ] See also: Catherine O'Leary An Irishman depicted as a gorilla ("Mr. G. O'Rilla") Another Irishman depicted as a monkey, in Congress Anti-Irish sentiments in Victorian Britain and 19th century United States manifested themselves the stereotyping of the Irish as violent and alcoholic.

[ 20 ] Magazines such as Punch portrayed the Irish as having "bestial, ape-like or demonic features and the Irishman, (especially the political radical) was invariably given a long or prognathous jaw, the stigmata to the phrenologists of a lower evolutionary order, degeneracy, or criminality." [ 21 ] [ 22 ] After the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars , a fall in agricultural prices occurred. During the ensuing depression, farmers in southern England were unable to pay their agricultural workers a sustainable wage. There was an excess of labour compounded by the men returning from the wars. In 1829 added to this mix, was an unprecedented influx of migrant Irish workers who were prepared to work for half what their English counterparts were earning.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] On the Isle of Thanet the local farm labourers rounded up the Irish workers.

William Cobbett wrote: Instantly the English labourers received notice that they must work at the same price as the Irish... They armed themselves with what they called BATS; [ a ] they went to the several barns, where the poor Irish fellows were snoozled in among the litter and rubbish, roused them up, and told them, that they must march out of the island.

[ 26 ] Irish labourers were singled out in particular for rough treatment by the locals. Farms employing Irish labour were subject to violent threats and incendiarism. There were similar problems in 1830, however eventually the farmers became the target for attacks, rather than the Irish, in the disturbances that became known as the Swing Riots .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Similar to other immigrant populations, they were sometimes accused of cronyism and subjected to misrepresentations of their religious and cultural beliefs.

Irish Catholics were particularly singled out for attack by Protestants.

[ 21 ] [ failed verification ] Anti-Catholicism , whether real or imagined, played to the Catholic respect for martyrdom, and was partly based on a fear of a reborn Inquisition whose methods clashed with the " Age of Enlightenment ". Irish Catholics were not involved in formulating church dogma, but it became a stick to beat them with. Mostly they stayed with their church as it fostered a sense of community in an otherwise harsh commercial world.

English atrocity propaganda depicting the behavior of Irish Catholics during the Irish Rebellion of 1798 , by George Cruikshank (1845).

In Liverpool , England, where many Irish immigrants settled following the Great Famine , anti-Irish prejudice was widespread. The sheer numbers of people coming across the Irish sea and settling in the poorer districts of the city led to physical attacks and it became common practice for those with Irish accents or even Irish names to be barred from jobs, public houses and employment opportunities.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] In 1836, young Benjamin Disraeli wrote: [The Irish] hate our order, our civilization, our enterprising industry, our pure religion. This wild, reckless, indolent, uncertain and superstitious race have no sympathy with the English character. Their ideal of human felicity is an alternation of clannish broils and coarse idolatry. Their history describes an unbroken circle of bigotry and blood.

[ 29 ] In 1882, five people were murdered in the Maamtrasna , on the border between County Mayo and County Galway in Ireland. Covering the incident, The Spectator wrote the following: The Tragedy at Maamtrasna, investigated this week in Dublin, almost unique as it is in the annals of the United Kingdom, brings out in strong relief two facts which Englishmen are too apt to forget. One is the existence in particular districts of Ireland of a class of peasants who are scarcely civilised beings, and approach far nearer to savages than any other white men; and the other is their extraordinary and exceptional gloominess of temper. In remote places of Ireland, especially in Connaught, on a few of the islands, and in one or two mountain districts, dwell cultivators who are in knowledge, in habits, and in the discipline of life no higher than Maories or other Polynesians.

— The Tragedy at Maamtrasna, The Spectator [ 30 ] Nineteenth-century Protestant American " Nativist " discrimination against Irish Catholics reached a peak in the mid-1850s when the Know-Nothing Movement tried to oust Catholics from public office.

Henry Winter Davis , an active Know-Nothing, was elected on the new "American Party" ticket to Congress from Maryland. He told Congress that the un-American Irish Catholic immigrants were to blame for the recent election of Democrat James Buchanan as president, stating: [ 31 ] The recent election has developed in an aggravated form every evil against which the American party protested. Foreign allies have decided the government of the country – men naturalized in thousands on the eve of the election. Again in the fierce struggle for supremacy, men have forgotten the ban which the Republic puts on the intrusion of religious influence on the political arena. These influences have brought vast multitudes of foreign-born citizens to the polls, ignorant of American interests, without American feelings, influenced by foreign sympathies, to vote on American affairs; and those votes have, in point of fact, accomplished the present result.

Philadelphia nativist riots in July 1844 Much of the opposition came from Irish Protestants, as in the 1831 riots in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania .

[ 32 ] Protestants of the nineteenth century would use crime statistics to allege that Irish Catholics were over-represented in crime. There were theories that the over-representation was due to a lack of morality stemming from Catholic religious belief, and other theories that Catholics were racially inferior to Anglo-Saxons. A. B. Forwood (1893) of the Liverpool Conservative Party stated, The influx of the Irish into Liverpool brought poverty, disease, dirt and misery; drunkenness and crime, in addition to a disturbance of the labour market, the cost to ratepayers of an enormous sum of money.

[ 33 ] During the 1830s in rural areas of the U.S., riots for control of job sites broke out among rival labour teams which were from different parts of Ireland, as well as riots between Irish and local American work teams which competed for construction jobs.

[ 34 ] Irish Catholics were isolated and marginalized by Protestant society, but the Irish gained control of the Catholic Church from English, French and Germans. Intermarriage between Catholics and Protestants was strongly discouraged by both Protestant ministers and Catholic priests.  Catholics, led by the Irish, built a network of parochial schools and colleges, as well as orphanages and hospitals, typically using nuns as an inexpensive work force. They thereby avoided public institutions mostly controlled by Protestants.

[ 35 ] The Irish used their base in Tammany Hall (the Democratic Party machine in New York City) to play a role in the New York State legislature. Young Theodore Roosevelt was their chief Republican opponent, and he wrote in his diary that: There are some twenty five Irish Democrats in the house. ... They are a stupid, sodden and vicious lot, most of them being equally deficient in brains and virtue. Three or four however ... seem to be pretty good men, and among the best members of the house are two Republican farmers named O'Neil and Sheehy, the grandsons of Irish immigrants. But the average catholic Irishman of first-generation as represented in this Assembly, is a low, venal, corrupt and unintelligent brute.

[ 36 ] "No Irish need apply" [ edit ] London version of "No Irish Need Apply", February 1862 1862 song that used the "No Irish Need Apply" slogan. It was copied from a similar London song.

[ 37 ] Example of "No Irish need apply" ads by a business for male workers found in The New York Times , 1854.

[ 38 ] After 1860, many Irish sang songs about signs and notices reading "Help wanted – no Irish need apply" or similar.

[ 38 ] The 1862 protest song "No Irish Need Apply", written and performed by Mrs F. R. Phillips , [ 39 ] was inspired by such signs in London. Later Irish Americans adapted the lyrics and the songs to reflect the discrimination they felt in America.

[ 38 ] Historians have debated about the issue of anti-Irish job discrimination in the United States. Some of them believe that the "No Irish need apply" (or "NINA") signs were common, but others, such as Richard J. Jensen , believe that anti-Irish job discrimination was not a significant factor in the United States, and they also believe that these signs and print advertisements were posted by the limited number of early 19th-century English immigrants to the United States who believed in the same prejudices that the people of their former homeland believed in.

[ 38 ] In July 2015 the same journal that published Jensen's 2002 paper published a rebuttal by Rebecca A. Fried, an 8th-grade student at Sidwell Friends School .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] She listed multiple instances of the restriction used in advertisements for many different types of positions, including "clerks at stores and hotels, bartenders, farm workers, house painters, hog butchers, coachmen, bookkeepers, blackers [tannery workers who blackened leather], workers at lumber yards, upholsterers, bakers, gilders, tailors, and papier mache workers, among others." While the greatest number of NINA instances occurred in the 1840s, Fried found instances for its continued use throughout the subsequent century, with the most recent dating to 1909 in Butte, Montana.

[ 40 ] Alongside "No Irish Need Apply" signs, in the post- World War II years, signs which read "No Irish, No Blacks, No Dogs" or similar signs reportedly appeared in the United Kingdom .

[ 42 ] 20th century [ edit ] Ku Klux Klan cartoon (1926) depicting Saint Patrick being driven out of America, along with snakes marked "Rome in Politics", " Knights of Columbus ", " superstition " and other evils wrongly associated with Irish Americans .

In July 1905, the British Parliament attempted to introduce the Drunkenness (Ireland) Bill which aimed to provide financial protection to the spouses of "habitual drunkards" and set penalties for adults who were found to be drunk while caring for children.

[ 43 ] The Irish Nationalist MP for South Louth, Joseph Nolan, said that the "very title 'Drunkenness (Ireland) Bill' was offensive" and that he "resented any special measure of this kind being brought forward to deal with drunkenness in Ireland which was not applicable to Great Britain as well." [ 44 ] According to a 2004 report which was published by the Irish Department of Foreign Affairs , Irish soldiers serving in the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) during World War I were treated more harshly in courts-martial because "British military courts were anti-Irish".

[ 45 ] The American writer H. P. Lovecraft held very anti-Irish views. In 1921, concerning the possibility of an independent Irish state, he said the following: "If the Irish had the 'right' to independence they would possess it. If they ever gain it, they will possess it – until they lose it again. England has the right to rule because she does ... It is not chance, but racial superiority, which has made the Briton supreme. Why have not the Irish conquered and colonized the earth if they be so deserving of regard? They are brainless canaille ." [ 46 ] In 1923, the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland approved a report entitled The Menace of the Irish race to our Scottish Nationality , which called for "means to be found to preserve Scotland and the Scottish race and to secure in future generations the traditions, ideals and faith of a great people, unspoiled and inviolate." [ 47 ] In 1934, the writer J. B. Priestley published the travelogue English Journey , in which he wrote "A great many speeches have been made and books written on the subject of what England has done to Ireland ... I should be interested to hear a speech and read a book or two on the subject of what Ireland has done to England ... if we do have an Irish Republic as our neighbour, and it is found possible to return her exiled citizens, what a grand clearance there will be in all the western ports, from the Clyde to Cardiff, what a fine exit of ignorance and dirt and drunkenness and disease." [ 48 ] In 1937, ten young men and boys, aged from 13 to 23, burned to death in a fire on a farm in Kirkintilloch , Scotland. All were seasonal workers from Achill Sound in County Mayo, Ireland.

The Vanguard , the official newspaper of the Scottish Protestant League , referred to the event in the following text: The Scandal of Kirkintilloch is not that some Irishmen have lost their lives in a fire; it is that Irish Papists brought up in disloyalty and superstition are engaged in jobs which should belong by right to Scottish Protestants.

The Kirkintilloch sensation again reminds the People of Scotland that Rome's Irish Scum still over-run our land.

[ 49 ] 21st century [ edit ] In 2002, English journalist Julie Burchill narrowly escaped prosecution for incitement to racial hatred , following a column in The Guardian where she described Ireland as being synonymous with "child molestation, Nazi-sympathising, and the oppression of women".

[ 50 ] She had expressed anti-Irish sentiment several times throughout her career, announcing in the London journal Time Out , "I hate the Irish, I think they're appalling." [ 51 ] In March 2012, a classified ad in Perth , Australia placed by a bricklayer stated that "no Irish" should apply for the job.

[ 52 ] In July 2012, The Irish Times published a report on anti-Irish prejudice in Britain. It claimed that far-right British nationalist groups continued to use "anti-IRA" marches as "an excuse to attack and intimidate Irish immigrants".

[ 53 ] Shortly before the 2012 Summer Olympics , British athlete Daley Thompson was shown an image of a runner with a misspelt tattoo and said that the person responsible for the misspelling "must have been Irish". The BBC issued an apology.

[ 54 ] On 8 August 2012, an article appeared in Australian newspapers titled "Punch Drunk: Ireland intoxicated as Taylor swings towards boxing gold". The article, Written by Peter Hanlon , [ 55 ] claimed that Katie Taylor was not "what you'd expect in a fighting Irishwoman, nor is she surrounded by people who'd prefer a punch to a potato". The journalist who wrote it apologised for "indulging racial stereotypes".

[ 56 ] The following day, Australian commentator Russell Barwick asserted that athletes from Ireland should compete for the British Olympic team, likening it to a surfer from Hawaii "not surfing for the USA". When fellow presenter Mark Chapman explained that the Republic of Ireland was an independent state, Barwick remarked, "It's nothing but an Irish joke." [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Since at least 2012, Greg Hodge, managing director of the dating website BeautifulPeople.com , has expressed anti-Irish sentiment on numerous occasions.

[ 59 ] In 2020, he said, "There are many examples of very handsome Irish men in Hollywood. However this is the exception and not the norm. Irish men are the undisputed ugliest in the world. They really are in a league of their own." [ 60 ] His comments are often mocked.

[ 61 ] On 25 June 2013, an Irish flag was burned at an Orange Order headquarters in the Everton area of Liverpool . This was seen by members of Liverpool's Irish community, which is the biggest in the UK, as a hate crime .

[ 62 ] In December 2014, British broadcaster Channel 4 caused an "outrage" and "fury" in Ireland and the UK when it planned a comedy series about the Irish Famine . The sitcom named Hungry , was announced by writer Hugh Travers, who said "we're kind of thinking of it as Shameless in famine Ireland." The response in Ireland was quick and negative: "Jewish people would never endorse making a comedy of the mass extermination of their ancestors at the hands of the Nazis, Cambodians would never support people laughing at what happened to their people at the hands of the Khmer Rouge and the people of Somalia, Ethiopia or Sudan would never accept the plight of their people, through generational famine, being the source of humour in Britain", Dublin councillor David McGuinness said. "I am not surprised that it is a British television outlet funding this venture." The writer defended the concept saying, "Comedy equals tragedy plus time." [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Channel 4 issued a press release stating that "This in the development process and is not currently planned to air ... It's not unusual for sitcoms to exist against backdrops that are full of adversity and hardship".

[ 65 ] Protesters from the Irish community planned to picket the offices of Channel 4 and campaigners called the proposed show "institutionalised anti-Irish racism".

[ 66 ] In January 2019, American rapper Azealia Banks made disparaging comments on Instagram about Irish people after getting into an argument with a flight attendant on an Aer Lingus flight to Dublin . She called Irish people "a bunch of prideful inbred leprechauns" and "barbarians".

[ 67 ] The following day, she said she would dedicate her Dublin show to "beautiful Irish women".

[ 68 ] However, following the show, Banks again attacked the Irish online and mocked the Irish Famine.

[ 69 ] In March 2019, host Sara Haines of ABC TV's Strahan & Sara Show described St. Patrick's day as "an Irish Holiday that celebrates drinking and public urination".

[ 70 ] In July 2019, the East Ham constituency Labour branch was criticised for its election of a White Irish woman as the women's officer for its Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) forum. The woman in question self-identified as being an ethnic minority and no objections within the branch were raised against her election. Branch secretary, Syed Taqi Shah commented that "if somebody self-declares [as BAME], and the Labour Party allows them to do so, they should be respected." [ 71 ] [ 72 ] In March 2021, the Equality and Human Rights Commission said it had investigated British holiday park operator Pontins after a whistleblower revealed that Pontins maintained a blacklist of common Irish surnames to prevent Irish Travellers from entering its parks.

[ 73 ] On 28 November 2023, Lazio supporters unfurled anti-Irish banners before and during a Champions League match with Celtic F.C.

which read: "The famine is over go home f***ing potato eaters" and "Did the Fenian bastards take [ sic ] shower today?".

[ 74 ] Northern Ireland [ edit ] Since the formation of Northern Ireland in 1921, there have been tensions between Protestants, who tend to refer to themselves as British, and Catholics, who tend to refer to themselves as Irish.

[ 75 ] In 1988, John Taylor , the Ulster Unionist MP for Strangford , replied to a letter from Gearoid Ó Muilleoir, deputy president of the Student's Union in Queen's University Belfast , relating to grants for students in Northern Ireland. Taylor's letter said, "Since your surname is clearly unpronounceable I have, rightly or wrongly, concluded that you are Irish and not British. I therefore suggest that you, and those whom you represent, apply for any necessary grants to the Dublin Government ." [ 76 ] Taylor later repudiated being Irish in a debate in Dublin: "We in Northern Ireland are not Irish. We do not jig at crossroads, speak Gaelic, play GAA etc. ... It is an insult for Dubliners to refer to us as being Irish." [ 77 ] In 1999, Austin Currie , a former member of the SDLP from Dungannon, County Tyrone, spoke in the Irish Parliament on the effect of partition on Catholics in Northern Ireland: "Partition was used to try to cut us off from the rest of the Irish nation. Unionists did their best to stamp out our nationalism and, the educational system, to the extent it could organise it, was oriented to Britain and we were not even allowed to use names such as Séamus or Seán. When my brothers' godparents went to register their birth, they were told no such names as Séamus or Seán existed in Northern Ireland and were asked for the English equivalent." [ 78 ] Since the Troubles began in the late 1960s, loyalists have consistently expressed anti-Irish sentiment.

Irish tricolours have been burned on the yearly Eleventh Night bonfires.

[ 79 ] In August 1993 the Red Hand Commando announced that it would attack pubs or hotels where Irish folk music is played, although it withdrew the threat shortly after.

[ 80 ] In 2000, loyalists made posters and banners that read "The Ulster conflict is about nationality. IRISH OUT!".

[ 81 ] The Provisional IRA 's bombings in England led to fear, anti-Irish sentiment and attacks on the Irish community there. After the Birmingham pub bombings , for example, there were reports of isolated attacks on Irish people and Irish-owned businesses in the Australian press.

[ 82 ] In the 1990s, writers for the Daily Mail newspaper "called for Irish people to be banned from UK sporting events and fined for IRA disruption to public transport", one of numerous opinions expressed over many years which has led the Daily Mail to be accused by some in Ireland of publishing "some of the most virulently anti-Irish journalism in Britain for decades".

[ 83 ] Discrimination against Irish Travellers [ edit ] Irish Travellers are an ethnic and cultural minority group who have lived in Ireland for centuries and experience overt discrimination throughout Ireland and the United Kingdom.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] In nature, such discrimination is similar to antiziganism (prejudice against the Roma ) [ 87 ] in the United Kingdom and Europe, [ 86 ] as well as the form of racism which the Irish diaspora was a victim of during the 19th century.

[ 88 ] In the United Kingdom and Ireland, media attack campaigns against Travellers have been launched in national and local newspapers as well as on the radio.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Irish Travellers who work for the Irish media have stated that in Ireland, they are living under an apartheid regime .

[ 92 ] In The Irish Times in 2013, the Irish journalist Jennifer O'Connell wrote that "Our casual racism against Travellers is one of Ireland's last great shames".

[ 93 ] While there is a willingness to acknowledge that there is widespread prejudice towards Travellers in Irish society, and a recognition of discrimination against Travellers, there is still strong resistance among the Irish public to calling the treatment of Travellers racist.

[ 92 ] Examples of it include the destruction of houses which were allocated to the Travellers by the state during Traveller feuds.

[ 94 ] In 2013, a Traveller home in Ballyshannon, Co Donegal was destroyed by fire days before members of a Traveller family were due to move in.

[ 93 ] Local Councillor Pearse Doherty said the house was specifically targeted because it was to house a Traveller family and was destroyed due to a 'hatred of Travellers'.

[ 95 ] Another local Councillor Sean McEniff of Bundoran caused controversy and a complaint under the 'Incitement to Hatred Act' when he stated that, due to the house's initial purchase, Travellers "should live in isolation from the settled community." and "I would not like these people (the family) living beside me".

[ 95 ] In England, the British television series Big Fat Gypsy Weddings has been accused of instigating bullying and it has also been accused of inciting racial hatred of Irish Travellers. The series has been the subject of a number of controversies, including allegations that its advertizing is racist [ 96 ] and allegations that it has instigated a rise in the rate of racially motivated bullying.

[ 97 ] See also [ edit ] Racism Anti-Catholicism Catholic–Protestant relations Philadelphia Nativist Riots Sectarianism in Glasgow Stage Irish Stereotypes of Irish Americans Sectarian violence among Christians White ethnic Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anti-Irish sentiment .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Anti-Irish sentiment .

Notes [ edit ] ^ The word "bat" in the dialect of Kent is used for any piece of wood of about 4 feet (1.2 m) or 5 feet (1.5 m) in length and not too wide in diameter to hold in the hand and able to be wielded about.

[ 25 ] References [ edit ] ^ John Richardson, A Short History of the Attempts that have been Made to Convert the Popish Natives of Ireland , to the Establish'd Religion: with a Proposal for their Conversion , London, 1712, p. 15. Retrieved 8 August 1712.

^ "' The Widow's Mite': private relief during the Great Famine ," from 18th–19th Century Social Perspectives, 18th–19th – Century History, Features, Issue 2 (Mar/Apr 2008), The Famine, Volume 16, reprinted online by History Ireland, 2015. Retrieved 8 August 2015.

^ "Laudabiliter: a new interpretation by Professor Anne Duggan" . 13 February 2013 . Retrieved 8 August 2015 .

^ Poole, Austin Lane (1993).

From Domesday book to Magna Carta, 1087–1216 .

Oxford University Press . pp.

303– 304.

ISBN 978-0-19-285287-8 .

^ Hull, Eleanor (1931). "Pope Adrian's bull 'Laudabiliter' and note upon it".

A History of Ireland and Her People .

^ Gerald of Wales ; O'Meara, John Joseph (1982).

The History and Topography of Ireland . Penguin. p. 102.

^ Davidson, James West (1996).

Nation of Nations: A Concise Narrative of the American Republic . McGraw-Hill. p. 27.

^ Hastings, Adrian (1997).

The Construction of Nationhood: Ethnicity, Religion and Nationalism . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp.

83– 84.

ISBN 0-521-59391-3 .

^ Rackwitz, Martin (2007).

Travels to terra incognita: the Scottish Highlands and Hebrides in early modern travellers accounts c. 1600–1800 . Waxmann. pp. 33, 94.

^ a b c Crowley, Tony (2000).

The politics of language in Ireland 1366–1922: a sourcebook (1st ed.). London New York: Routledge. pp. 2, 14– 16, 21.

ISBN 978-0-415-15717-9 .

^ Durkacz, Victor Edward (1983).

The decline of the Celtic languages: a study of linguistic and cultural conflict in Scotland, Wales and Ireland from the Reformation to the twentieth century . Edinburgh: John Donald. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-85976-428-5 .

^ "1537 Act for the English Order, Habit and Language" .

Exploring Celtic Civilizations . University of North Carolina . Retrieved 26 October 2023 .

^ "A History of the Penal Laws against the Irish Catholics" .

The Gilder Lehrman Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance, and Abolition . 9 April 2015 . Retrieved 31 October 2023 .

^ Power, Thomas P. (1991).

The Irish in Atlantic Canada, 1780-1900 . New Ireland Press.

ISBN 978-0-920483-18-3 .

^ "Irish immigrants and Canadian destinies in Margaret Atwood's 'Alias Grace ' ". Ecaterina Hanţiu University of Oradea.

^ "Kirk 'regret' over bigotry" .

BBC News . 29 May 2002 . Retrieved 9 October 2012 .

^ Clancy, Patrick (1995).

Irish Society: Sociological Perspectives . Institute of Public Administration.

ISBN 978-1-872002-87-3 .

^ John Morley, Biography of Oliver Cromwell. Page 298. 1900 and 2001.

ISBN 978-1-4212-6707-4 .; "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 25 May 2009 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) British National Archives web site. Accessed March 2007; "1649-52: Cromwell's conquest of Ireland" . Archived from the original on 11 December 2004 . Retrieved 17 January 2006 .

From a history site dedicated to the English Civil War. "... making Cromwell's name into one of the most hated in Irish history". Accessed March 2007. Site currently offline. WayBack Machine holds archive here ^ Gargett, Graham (1994). "Some Reflections on Voltaire's L'lngenu and a Hitherto Neglected Source: the Questions sur les miracles ". In Hemming, T. D.; Freeman, Edward; Meakin, David (eds.).

The Secular City: Studies in the Enlightenment: Presented to Haydn Mason . University of Exeter Press.

ISBN 0859894169 .

Voltaire's writing, particular in this field of history, show by this stage in his career Ireland and the Catholic Irish had become shorthand reference to extreme religious fanaticism and general degeneracy.

^ Williams, W. H. A. (1996).

'Twas Only an Irishman's Dream: The Image of Ireland and the Irish in American Popular Song Lyrics, 1800–1920 . University of Illinois Press. pp.

148– 49.

ISBN 9780252065514 .

^ a b Wohl, Anthony S. (1990).

"Racism and Anti-Irish Prejudice in Victorian England" .

The Victorian Web .

^ Curtis, L. P. (1971).

Apes and Angels: The Irishman in Victorian Caricature .

^ a b Brandon, Peter (2010).

Discovering Sussex . Andover: Phillimore. p. 51.

ISBN 978-1-86077-616-8 .

^ a b Griffin, Carl J. (2010). "The Violent Captain Swing?".

Past & Present (209): 149– 180.

doi : 10.1093/pastj/gtq035 .

JSTOR 40960936 .

^ Sanders, F. W. T. (1950).

The Dialect of Kent: being the fruits of many rambles . p. 4.

OCLC 1079776904 .

^ Cobbett, William (1832). "Letter to George Woodward".

Cobbett's Weekly Political Register . Vol. 75, no. 13 (24 March 1832 ed.). p. 786.

^ "Ireland and Liverpool: A Traumatic History" . Liverpool Irish Festival. 23 September 2021 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ Kelly, Laura.

"The Irish, Politics and Sectarianism in Nineteenth-Century Liverpool" . University College Dublin . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ Robert Blake (1960).

Disraeli . Faber & Faber. pp.

152– 53.

ISBN 9780571287550 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "The Tragedy at Maamtrasna" .

The Spectator . 18 November 1882 . Retrieved 16 August 2020 .

^ Quoted in McLaughlin, James Fairfax (1885).

The life and times of John Kelly, tribune of the people . New York, American News Company. pp.

72– 73.

^ Hoeber, Francis W. (2001). "Drama in the Courtroom, Theater in the Streets: Philadelphia's Irish Riot of 1831".

Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography . Vol. 125, no. 3. pp.

191– 232.

ISSN 0031-4587 .

^ Neal, F. (1991).

"A criminal profile of the Liverpool Irish" (PDF) .

Transactions of the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire .

140 : 161– 62.

^ Prince, Carl E. (1985). "The Great 'Riot Year': Jacksonian Democracy and Patterns of Violence in 1834".

Journal of the Early Republic .

5 (1): 1– 19.

doi : 10.2307/3122502 .

ISSN 0275-1275 .

JSTOR 3122502 .

Examines 24 episodes including the January labor riot at the Chesapeake & Ohio Canal, the New York City election riot in April, the Philadelphia race riot in August, and the Baltimore & Washington Railroad riot in November.

^ Carper, James C.; Hunt, Thomas C. (2007).

The Dissenting Tradition in American Education . Peter Lang. p. 29ff.

ISBN 9780820479200 .

^ Kohn, Edward P., ed. (2014).

A Most Glorious Ride: The Diaries of Theodore Roosevelt, 1877–1886 . SUNY Press. p. 214.

ISBN 9781438455136 .

^ Jensen, Richard (2002).

" 'No Irish Need Apply': A Myth of Victimization" .

Journal of Social History .

36 (2): 405– 429.

doi : 10.1353/jsh.2003.0021 .

S2CID 145258998 . Retrieved 7 November 2008 .

^ a b c d Jensen, Richard (2004) [print version 2002].

" 'No Irish Need Apply': A Myth of Victimization" .

Journal of Social History .

36 (2): 405– 429.

doi : 10.1353/jsh.2003.0021 .

^ "No Irish need apply" .

Folk Song and Music Hall . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ a b Fried, Rebecca A. (4 July 2015).

"No Irish Need Deny: Evidence for the Historicity of NINA Restrictions in Advertisements and Signs" .

Journal of Social History .

doi : 10.1093/jsh/shv066 .

^ Young, Patrick (19 July 2015).

"High School Student Proves Professor Wrong When He Denied 'No Irish Need Apply' Signs Existed" .

Long Island Wins . Retrieved 16 August 2015 .

^ Murray, Tony (28 October 2015).

"No reason to doubt No Irish, no blacks signs" . Letter to The Guardian . Retrieved 9 April 2016 .

^ Ruxton, Dean (11 October 2020).

"The Drunkenness (Ireland) Bill 1905: 'Needlessly offensive to every Irishman' " .

Irish Times . Retrieved 22 June 2022 .

^ "Drunkenness (Ireland) Bill" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . United Kingdom: House of Commons. 7 July 1905. col. 1497–1505 . Retrieved 22 June 2022 .

^ "UK military justice was 'anti-Irish': secret report" .

Irish Independent . 7 August 2005 . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

^ Letter to Alfred Galpin, quoted in " 'Criminals and Mongrel Wretches': The Anti-Irish Sentiments of H. P. Lovecraft" .

Irish American News . Chicago. 25 November 2017. Archived from the original on 27 December 2017 . Retrieved 16 August 2020 – via Charley Brady.

^ Massie, Allan (1994).

Edinburgh . London: Sinclair-Stevenson. pp.

207– 209.

^ Priestley, J. B. (1934).

English Journey . London: William Heinemann. pp.

248– 249.

^ "The Scandal of Kirkintilloch".

Vanguard . Lanarkshire. 1 October 1937.

^ O'Brien, Jonathan (25 August 2002).

"Unruly Julie: Julie Burchill" .

The Sunday Business Post . Archived from the original on 13 May 2005.

^ Shapero, Lindsay (17–23 May 1984). "Red devil".

Time Out . p. 27.

^ "Australian bricklayer employment ad says 'No Irish' need apply" .

IrishCentral . 13 March 2012.

^ Whelan, Brian (17 July 2012).

"Return of anti-Irish prejudice in Britain?" .

The Irish Times .

^ "Daley Thompson in race row over anti-Irish joke on BBC" .

Irish Independent . 2 December 2012.

^ " 'Punch drunk' Katie Taylor article sparks outrage" .

Irish Independent . 8 August 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2025 .

^ " 'Fighting Irish' article prompts apology" .

The Irish Times .

^ "Aussie journalist 'sorry' for suggesting Ireland should join Team GB" . TheJournal.ie. 8 August 2012.

^ "ESPN's Aussie presenter's Irish Olympic rant" .

Irish Echo . Archived from the original on 16 August 2012.

^ Bramhill, Nick (14 February 2012).

"Irish men are the 'ugliest in the world' but Irish woman scrub up well" .

Irish Independent .

^ Martin, Megan (16 February 2020).

"Irish men are the 'undisputed ugliest' in the world, according to dating website" .

RSVP Live .

^ Tourjée, Diana (29 January 2016).

"Irish Fetishist Reacts to News That Irish Men Are the 'Ugliest in the World' " .

Vice .

^ Sammons, Angie (23 June 2013).

"Irish tricolour burning condemned" .

Liverpool Confidential . Archived from the original on 16 September 2013.

^ Burrell, Ian (2 January 2015).

"Potato famine comedy prompts Irish outrage at Channel 4" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 7 May 2022.

^ Beatty, Jilly (2 January 2015).

"Fury as British TV station commissions family sitcom based on the Irish famine" .

Irish Mirror .

^ O'Shea, James (5 January 2015).

"Famine historian Tim Pat Coogan criticizes Channel 4 sitcom" .

Irish Central . Retrieved 16 December 2024 .

^ "Demo planned over famine comedy: Protesters to descend on Channel 4" .

Chortle . 8 January 2015 . Retrieved 16 December 2024 .

^ Power, Ed (24 January 2019).

"Azealia Banks: Who is she and why does she hate Ireland?" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 24 March 2021 .

^ Moriarty, Aoife (23 January 2019).

"Azealia Banks: 'I want to dedicate this to all the beautiful Irish women' " .

The Irish Times .

^ "Azealia Banks: Irish fans react to 'inbred' comments" .

BBC News . 25 January 2019.

^ Cosgrove, Neil F. (26 March 2019).

"ABC should apologize for St Patrick's Day 'drinking and public urination' comment" .

Irish Central . Retrieved 16 December 2024 .

^ White, Nadine (11 July 2019).

"A White Woman Has Been Elected To Run A Labour Forum For BAME People" .

HuffPost UK . London. Archived from the original on 3 May 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2024 .

^ King, Jon (10 July 2019).

"Race row erupts after a white Irishwoman is picked to represent BAME females in East Ham Labour" .

Newham Recorder .

Barking : Archant . Archived from the original on 3 May 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2024 .

^ "Pontins used 'undesirables list' of Irish surnames" .

BBC . 2 March 2021.

^ " 'The famine is over go home f***ing potato eaters' – Lazio fans unfurl huge anti-Irish banners at Celtic game in Rome" .

Belfast Telegraph . 29 November 2023.

^ Breen, Richard (1996). "Chapter 2: Who Wants a United Ireland? Constitutional Preferences among Catholics and Protestants". In Breen, R.; Devine, P.; Dowds, L. (eds.).

Social Attitudes in Northern Ireland: The Fifth Report . Appletree Press.

ISBN 0-86281-593-2 . Retrieved 24 August 2006 .

Summary: In 1989–1994, 79% Protestants replied 'British' or 'Ulster', 60% of Catholics replied 'Irish'.

^ "Queen's student union archives shine light on the past" .

BBC News . 15 September 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ O'Clery, Conor (1999).

Ireland in Quotes: A History of the 20th Century . Dublin: The O'Brien Press. p. 219.

^ "British-Irish Agreement Bill, 1999: Second Stage (Resumed)" .

Houses of the Oireachtas . 9 March 1999 . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ Bowcott, Owen (13 July 2006).

"Army off streets for July 12" .

The Guardian . London.

^ "Chronology of the Conflict: August 1993" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

^ "Loyalist Feud: 31 July – 2 September 2000" .

Pat Finucane Centre . Archived from the original on 2 February 2014.

^ "Every Briton now a target for death" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 1 December 1974.

^ "Anti-Irish newspaper plans to launch edition here" .

Irish Independent . 25 September 2005 . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

^ "On the Road to Recognition: Irish Travellers' quest for Ethnic Identity (Saint Louis University of Law)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2014 . Retrieved 16 December 2012 .

^ The political geography of anti-Traveller racism in Ireland: the politics of exclusion and the geography of closure. Jim MacLaughlin Department of Geography, University College, Cork, Ireland ^ a b Jane Helleiner (2003).

Irish Travellers: Racism and the Politics of Culture .

University of Toronto Press . p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-8020-8628-0 .

^ "Was ist EZAF ? | Europäisches Zentrum für Antiziganismusforschung und -bekämpfung" . Ezaf.org. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012 . Retrieved 21 May 2012 .

^ Racial, ethnic, and homophobic violence: killing in the name of otherness (p18) Marie-Claude Barbier, Bénédicte Deschamps, Michel Prum Routledge-Cavendish, 2007 ^ "They are dirty and unclean. Travelling people have no respect for themselves and their children". (County Councillor quoted in Irish Times, 13 March 1991) cited in "Travellers in Ireland: An Examination of Discrimination and Racism: Part 3" . Archived from the original on 26 July 2010 . Retrieved 29 July 2010 .

^ "Killarney is literally infested by these people." (County Councillor quoted in Cork Examiner, 18 July 1989) cited in "Travellers in Ireland: An Examination of Discrimination and Racism: Part 3" . Archived from the original on 26 July 2010 . Retrieved 29 July 2010 .

^ "Deasy suggests birth control to limit traveller numbers" (Headline in Irish Times, Friday, 15 June 1996.) cited in "Travellers in Ireland: An Examination of Discrimination and Racism: Part 3" . Archived from the original on 26 July 2010 . Retrieved 29 July 2010 .

^ a b Buckley, Dan (15 December 2006).

"Racist attitudes towards Travellers must be dealt with urgently | Irish Examiner" . Examiner.ie.

^ a b "Our casual racism against Travellers is one of Ireland's last great shames" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Archived copy" .

waterfordcity.ie . Archived from the original on 18 May 2014 . Retrieved 21 May 2012 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ a b "Controversial Ballyshannon house burned down" . Donegalnews.com. 11 February 2013. Archived from the original on 9 March 2015 . Retrieved 10 August 2013 .

^ Sweney, Mark (3 October 2012).

"Big Fat Gypsy Weddings poster 'endorsed negative stereotypes' " .

The Guardian . London.

^ Plunkett, John (16 October 2012).

"Big Fat Gypsy Weddings 'has increased bullying of Gypsies and Travellers' " .

The Guardian . London.

Further reading [ edit ] Kennedy, Liam.

Unhappy the Land: The Most Oppressed People Ever, the Irish?

(Irish Academic Press, 2015); deals only with Ireland; online review MacRaild, Donald. " 'No Irish need apply': the origins and persistence of a prejudice." Labour History Review 78.3 (2013): 269–299; in Britain MacRaild, Donald M. ..Faith, Fraternity and Fighting: The Orange Order and Irish Migrants in Northern England, C. 1850–1920.. (Liverpool University Press, 2005).

MacRaild, Donald M.

Culture, conflict, and migration: the Irish in Victorian Cumbria (Liverpool University Press, 1998).

MacRaild, Donald M. "Transnationalising 'Anti-Popery': Militant Protestant Preachers in the Nineteenth-Century Anglo-World." Journal of Religious History 39.2 (2015): 224–243.

online External links [ edit ] Irish Famine Unit II: Racism v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hj7fp
Cached time: 20250817004547
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.563 seconds
Real time usage: 1.779 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7054/1000000
Revision size: 65672/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 335192/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9376/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 411342/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.041/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19765062/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1494.772      1 -total
 42.68%  638.034      2 Template:Reflist
 23.60%  352.715      1 Template:Discrimination_sidebar
 23.47%  350.881      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.43%  275.525     10 Template:Excerpt
 16.39%  244.959     36 Template:Cite_web
  9.20%  137.541     24 Template:Cite_book
  7.57%  113.175     23 Template:Cite_news
  6.99%  104.473      4 Template:Lang
  4.39%   65.666      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6445961:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817004547 and revision id 1304152644. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Irish_sentiment&oldid=1304152644 " Categories : Anti-Irish sentiment Anti-national sentiment Sectarianism Discrimination in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2025 Use British English from October 2013 Articles with excerpts Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 08:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Irish sentiment 6 languages Add topic

