Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Capture and kill techniques 2 Storage and curation 3 Insect pins Toggle Insect pins subsection 3.1 Pinning of entomological specimens 4 In popular culture 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 6.2 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Insect collecting 11 languages العربية Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Svenska 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Insect collection ) Hobby For the scientific study of insects, see Entomology .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Insect collecting" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Beetle collection at the Melbourne Museum , Australia Insect collecting refers to the collection of insects and other arthropods for scientific study or as a hobby .

[ 1 ] Most insects are small and the majority cannot be identified without the examination of minute morphological characters, so entomologists often make and maintain insect collections. Very large collections are preserved in natural history museums or universities where they are maintained and studied by specialists. Many college courses require students to form small collections. There are also amateur entomologists and collectors who keep collections.

Historically, insect collecting has been widespread and was in the Victorian age a very popular educational hobby . Insect collecting has left traces in European cultural history , literature and songs, e.g., Georges Brassens 's La chasse aux papillons ( The Hunt for Butterflies ). The practice is particularly common among Japanese youths.

[ citation needed ] Capture and kill techniques [ edit ] Further information: Insect trap 1877 illustration showing a variety of collection techniques A Robinson light trap for collecting moths Insects may be passively caught using traps such as funnels , pitfall traps , bottle traps , malaise traps , or flight interception traps , some of which are baited with small bits of sweet foods (such as honey). Entomologists collecting nocturnal insects (especially moths) during faunistic survey studies might utilize ultraviolet light traps such as the Robinson trap .

Aspirators , sometimes called "pooters", suck up insects too small or delicate to handle with fingers.

[ 2 ] Active capture of insects often involves using nets.

Aerial insect nets are used to collect flying insects. The bag of a butterfly net is generally constructed from a lightweight mesh to minimize damage to delicate butterfly wings.

Sweep nets are more rugged, and used to collect insects from grass and brush. A sweep net is swept back and forth through vegetation quickly turning the opening from side to side and following a shallow figure eight pattern. The collector walks forward while sweeping, and the net is moved through plants and grasses with force. Sweeping continues for some distance and then the net is flipped over, with the bag hanging over the rim, trapping the insects until they can be removed. Other types of nets used for collecting insects include beating nets and aquatic nets .

[ 3 ] Leaf litter sieves are used by coleopterists and to collect larvae.

Once collected, insects must be killed before they damage themselves trying to escape.

Killing jars are used on hard-bodied insects.  Soft-bodied insects, such as those in the larval stage, are generally fixed in a vial containing an ethanol and water solution.

[ 4 ] Storage and curation [ edit ] Equipment for preparation Insect pinning label order diagram There are several different preservation methods that are used; some of which include: dried preservation (pinning), liquid preservation, or slide mounts. Another (now mostly historical) approach is caterpillar inflation , where the innards were removed and the skin dried.

[ 5 ] Pinning is by far the most common form of insect preservation.

[ 1 ] It is better to pin an insect that has died recently enough that it has not dried yet, because it allows the thoracic muscles to adhere to the pin. Previously dried specimens must have glue applied to the pin location to avoid spinning. The large majority of the time insects are pinned vertically through their mesothorax and slightly off-center to the right of the mid-line.

[ 6 ] The pin should sit with 1/4 of the pin above the insect as to allow enough room for labels to be readable underneath.

When pinning insects with wings, it is important to display them properly: Lepidoptera wings should always be spread. When drying insects with wings such as butterflies, setting paper is used to position the wings.

Orthopteroids often have their left wings spread. In scientific collections, the insect's wings, legs, and antenna are tucked underneath it to conserve space.

When point-mounting small insects the insect is glued to a small piece of non acidic, triangle paper.  When drying an insect the relaxed insect is spread out accordingly using pins on a foam block where it can dry and retain its positioning.

When labeling insects the labels are presented in this order top down: Locality, additional locality/voucher label/accession numbers, insect identification.

[ 7 ] Insect pins [ edit ] Main article: Insect pins Part of a beetle collection. The insects are fixed in place by entomological pins which allow handling and which also pierce the data label A hoverfly double-mounted with a minuten pin and a size 3 pin Insect pins are used by entomologists for mounting insect specimens.

[ 1 ] As standard, they are 38 millimetres (1.5 in) long and come in sizes from 000 (the smallest diameter), through 00, 0, and 1, to 8 (the largest diameter).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The most generally useful size in entomology is size 2, which is 0.46 millimetres (0.018 in) in diameter, with sizes 1 and 3 being the next most useful.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] They were once commonly made from brass or silver, but these would corrode from contact with insect bodies and are no longer commonly used.

[ 8 ] Instead they are nickel-plated brass, yielding "white" or "black" enamelling, or even made from stainless steel.

[ 9 ] Similarly, the smallest sizes from 000 to 1 used to be impractical for mounting until plastic and polyethylene became commonly used for pinning bases.

[ 8 ] There are also micropins , which are 10–15 millimetres (0.39–0.59 in) long.

[ 9 ] minutens are headless micropins that are generally only made of stainless steel, used for double-mounting, where the insect is mounted on the minuten, which is pinned to a small block of soft material, which is in turn mounted on a standard, larger, insect pin.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Pinning of entomological specimens [ edit ] Directly-pinned Diptera. Though most of these specimens are at the correct height, some have been pinned incorrectly by placing the pin on the centre line, damaging characters on both sides of the thorax.

Setting boards Entomological pins . Continental pins, so called for historical reasons, are used internationally by museums and collectors. They are made of stainless steel for preference, especially for very long-term storage of specimens, but blackened steel also is used. The pins have round plastic or solid metal heads. Continental pins are of a standard length (40mm), but they are available in thicknesses numbered 000 (the thinnest), 00, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 (the thickest). This standard pin length is sufficient to accommodate an adequate number of data labels and to permit convenient handling with suitably curved forceps or tweezers, referred to as 'entomological forceps'.

[ 13 ] As an exception to this standard, there also are pins of size 7, extra-long and very strong pins for very large beetles; they are 52mm long and thicker than size 6 pins.

Direct pinning.

Direct pinning is the insertion of an entomological pin directly through the thorax of a specimen. The insects are pinned vertically through the thorax with a suitably sized pin, but by convention they are not pinned on the midline, but to the right, so as to leave at least one side undamaged.

[ 14 ] Point . A point is a triangular piece of white card. Specially designed point punches permit the production of large numbers of points of standard sizes as required. To use a point, a pin is inserted through the broad base of the triangle. To mount the specimen, a tiny amount of glue is placed on the tip and applied to the right side of the insect's thorax.

[ 14 ] If appropriate the tip of the point may be bent at the necessary angle to hold the body of the specimen horizontal when the pin is vertical, with the long axis of the insect at right angles to the point.

Sciapus nervosus glued to a card point Diptera mounted on card points Minuten pins . Insect pins without heads, 12mm long. They are used for double mounting (staging) very small insects. They also may be used profitably for staging insects of moderate size, where they have the advantage of being less damaging to the specimen. For best effect in that respect, the pin is inserted from below through the staging card, well into the thorax, but not all the way through. Alternatively the minuten pin can be inserted laterally into one side of the thorax, again preferably not all the way through.

Carding . Insects (especially Coleoptera and Hemiptera ) are glued to rectangular pieces of acid free card or Bristol board providing a stage. Typical sizes are 4.5 x 11 mm;5 x 14 mm;6 x 17 mm;10 x 21 mm;13 x 30 mm. Printed lines allow uniform placement of the entomological pin. Though this is convenient, it is dubious practice at best, because it obscures features that might be necessary for taxonomic or morphological studies. In any case, at the very least the glue should be sufficiently conveniently soluble to be removed with solvents when necessary. With such considerations in mind, Canada balsam is about as good an adhesive as any.

A carded bug Staging . When specimens are mounted on a smaller support which in turn is supported on a normal full-sized entomological pin, this is called staging. For example a specimen might be mounted on a minuten pin, typically being pinned on its side (lateral pinning) or upright (direct pinning) with the minuten pin driven into a stage, a strip of suitable material such as dried plant pith or plastic foam supported in a horizontal position on the main entomological pin; as a rule a number 3 pin is convenient. Other forms of stage include card mounts and point mounts.

The stage usually is positioned at such a distance up the vertical stage-pin, as to put the specimen at the same height as a directly pinned insect; this normally allows room for labels beneath and to allow handling of the specimen without damage.

If insects are side-pinned by pins that pass right through the specimens, then the minuten should be at such an angle that different features are damaged on the opposite sides of the thorax. Competent staging protects small specimens and displays most features conveniently. The stage-pin then is easy to manipulate when moving the specimen and the stage absorbs vibrations.

In popular culture [ edit ] Pokémon creator Satoshi Tajiri 's childhood hobby of insect collecting is the inspiration behind the popular video game series.

[ 15 ] A beetle collection becomes a source of fascination for a mentally disturbed woman in Chapter XI of MacKinlay Kantor's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel Andersonville (1955).

See also [ edit ] Identification key Killing jar Timeline of entomology References [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ a b c Manoj K., Ranjan R., Sinha M. P., Dhan A., Naaz F., Khanum G., Rani K. A., Sharma S., Raipat B. S. (2022). A Review on Insect Collection and Preservation Techniques. European Journal of Pharmaceutical and Medical Research, 9(7): 233-239.

^ Martin, J.E.H. 1977. Collecting, preparing and preserving insects, mites, and spiders. The Insects and Arachnids of Canada, Part 1. Publ. 1643, Res. Br., Canada Dep. Agric., Ottawa, ON.

Archived PDF ^ Charles Valentine Riley , 1892 Directions for collecting and preserving insects Bulletin (United States National Museum) no. 39, pt. F. Washington, Govt. Printing Office.

Full text online here ^ Hongfu, Zhu, 1949 How to know the immature insects; an illustrated key for identifying the orders and families of many of the immature insects with suggestions for collecting, rearing and studying them, by H. F. Chu.

Pictured key nature series Dubuque, Iowa, W. C. Brown Co.

Full text online here ^ Gibb, Timothy J; Oseto, Christian (2006).

Arthropod Collection and Identification: Laboratory and Field Techniques .

Academic Press . p. 67.

ISBN 0123695457 .

^ Department of Entomology.

"How to Make an Awesome Insect Collection: Purdue: entomology: insect: collect: supplies: specimen: mounting: identifying: displaying: preserve: labels" .

Purdue . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ V.M. Uys & R.P. Urban (Eds.): "How to Collect and Preserve Insects and Arachnids". Pretoria 2006. 112 p.

ISBN 1-86849-311-3 ^ a b c d Gibb & Oseto 2010 , p. 53.

^ a b c d Dhooria 2009a , p. 114.

^ Banks 1909 , p. 53.

^ Gibb & Oseto 2010 , pp. 55–56.

^ Dhooria 2009b , p. 146.

^ Common, I. F. B. (1990).

Moths of Australia . BRILL. p. 473.

ISBN 978-90-04-09227-3 . Retrieved 14 June 2022 .

^ a b Rondon, Sylvia; Corp, Mary.

"Pinning and Labeling Insects" (PDF) .

oregonstate.edu . Oregon State University . Retrieved 14 June 2022 .

^ Pokémon inspired from creator’s bug collection hobby , inshorts Works cited [ edit ] Banks, Nathan (1909). "Directions for Collecting and Preserving Insects".

Bulletin . No. 67. Smithsonian Institution, United States National Museum.

Denham, Carolyn; Field, Roderick (2014).

Merchant & Mills Sewing Book . Collins & Brown.

ISBN 9781910231012 .

Dhooria, Manjit S. (2009a). "Insect pins".

Ane's Encyclopedic Dictionary of General & Applied Entomology . Springer Science + Business Media.

ISBN 9781402086441 .

Dhooria, Manjit S. (2009b). "Minuten pins".

Ane's Encyclopedic Dictionary of General & Applied Entomology . Springer Science + Business Media.

ISBN 9781402086441 .

Gibb, Timothy J.; Oseto, Christian (2010).

Arthropod Collection and Identification: Laboratory and Field Techniques . Academic Press.

ISBN 9780080919256 .

Further reading [ edit ] Picture guide series for college students. Out of date, but very useful for beginners: Harry Edwin Jaques, 1941 How to know the insects; an illustrated key to the more common families of insects, with suggestions for collecting, mounting and studying them . His Pictured-key nature series Mt. Pleasant, Iowa, The author Full text online here Excellent college level guide Hongfu, Zhu, 1949 How to know the immature insects; an illustrated key for identifying the orders and families of many of the immature insects with suggestions for collecting, rearing and studying them, by H. F. Chu.

Pictured key nature series Dubuque, Iowa, W. C. Brown Co.

Full text online here External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Insect collecting .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Insect Collections Methodology .

Capture methods and techniques Intermediate level Collecting and Preserving Insects and Mites: Tools and Techniques ; PDF Comprehensive, detailed download. Advanced level.

How to make an insect collection; containing suggestions and hints designed to aid the beginning and less advanced collector (Wards Natural Science Establishment 1945) v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming v t e Wildlife and animal trapping Animal trapping methods Bird trapping Insect collecting Fish trapping Terrestrial animals Deadfall Cage Foothold trap Mousetrap Gun-powered mousetrap Rat trap Pitfall trap Sherman trap Timms trap Snare Trapping pit Insects and invertebrates Bottle trap Flight interception trap Malaise trap Moth trap Pan trap Pheromone trap Birds and bats Bal-chatri Birdlime Harp trap Heligoland trap Mist net Rocket net Fishing Almadraba Barrier net Corf Crab trap Eel buck Fish corral Fish nest Fish wheel Fishing basket Fishing weir Lobster trap Putcher fishing Trabucco Related articles Bait Camera trap Conservation and restoration of insect specimens Decoy Trapline Booby trap Butterfly net Hand net Hunting Professional hunter Fur trade Mantrap Media related to Traps at Wikimedia Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c6cf9dc48‐vkr6p
Cached time: 20250814202359
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.459 seconds
Real time usage: 0.575 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2351/1000000
Revision size: 18279/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 76361/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2424/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 62025/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.279/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9970610/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  466.694      1 -total
 20.25%   94.528      1 Template:Reflist
 17.16%   80.091      4 Template:Cite_book
 14.29%   66.708      2 Template:Navbox
 12.91%   60.241      1 Template:Hunting_topics
 12.88%   60.128      1 Template:Short_description
 10.20%   47.592      2 Template:Ambox
 10.11%   47.176      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.36%   43.667      2 Template:Sister_project
  9.14%   42.677     11 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:889726:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814202359 and revision id 1305909904. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Insect_collecting&oldid=1305909904 " Categories : Insect-related occupations or hobbies Collecting Natural history Cultural history Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2009 All articles lacking in-text citations Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Insect collecting 11 languages Add topic

