Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cultural influence Toggle Cultural influence subsection 1.1 Influence on Western culture 2 Architecture 3 Art Toggle Art subsection 3.1 Illumination 3.2 Iconography 3.3 Eastern Christian art 3.4 Catholic art 3.5 Protestant art 4 Education 5 Literature and poetry 6 Medicine and health care 7 Music 8 Philosophy 9 Science and technology Toggle Science and technology subsection 9.1 Individual scientists' beliefs 9.2 Eastern Christianity 9.3 Catholic Church 9.3.1 Jesuits in science 9.4 Protestant 10 Thought and work ethic 11 Festivals 12 Religious life 13 Family life 14 Cuisine 15 Cleanliness 16 Christian pop culture Toggle Christian pop culture subsection 16.1 Film industry 16.2 Televangelism 17 Christianophile 18 See also 19 References Toggle References subsection 19.1 Works cited 20 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Christian culture 12 languages العربية Ελληνικά فارسی 한국어 עברית Lingua Franca Nova मराठी Polski Shqip Suomi Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cultural practices common to Christianity Examples of Christian culture Clockwise from top: Windows of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, Christ the Redeemer statue in Rio de Janeiro, Nativity scene , Notre-Dame cathedral in Paris, Eastern Orthodox wedding Part of a series on Christian culture Christian culture Christian tradition Eastern Christianity Western Christianity Byzantine culture Protestant culture Holidays Mormon culture Cultural Christian Art Christian symbolism Early art Catholic art Lutheran art Church architecture Icons Media Film industry Radio formats Video games Literature American Catholic literature Bible fiction Christian drama Christian poetry Christian novel Christian science fiction Spiritual autobiography Music CCM Christmas music Church music Gospel music Liturgical music Science List of Christian scientists Merton thesis List of Christian Nobel laureates Catholic Church and science Parson-naturalist Quakers in science History Christianity in civilization Christian history Catholic history Eastern Orthodox history Christian influences in Islam Christianity portal v t e Christian culture generally includes all the cultural practices which have developed around the religion of Christianity . There are variations in the application of Christian beliefs in different cultures and traditions.

Christian culture has influenced and assimilated much from the Middle Eastern , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Greco-Roman , Byzantine , Western culture , [ 3 ] Slavic and Caucasian culture. During the early Roman Empire , Christendom has been divided in the pre-existing Greek East and Latin West . Consequently, different versions of the Christian cultures arose with their own rites and practices, Christianity remains culturally diverse in its Western and Eastern branches .

Christianity played a prominent role in the development of Western civilization , in particular, the Catholic Church and Protestantism .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Western culture, throughout most of its history, has been nearly equivalent to Christian culture.

[ 6 ] Outside the Western world, Christianity has had an influence on various cultures, such as in Latin America, Africa and Asia.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Christians have made a noted contributions to human progress in a broad and diverse range of fields, both historically and in modern times, including science and technology , [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] medicine , [ 15 ] fine arts and architecture , [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] politics, literatures , [ 18 ] music , [ 18 ] philanthropy , philosophy , [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] : 15 ethics , [ 22 ] humanism , [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] theatre and business.

[ 17 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] According to 100 Years of Nobel Prizes a review of Nobel prizes award between 1901 and 2000 reveals that (65.4%) of Nobel Prizes Laureates, have identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference.

[ 29 ] Cultural influence [ edit ] Main article: Role of Christianity in civilization Gutenberg Bible , was the earliest major book printed using mass-produced movable metal type in West.

[ 30 ] The Bible has had a profound influence on Western civilization and on cultures around the globe; it has contributed to the formation of Western law , art , texts , and education.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] With a literary tradition spanning two millennia, the Bible is one of the most influential works ever written. From practices of personal hygiene to philosophy and ethics, the Bible has directly and indirectly influenced politics and law, war and peace, sexual morals, marriage and family life, toilet etiquette , letters and learning, the arts, economics, social justice, medical care and more.

[ 33 ] The Gutenberg Bible was the first book printed in Europe using movable type .

[ 30 ] Since the spread of Christianity from the Levant to Asia Minor , Mesopotamia , Europe , North Africa and Horn of Africa during the early Roman Empire , Christendom has been divided in the pre-existing Greek East and Latin West . Consequently, different versions of the Christian cultures arose with their own rites and practices, centered around the cities such as Rome ( Western Christianity ) and Carthage , whose communities was called Western or Latin Christendom , [ 34 ] and Constantinople ( Eastern Christianity ), Antioch ( Syriac Christianity ), Kerala ( Indian Christianity ) and Alexandria , among others, whose communities were called Eastern or Oriental Christendom.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The Byzantine Empire was one of the peaks in Christian history and Christian civilization .

[ 37 ] From the 11th to 13th centuries, Latin Christendom rose to the central role of the Western world and Western culture .

[ 38 ] Outside the Western world, Christianity has had an influence on various cultures, such as in Africa, the Near East, Middle East, Central Asia, East Asia, Southeast Asia, and the Indian subcontinent.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Scholars and intellectuals agree Christians in the Middle East have made significant contributions to Arab and Islamic civilization since the introduction of Islam , and they have had a significant impact contributing the culture of the Mashriq , Turkey , and Iran .

[ 39 ] [ 8 ] Eastern Christian scientists and scholars of the medieval Islamic world (particularly Jacobite and Nestorian Christians) contributed to the Arab Islamic civilization during the reign of the Umayyad and the Abbasid , by translating works of Greek philosophers to Syriac and afterwards, to Arabic .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] They also excelled in philosophy, science, theology, and medicine.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Historian Paul Legutko of Stanford University said the Catholic Church is "at the center of the development of the values, ideas, science, laws, and institutions which constitute what we call Western civilization." [ 45 ] The Eastern Orthodox Church has played a prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern and Southeastern Europe , the Caucasus , and the Near East .

[ 46 ] The Oriental Orthodox Churches have played a prominent role in the history and culture of Armenia , Egypt , Turkey , Eritrea , Ethiopia , Sudan and parts of the Middle East and India .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Protestants have extensively developed a unique culture that has made major contributions in education, the humanities and sciences , the political and social order, the economy and the arts, and many other fields.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Influence on Western culture [ edit ] Vatican City and St. Peter's Basilica .

Christianity played a prominent role in the development of Western civilization , in particular, the Catholic Church and Protestantism .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Western culture, throughout most of its history, has been nearly equivalent to Christian culture, and much of the population of the Western hemisphere could broadly be described as cultural Christians . The notion of Europe and the Western world has been intimately connected with the concept of Christianity and Christendom , many even consider Christianity to be the link that created a unified European identity , [ 6 ] although some progress originated elsewhere: Renaissance and Romanticism began with the curiosity and passion of the pagan world of old.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Although Western culture contained several polytheistic religions during its early years under the Greek and Roman Empires , as the centralized Roman power waned, the dominance of the Catholic Church was the only consistent force in Western Europe.

[ 56 ] Until the Age of Enlightenment , [ 57 ] Christian culture guided the course of philosophy, literature, art, music, and science.

[ 56 ] [ 58 ] Christian disciplines of the respective arts have subsequently developed into Christian philosophy , Christian art , Christian music , Christian literature , etc. Art and literature, law, education, and politics were preserved in the teachings of the Church, in an environment that, otherwise, would have probably seen their loss. The Church founded many cathedrals , universities , monasteries and seminaries , some of which continue to exist today.

Medieval Christianity created the first modern universities.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] The Catholic Church established a hospital system in medieval Europe that vastly improved upon the Roman valetudinaria .

[ 61 ] These hospitals were established to cater to "particular social groups marginalized by poverty, sickness, and age", according to historian of hospitals, Guenter Risse.

[ 62 ] Christianity also had a strong impact on all other aspects of life: marriage and family, education, the humanities and sciences, the political and social order, the economy, and the arts.

[ 63 ] Notre-Dame de Paris in Paris , France is among the most recognizable symbols of the civilization of Christendom .

Christianity had a significant impact on education and science and medicine as the church created the basis of the Western system of education , [ 64 ] and was the sponsor of founding universities in the Western world as the university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian setting.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Many clerics throughout history have made significant contributions to science and Jesuits in particular have made numerous significant contributions to the development of science .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] Some scholars state that Christianity contributed to the rise of the Scientific Revolution .

[ 73 ] Protestantism also has had an important influence on science. According to the Merton Thesis , there was a positive correlation between the rise of English Puritanism and German Pietism on the one hand, and early experimental science on the other.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] The cultural influence of Christianity includes social welfare , [ 77 ] founding hospitals , [ 78 ] economics (as the Protestant work ethic ), [ 79 ] [ 80 ] natural law (which would later influence the creation of international law ), [ 81 ] politics, [ 82 ] architecture, [ 83 ] literature, [ 84 ] personal hygiene ( ablution ), [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] and family life.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Historically, extended families were the basic family unit in the Christian culture and countries .

[ 91 ] Christianity played a role in ending practices common among pagan societies, such as human sacrifice, slavery, [ 92 ] infanticide and polygamy.

[ 93 ] Scientists such as Newton and Galileo believed that God would be better understood if God's creation was better understood.

[ 94 ] Architecture [ edit ] Main article: Church architecture Tomb of Jesus in the Holy Sepulchre church in Jerusalem .

The architecture of cathedrals, basilicas and abbey churches is characterised by the buildings' large scale and follows one of several branching traditions of form, function and style that all ultimately derive from the Early Christian architectural traditions established in the Constantinian period.

Cathedrals in particular, as well as many abbey churches and basilicas , have certain complex structural forms that are found less often in parish churches . They also tend to display a higher level of contemporary architectural style and the work of accomplished craftsmen, and occupy a status both ecclesiastical and social that an ordinary parish church does not have.  Such a cathedral or great church is generally one of the finest buildings within its region and is a focus of local pride. Many cathedrals and basilicas, and a number of abbey churches are among the world's most renowned works of architecture. These include St. Peter's Basilica , Notre Dame de Paris , Cologne Cathedral , Salisbury Cathedral , Prague Cathedral , Lincoln Cathedral , the Basilica of St Denis , the Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore , the Basilica of San Vitale , St Mark's Basilica , Westminster Abbey , Saint Basil's Cathedral , Washington National Cathedral , Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception , Cathedral Basilica of Saint Louis , Gaudí's incomplete Sagrada Familia and the ancient church of Hagia Sophia , now a museum.

Hagia Sophia has been described as architectural and cultural icon of Byzantine and Eastern Orthodox civilization .

[ 95 ] The earliest large churches date from Late Antiquity . As Christianity and the construction of churches and cathedrals spread throughout the world, their manner of building was dependent upon local materials and local techniques. Different styles of architecture developed and their fashion spread, carried by the establishment of monastic orders, by the posting of bishops from one region to another and by the travelling of master stonemasons who served as architects.

[ 96 ] The styles of the great church buildings are successively known as Early Christian , Byzantine , Romanesque , Gothic , Renaissance , Baroque , various Revival styles of the late 18th to early 20th centuries and Modern .

[ 83 ] Overlaid on each of the academic styles are the regional characteristics. Some of these characteristics are so typical of a particular country or region that they appear, regardless of style, in the architecture of churches designed many centuries apart.

[ 83 ] Saint Basil's Cathedral Sagrada Família Hagia Sophia San Francisco de Asís Church Florence Cathedral Art [ edit ] Main article: Christian art The Last Judgment by Michelangelo Christian art is sacred art which uses themes and imagery from Christianity. Most Christian groups use or have used art to some extent, although some have had strong objections to some forms of religious image, and there have been major periods of iconoclasm within Christianity.

Images of Jesus and narrative scenes from the Life of Christ are the most common subjects, and scenes from the Old Testament play a part in the art of most denominations.  Images of the Virgin Mary and saints are much rarer in Protestant art than that of Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy.

Christianity makes far wider use of images than related religions, in which figurative representations are forbidden, such as Islam and Judaism .  However, there is also a considerable history of aniconism in Christianity from various periods.

Illumination [ edit ] Main article: Illuminated manuscript Armenian manuscript of 1053. Work of Johannes An illuminated manuscript is a manuscript in which the text is supplemented by the addition of decoration. The earliest surviving substantive illuminated manuscripts are from the period AD 400 to 600, primarily produced in Ireland, Constantinople and Italy. The majority of surviving manuscripts are from the Middle Ages , although many illuminated manuscripts survive from the 15th-century Renaissance , along with a very limited number from Late Antiquity .

Most illuminated manuscripts were created as codices , which had superseded scrolls; some isolated single sheets survive. A very few illuminated manuscript fragments survive on papyrus . Most medieval manuscripts, illuminated or not, were written on parchment (most commonly of calf , sheep, or goat skin), but most manuscripts important enough to illuminate were written on the best quality of parchment, called vellum , traditionally made of unsplit calfskin , although high quality parchment from other skins was also called parchment .

Iconography [ edit ] Main articles: Iconoclasm , Religious image , Christian icons , and Christian symbolism There are few old ceramic icons, such as this St. Theodor icon which dates to ca. 900 (from Preslav , Bulgaria) Christian art began, about two centuries after Christ, by borrowing motifs from Roman Imperial imagery, classical Greek and Roman religion and popular art.

Religious images are used to some extent by the Abrahamic Christian faith, and often contain highly complex iconography, which reflects centuries of accumulated tradition. In the Late Antique period iconography began to be standardised, and to relate more closely to biblical texts, although many gaps in the canonical Gospel narratives were plugged with matter from the apocryphal gospels . Eventually the Church would succeed in weeding most of these out, but some remain, like the ox and ass in the Nativity of Christ .

An icon is a religious work of art, most commonly a painting, from Orthodox Christianity . Christianity has used symbolism from its very beginnings.

[ 97 ] In both East and West, numerous iconic types of Christ, Mary and saints and other subjects were developed; the number of named types of icons of Mary, with or without the infant Christ, was especially large in the East, whereas Christ Pantocrator was much the commonest image of Christ.

Christian symbolism invests objects or actions with an inner meaning expressing Christian ideas. Christianity has borrowed from the common stock of significant symbols known to most periods and to all regions of the world.

Religious symbolism is effective when it appeals to both the intellect and the emotions. Especially important depictions of Mary include the Hodegetria and Panagia types. Traditional models evolved for narrative paintings, including large cycles covering the events of the Life of Christ, the Life of the Virgin , parts of the Old Testament, and, increasingly, the lives of popular saints . Especially in the West, a system of attributes developed for identifying individual figures of saints by a standard appearance and symbolic objects held by them; in the East they were more likely to identified by text labels.

Each saint has a story and a reason why he or she led an exemplary life. Symbols have been used to tell these stories throughout the history of the Church. A number of Christian saints are traditionally represented by a symbol or iconic motif associated with their life, termed an attribute or emblem , in order to identify them. The study of these forms part of iconography in Art history .

Eastern Christian art [ edit ] Main article: Byzantine art c.

6th-century icon of Christ Pantocrator , a very rare pre- Iconoclasm icon.

The dedication of Constantinople as capital in 330 AD created a great new Christian artistic centre for the Eastern Roman Empire , which soon became a separate political unit. Major Constantinopolitan churches built under Constantine and his son, Constantius II , included the original foundations of Hagia Sophia and the Church of the Holy Apostles .

[ 98 ] As the Western Roman Empire disintegrated and was taken over by "barbarian" peoples, the art of the Byzantine Empire reached levels of sophistication, power and artistry not previously seen in Christian art, and set the standards for those parts of the West still in touch with Constantinople.

Church of Agios Panteleimonos, Greece.

This achievement was checked by the controversy over the use of graven images , and the proper interpretation of the Second Commandment, which led to the crisis of Iconoclasm or destruction of religious images, which racked the Empire between 726 and 843. The restoration of Orthodoxy resulted in a strict standardization of religious imagery within the Eastern Church . Byzantine art became increasingly conservative, as the form of images themselves, many accorded divine origin or thought to have been be painted by Saint Luke or other figures, was held to have a status not far off that of a scriptural text. They could be copied, but not improved upon. As a concession to Iconoclast sentiment, monumental religious sculpture was effectively banned. Neither of these attitudes were held in Western Europe, but Byzantine art nonetheless had great influence there until the High Middle Ages , and remained very popular long after that, with vast numbers of icons of the Cretan School exported to Europe as late as the Renaissance . Where possible, Byzantine artists were borrowed for projects such as mosaics in Venice and Palermo . The enigmatic frescoes at Castelseprio may be an example of work by a Greek artist working in Italy.

The art of Eastern Catholicism has always been rather closer to the Orthodox art of Greece and Russia, and in countries near the Orthodox world, notably Poland, Catholic art has many Orthodox influences. The Black Madonna of Częstochowa may well have been of Byzantine origin – it has been repainted and this is hard to tell. Other images that are certainly of Greek origin, like the Salus Populi Romani and Our Lady of Perpetual Help , both icons in Rome, have been subjects of specific veneration for centuries.

Although the influence has often been resisted, especially in Russia, Catholic art has also affected Orthodox depictions in many respects, especially in countries like Romania, and in the post-Byzantine Cretan School , which led Greek Orthodox art under Venetian rule in the 15th and 16th centuries.

El Greco left Crete when relatively young, but Michael Damaskinos returned after a brief period in Venice, and was able to switch between Italian and Greek styles. Even the traditionalist Theophanes the Cretan , working mainly on Mount Athos , nevertheless shows unmistakable Western influence.

Many Eastern Orthodox states in Eastern Europe, as well as to some degree the Muslim states of the eastern Mediterranean , preserved many aspects of the empire's culture and art for centuries afterward. A number of states contemporary with the Byzantine Empire were culturally influenced by it, without actually being part of it (the " Byzantine commonwealth "). These included Bulgaria, Serbia , and Kievan Rus' , as well as some non-Orthodox states like the Republic of Venice and the Kingdom of Sicily , which had close ties to the Byzantine Empire despite being in other respects part of western European culture. Art produced by Eastern Orthodox Christians living in the Ottoman Empire is often called "post-Byzantine". Certain artistic traditions that originated in the Byzantine Empire, particularly in regard to icon painting and church architecture, are maintained in Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Russia and other Eastern Orthodox countries to the present day.

Catholic art [ edit ] Main article: Roman Catholic art Bernini 's Ecstasy of Saint Theresa Roman Catholic art consists of all visual works produced in an attempt to illustrate, supplement and portray in tangible form the teachings of the Catholic Church . This includes sculpture, painting, mosaics, metalwork, embroidery and even architecture. Catholic art has played a leading role in the history and development of Western art since at least the 4th century. The principal subject matter of Catholic art has been the life and times of Jesus Christ , along with those of his disciples, the saints, and the events of the Jewish Old Testament .

The earliest surviving art works are the painted frescoes on the walls of the catacombs and meeting houses of the persecuted Christians of the Roman Empire. The Christian Church in Rome was influenced by the Roman style of art and the religious Christian artists of the time. The stone sarcophagi of Roman Christians exhibit the earliest surviving carved statuary of Jesus, Mary and other biblical figures. The legalisation of Christianity transformed Catholic art, which adopted richer forms such as mosaics and illuminated manuscripts. The iconoclasm controversy briefly divided the eastern and western churches, after which artistic development progressed in separate directions.

Romanesque and Gothic art flowered in the Western Church as the style of painting and statuary moved in an increasingly naturalistic direction. The Protestant Reformation produced new waves of image-destruction, to which the Church responded with the dramatic and emotive Baroque and Rococo styles. In the 19th century the leadership in western art moved away from the Catholic Church which, after embracing historical revivalism was increasingly affected by the modernist movement, a movement that in its "rebellion" against nature, counters the Church's emphasis on nature as a good creation of God.

Renaissance artists such as Raphael , Michelangelo , Leonardo da Vinci , Bernini , Botticelli , Fra Angelico , Tintoretto , Caravaggio , and Titian , were among a multitude of innovative virtuosos sponsored by the Church.

[ 99 ] British art historian Kenneth Clark wrote that Western Europe's first "great age of civilisation" was ready to begin around the year 1000. From 1100, he wrote, monumental abbeys and cathedrals were constructed and decorated with sculptures, hangings, mosaics and works belonging one of the greatest epochs of art and providing stark contrast to the monotonous and cramped conditions of ordinary living during the period.

Abbot Suger of the Abbey of St. Denis is considered an influential early patron of Gothic architecture and believed that love of beauty brought people closer to God: "The dull mind rises to truth through that which is material". Clarke calls this "the intellectual background of all the sublime works of art of the next century and in fact has remained the basis of our belief of the value of art until today".

[ 100 ] Later, during The Renaissance and Counter-Reformation , Catholic artists produced many of the unsurpassed masterpieces of Western art – often inspired by biblical themes: from Michelangelo's Moses and David and Pietà sculptures, to Da Vinci's Last Supper and Raphael's various Madonna paintings. Referring to a "great outburst of creative energy such as took place in Rome between 1620 and 1660", Kenneth Clarke wrote: [ 100 ] [W]ith a single exception, the great artists of the time were all sincere, conforming Christians.

Guercino spent much of his mornings in prayer; Bernini frequently went into retreats and practised the Spiritual Exercises of Saint Ignatius ; Rubens attended Mass every morning before beginning work. The exception was Caravaggio , who was like the hero of a modern play, except that he happened to paint very well.
This conformism was not based on fear of the Inquisition, but on the perfectly simple belief that the faith which had inspired the great saints of the preceding generation was something by which a man should regulate his life.

Adoration of the Shepherds by Gerard van Honthorst , 1622 Master of the Holy Kinship , 1500 The Transfiguration by Raphael , c. 1520 Michelangelo 's Pietà in St. Peter's Basilica Leonardo da Vinci 's Last Supper , 1498.

Protestant art [ edit ] Further information: Hymnody of continental Europe , Anglican church music , Church architecture § The Reformation and its influence on church architecture , and Lutheran art Hans Holbein the Younger 's Noli me tangere a relatively rare Protestant oil painting of Christ from the Reformation period. It is small, and generally naturalistic in style, avoiding iconic elements like the halo , which is barely discernible.

The Protestant Reformation during the 16th century in Europe almost entirely rejected the existing tradition of Catholic art, and very often destroyed as much of it as it could reach.  A new artistic tradition developed, producing far smaller quantities of art that followed Protestant agendas and diverged drastically from the southern European tradition and the humanist art produced during the High Renaissance .  In turn, the Catholic Counter-Reformation both reacted against and responded to Protestant criticisms of art in Roman Catholicism to produce a more stringent style of Catholic art.  Protestant religious art both embraced Protestant values and assisted in the proliferation of Protestantism, but the amount of religious art produced in Protestant countries was hugely reduced.  Artists in Protestant countries diversified into secular forms of art like history painting , landscape painting , portrait painting and still life .

Prominent painters with Protestant background were, for example, Albrecht Dürer , Hans Holbein the Younger , Lucas Cranach , Rembrandt , and Vincent van Gogh . World literature was enriched by the works of Edmund Spenser , John Milton , John Bunyan , John Donne , John Dryden , Daniel Defoe , William Wordsworth , Jonathan Swift , Johann Wolfgang Goethe , Friedrich Schiller , Samuel Taylor Coleridge , Edgar Allan Poe , Matthew Arnold , Conrad Ferdinand Meyer , Theodor Fontane , Washington Irving , Robert Browning , Emily Dickinson , Emily Brontë , Charles Dickens , Nathaniel Hawthorne , Thomas Stearns Eliot , John Galsworthy , Thomas Mann , William Faulkner , John Updike , and many others.

Education [ edit ] Further information: Christian school , Christian college , Catholic school , Seminary , Cathedral school , Catholic university , and Medieval university Students studying outside Wolfington Hall Jesuit Residence in Georgetown University The university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian setting.

[ 66 ] [ 65 ] [ 101 ] Prior to the establishment of universities, European higher education took place for hundreds of years in Christian cathedral schools or monastic schools ( Scholae monasticae ), in which monks and nuns taught classes; evidence of these immediate forerunners of the later university at many places dates back to the 6th century AD.

[ 102 ] Missionary activity for the Catholic Church has always incorporated education of evangelized peoples as part of its social ministry. History shows that in evangelized lands, the first people to operate schools were Roman Catholics. In some countries, the Church is the main provider of education or significantly supplements government forms of education. Presently, the Church operates the world's largest non-governmental school system.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Many of Western Civilization's most influential universities were founded by the Catholic Church.

The Catholic St. Xavier's College in Mumbai , is one of the most prestigious liberal arts colleges in India The Catholic Church founded the West's first universities, which were preceded by the schools attached to monasteries and cathedrals, and generally staffed by monks and friars.

[ 105 ] Universities began springing up in Italian towns like Salerno , which became a leading medical school, translating the work of Greek and Arabic physicians into Latin.

Bologna University became the most influential of the early universities, which first specialised in canon law and civil law .

Paris University , specialising in such topics as theology, came to rival Bologna under the supervision of Notre Dame Cathedral .

Oxford University in England later came rival Paris in Theology and Salamanca University was founded in Spain in 1243. According to the historian Geoffrey Blainey , the universities benefitted from the use of Latin, the common language of the Church, and its internationalist reach, and their role was to "teach, argue and reason within a Christian framework".

[ 105 ] The medieval universities of Western Christendom were well-integrated across all of Western Europe, encouraged freedom of enquiry and produced a great variety of fine scholars and natural philosophers, including Robert Grosseteste of the University of Oxford , an early expositor of a systematic method of scientific experimentation; [ 106 ] and Saint Albert the Great , a pioneer of biological field research [ 107 ] The Catholic church has always been involved in education, since the founding of the first universities of Europe. It runs and sponsors thousands of primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities throughout the world.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] As the Reformers wanted all members of the church to be able to read the Bible, education on all levels got a strong boost. Compulsory education for both boys and girls was introduced. For example, the Puritans who established Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1628 founded Harvard College only eight years later. About a dozen other colleges followed in the 18th century, including Yale University (1701).

Pennsylvania also became a centre of learning.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] While Princeton University was a Presbyterian foundation. Protestantism also initiated translations of the Bible into national languages and hereby supported the development of national literatures.

A large number of mainline Protestants have played leadership roles in many aspects of American life, including politics, business, science, the arts, and education. They founded most of the country's leading institutes of higher education.

[ 112 ] The Ivy League universities have strong White Anglo-Saxon Protestant historical ties, and their influence continues today. Until about World War II, Ivy League universities were composed largely of WASP students.

Some of the first colleges and universities in America, including Harvard , [ 113 ] Yale , [ 114 ] Princeton , [ 115 ] Columbia , [ 116 ] Dartmouth , Williams , Bowdoin , Middlebury , and Amherst , all were founded by the Mainline Protestantism , as were later Carleton , Duke , [ 117 ] Oberlin , Beloit , Pomona , [ 118 ] Rollins and Colorado College .

According to Pew Center study there is correlation between education and income, about (59%) of American Anglican have a graduate and post-graduate degree, and about (56%) of Episcopalians and (47%) of Presbyterians and (46%) United Church of Christ , [ 119 ] have a graduate and post-graduate degree.

A Catholic nun teach Mathematics in Santa Inês College in São Paulo in the year 1917.

A Pew Center study about religion and education around the world in 2016, found that Christians ranked as the second most educated religious group around in the world after Jews with an average of 9.3 years of schooling, [ 120 ] and the highest of years of schooling among Christians found in Germany (13.6), [ 120 ] New Zealand (13.5) [ 120 ] and Estonia (13.1).

[ 120 ] Christians were also found to have the second highest number of graduate and post-graduate degrees per capita while in absolute numbers ranked in the first place (220 million).

[ 120 ] Between the various Christian communities , Singapore outranks other nations in terms of Christians who obtain a university degree in institutions of higher education (67%), [ 120 ] followed by the Christians of Israel (63%), [ 121 ] and the Christians of Georgia (57%).

[ 120 ] According to the study, Christians in North America, Europe, Middle East, North Africa and Asia-Pacific regions are highly educated since many of the world universities were built by the historic Christian Churches , [ 120 ] in addition to the historical evidence that "Christian monks built libraries and, in the days before printing presses, preserved important earlier writings produced in Latin, Greek and Arabic".

[ 120 ] According to the same study, Christians have a significant amount of gender equality in educational attainment, [ 120 ] and the study suggests that one of the reasons is the encouragement of the Protestant Reformers in promoting the education of women , which led to the eradication of illiteracy among females in Protestant communities.

[ 120 ] According to the same study "there is a large and pervasive gap in educational attainment between Muslims and Christians in sub-Saharan Africa" as Muslim adults in this region are far less educated than their Christian counterparts, [ 120 ] with scholars suggesting that this gap is due to the educational facilities that were created by Christian missionaries during the colonial era for fellow believers.

[ 120 ] Literature and poetry [ edit ] Main articles: Christian literature and Christian poetry Gutenberg Bible . The Bible was authored by Jews during the Iron Ages and the Classical era . It comprise cultural values, basic human values, mythology and religious beliefs of both Judaism and Christianity.

[ 122 ] Christian literature is writing that deals with Christian themes and incorporates the Christian world view . This constitutes a huge body of extremely varied writing.

Christian poetry is any poetry that contains Christian teachings, themes, or references. The influence of Christianity on poetry has been great in any area that Christianity has taken hold. Christian poems often directly reference the Bible, while others provide allegory .

While falling within the strict definition of literature, the Bible is not generally considered literature. However, the Bible has been treated and appreciated as literature; the Bible is a corner stone of Western civilization.

[ 123 ] The King James Version in particular has long been considered a masterpiece of English prose, whatever may be thought of its religious significance. The Authorized Version has been called "the most influential version of the most influential book in the world, in what is now its most influential language", "the most important book in English religion and culture", and "the most celebrated book in the English-speaking world ".

David Crystal has estimated that it is responsible for 257 idioms in English, examples include feet of clay and reap the whirlwind . Furthermore, prominent atheist figures such as the late Christopher Hitchens and Richard Dawkins have praised the King James Version as being "a giant step in the maturing of English literature" and "a great work of literature", respectively, with Dawkins then adding, "A native speaker of English who has never read a word of the King James Bible is verging on the barbarian".

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Several retellings of the Bible, or parts of the Bible, have also been made with the aim of emphasising its literary qualities. With estimated sales of over 5 billion copies, the Bible is widely considered to be the best-selling book of all time.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] It sells approximately 100 million copies annually, [ 128 ] [ 129 ] and has been a major influence on literature and history, especially in the West , where the Gutenberg Bible was the first book printed using movable type .

The stories of the saints which are preserved in the Golden Legend In Byzantine literature , four different cultural elements are recognised: the Greek , the Christian, the Roman , and the Oriental. Byzantine literature is often classified in five groups: historians and annalists, encyclopaedists (Patriarch Photios, Michael Psellus , and Michael Choniates are regarded as the greatest encyclopaedists of Byzantium) and essayists, and writers of secular poetry. The only genuine heroic epic of the Byzantines is the Digenis Acritas . The remaining two groups include the new literary species: ecclesiastical and theological literature, and popular poetry.

[ 130 ] And it was in Alexandria that Graeco-Oriental Christianity had its birth. There the Septuagint translation had been made; there that that fusion of Greek philosophy and Jewish religion took place which culminated in Philo ; there flourished the mystic speculative Neoplatonism associated with Plotinus and Porphyry . At Alexandria the great Greek ecclesiastical writers worked alongside pagan rhetoricians and philosophers; several were born here, e.g.

Origen , Athanasius , and his opponent Arius , also Cyril and Synesius . On Egyptian soil monasticism began and thrived. After Alexandria, Antioch held great prestige, where a school of Christian commentators flourished under St. John Chrysostom and where later arose the Christian universal chronicles. In surrounding Syria, we find the germs of Greek ecclesiastical poetry, while from neighboring Palestine came St. John of Damascus , one of the Greek Fathers .

The list of Catholic authors and literary works is vast. With a literary tradition spanning two millennia, the Bible and Papal Encyclicals have been constants of the Catholic canon but countless other historical works may be listed as noteworthy in terms of their influence on Western society. From late Antiquity, St Augustine 's book Confessions , which outlines his sinful youth and conversion to Christianity, is widely considered to be the first autobiography of ever written in the canon of Western Literature . Augustine profoundly influenced the coming medieval worldview. The Summa Theologica , written 1265–1274, is the best-known work of Thomas Aquinas (c.1225–1274), and although unfinished, "one of the classics of the history of philosophy and one of the most influential works of Western literature." [ 131 ] It is intended as a manual for beginners in theology and a compendium of all of the main theological teachings of the Church. It presents the reasoning for almost all points of Christian theology in the West. The epic poetry of the Italian Dante and his Divine Comedy of the late Middle Ages is also considered immensely influential. The English statesman and philosopher, Thomas More , wrote the seminal work Utopia in 1516.

St Ignatius Loyola , a key figure in the Catholic counter-reformation, is the author of an influential book of meditations known as the Spiritual Exercises .

Catholics have also given greater value to the world through literary works by Dante Alighieri , Geoffrey Chaucer , John Dryden , Walker Percy , Jack Kerouac , Evelyn Waugh , Alexander Pope , Honoré de Balzac , Oscar Wilde , Thomas Merton , Toni Morrison , Ernest Hemingway , J.R.R. Tolkien , G. K. Chesterton , Claude McKay , Paul Verlaine , Graham Greene , Sigrid Undset , Tennessee Williams , Francois Mauriac , Flannery O'Connor , Gerard Manley Hopkins , Paul Claudel , F. Scott Fitzgerald , Michel de Montaigne , Siegfried Sassoon , John Henry Newman , Hugo von Hofmannsthal , Arthur Rimbaud , Joseph Conrad , Miguel de Cervantes , Czeslaw Milosz , Hilaire Belloc , John of the Cross , Luis Vaz De Camoes , Edith Sitwell , Thomas More , among others.

Medicine and health care [ edit ] See also: Catholic Church and health care Panorama of Siena's Santa Maria della Scala Hospital , one of Europe's oldest hospitals The administration of the Eastern and Western Roman Empires split and the demise of the Western Empire by the 6th century was accompanied by a series of violent invasions and precipitated the collapse of cities and civic institutions of learning, along with their links to the learning of classical Greece and Rome. For the next thousand years, medical knowledge would change very little.

[ 132 ] A scholarly medical tradition maintained itself in the more stable East, but in the West, scholarship virtually disappeared outside of the Church, where monks were aware of a dwindling range of medical texts.

[ 133 ] Hospitality was considered an obligation of Christian charity and bishops' houses and the valetudinaria of wealthier Christians were used to tend the sick. And the legacy of this early period was, in the words of Porter, that "Christianity planted the hospital: the well-endowed establishments of the Levant and the scattered houses of the West shared a common religious ethos of charity." The Byzantine Empire was one of the first empires to have flourishing medical establishments. Prior to the Byzantine Empire the Roman Empire had hospitals specifically for soldiers and slaves. However, none of these establishments were for the public. The hospitals in Byzantium were originally started by the church to act as a place for the poor to have access to basic amenities. Hospitals were usually separated between men and women. Although the remains of these hospitals have not been discovered by archaeologists, recordings of hospitals from the Byzantine Empire describe large buildings that had the core feature of an open hearth.

[ 134 ] The establishments of the Byzantine Empire resembled the beginning of what we now know as modern hospitals. The first hospital was erected by Leontius of Antioch between the years 344 to 358 and was a place for strangers and migrants to find refuge. Around the same time, a deacon named Marathonius was in charge of hospitals and monasteries in Constantinople. His main objective was to improve urban aesthetics, illustrating hospitals as a main part of Byzantine cities. These early hospitals were designed for the poor. In fact, most hospitals throughout the Byzantine Empire were almost exclusively utilized by the poor. This may be due to descriptions of hospitals similar to " Gregory Nazianzen who called the hospital a stairway to heaven, implying that it aimed only to ease death for the chronically or terminally ill rather than promote recovery".

[ 134 ] There is debate between scholars as to why these institutions were started by the church. Many scholars believe that the church founded hospitals in order to receive additional donations. Whatever the case for these hospitals, they began to diffuse across the empire. Soon after, St. Basil of Caesarea developed a place for the sick in which provided refuge for the sick and homeless.

[ 135 ] Salesian sister caring for sick and poor in former Madras Presidency . Catholic women have been heavily involved as care givers Geoffrey Blainey likened the Catholic Church in its activities during the Middle Ages to an early version of a welfare state: "It conducted hospitals for the old and orphanages for the young; hospices for the sick of all ages; places for the lepers; and hostels or inns where pilgrims could buy a cheap bed and meal". It supplied food to the population during famine and distributed food to the poor. This welfare system the church funded through collecting taxes on a large scale and possessing large farmlands and estates.

[ 136 ] It was common for monks and clerics to practice medicine and medical students in northern European universities often took minor Holy orders. Mediaeval hospitals had a strongly Christian ethos, and were, in the words of historian of medicine Roy Porter , "religious foundations through and through", and Ecclesiastical regulations were passed to govern medicine, partly to prevent clergymen profiting from medicine.

[ 137 ] During Europe's Age of Discovery , Catholic missionaries, notably the Jesuits, introduced the modern sciences to India, China and Japan. While persecutions continue to limit the spread of Catholic institutions to some Middle Eastern Muslim nations, and such places as the People's Republic of China and North Korea, elsewhere in Asia the church is a major provider of health care services - especially in Catholic Nations like the Philippines .

Today the Roman Catholic Church is the largest non-government provider of health care services in the world.

[ 138 ] It has around 18,000 clinics, 16,000 homes for the elderly and those with special needs, and 5,500 hospitals, with 65 percent of them located in developing countries.

[ 139 ] In 2010, the Church's Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Health Care Workers said that the Church manages 26% of the world's health care facilities.

[ 140 ] The Church's involvement in health care has ancient origins.

Music [ edit ] Main article: Christian music Christian music is music that has been written to express either personal or a communal belief regarding Christian life and faith. Common themes of Christian music include praise , worship , penitence , and lament , and its forms vary widely across the world.

Like other forms of music the creation, performance, significance, and even the definition of Christian music varies according to culture and social context. Christian music is composed and performed for many purposes, ranging from aesthetic pleasure, religious or ceremonial purposes, or as an entertainment product for the marketplace.

In music, Catholic monks developed the first forms of modern Western musical notation in order to standardize liturgy throughout the worldwide Church, [ 141 ] and an enormous body of religious music has been composed for it through the ages. This led directly to the emergence and development of European classical music, and its many derivatives. The Baroque style, which encompassed music, art, and architecture, was particularly encouraged by the post-Reformation Catholic Church as such forms offered a means of religious expression that was stirring and emotional, intended to stimulate religious fervor.

[ 142 ] The list of Catholic composers and Catholic sacred music which have a prominent place in Western culture is extensive, but includes Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart 's Ave verum corpus ; Franz Schubert 's Ave Maria , César Franck 's Panis angelicus , and Antonio Vivaldi 's Gloria .

Martin Luther , Paul Gerhardt , George Wither , Isaac Watts , Charles Wesley , William Cowper , and many other authors and composers created well-known church hymns. Musicians like Heinrich Schütz , Johann Sebastian Bach , George Frederick Handel , Henry Purcell , Johannes Brahms , and Felix Mendelssohn-Bartholdy composed great works of music.

Josquin des Prez (1450/1455 – 1521) Claudio Monteverdi (1567–1643) Antonio Vivaldi (1678–1741) Johann Sebastian Bach (1685–1750) Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756–1791) Ludwig van Beethoven (1770–1827) Franz Schubert (1797–1828) Franz Liszt (1811–1886) Anton Bruckner (1824–1896) Philosophy [ edit ] Main articles: Christian philosophy and Scholasticism Confessions by St.

Augustine of Hippo Christian philosophy is a term to describe the fusion of various fields of philosophy with the theological doctrines of Christianity.

Scholasticism , which means "that [which] belongs to the school", and was a method of learning taught by the academics (or school people ) of medieval universities c. 1100–1500. Scholasticism originally started to reconcile the philosophy of the ancient classical philosophers with medieval Christian theology. Scholasticism is not a philosophy or theology in itself but a tool and method for learning which places emphasis on dialectical reasoning .

Medieval philosophy is the philosophy of Western Europe and the Middle East during the Middle Ages , roughly extending from the Christianization of the Roman Empire until the Renaissance.

[ 143 ] Medieval philosophy is defined partly by the rediscovery and further development of classical Greek and Hellenistic philosophy , and partly by the need to address theological problems and to integrate the then widespread sacred doctrines of Abrahamic religion ( Islam , Judaism , and Christianity) with secular learning.

The history of western European medieval philosophy is traditionally divided into two main periods: the period in the Latin West following the Early Middle Ages until the 12th century, when the works of Aristotle and Plato were preserved and cultivated; and the "golden age" of the 12th, 13th and 14th centuries in the Latin West, which witnessed the culmination of the recovery of ancient philosophy, and significant developments in the field of philosophy of religion , logic and metaphysics .

Summa theologica , Pars secunda, prima pars. (copy by Peter Schöffer, 1471) The medieval era was disparagingly treated by the Renaissance humanists, who saw it as a barbaric "middle" period between the classical age of Greek and Roman culture, and the "rebirth" or renaissance of classical culture. Yet this period of nearly a thousand years was the longest period of philosophical development in Europe, and possibly the richest.

Jorge Gracia has argued that "in intensity, sophistication, and achievement, the philosophical flowering in the thirteenth century could be rightly said to rival the golden age of Greek philosophy in the fourth century B.C." [ 144 ] Some problems discussed throughout this period are the relation of faith to reason , the existence and unity of God, the object of theology and metaphysics , the problems of knowledge, of universals, and of individuation.

Philosophers from the Middle Ages include the Christian philosophers Augustine of Hippo , Boethius , Anselm , Gilbert of Poitiers , Peter Abelard , Roger Bacon , Bonaventure , Thomas Aquinas , Duns Scotus , William of Ockham and Jean Buridan ; the Jewish philosophers Maimonides and Gersonides ; and the Muslim philosophers Alkindus , Alfarabi , Alhazen , Avicenna , Algazel , Avempace , Abubacer , Ibn Khaldūn , and Averroes . The medieval tradition of Scholasticism continued to flourish as late as the 17th century, in figures such as Francisco Suarez and John of St. Thomas .

Aquinas, father of Thomism , was immensely influential in Catholic Europe, placed a great emphasis on reason and argumentation, and was one of the first to use the new translation of Aristotle's metaphysical and epistemological writing. His work was a significant departure from the Neoplatonic and Augustinian thinking that had dominated much of early Scholasticism.

The Renaissance ("rebirth") was a period of transition between the Middle Ages and modern thought, [ 145 ] in which the recovery of classical texts helped shift philosophical interests away from technical studies in logic, metaphysics, and theology towards eclectic inquiries into morality, philology, and mysticism.

[ 146 ] The study of the classics and the humane arts generally, such as history and literature, enjoyed a scholarly interest hitherto unknown in Christendom, a tendency referred to as humanism .

[ 147 ] Displacing the medieval interest in metaphysics and logic, the humanists followed Petrarch in making man and his virtues the focus of philosophy.

[ 148 ] These new movements in philosophy developed contemporaneously with larger religious and political transformations in Europe: the Reformation and the decline of feudalism .  Though the theologians of the Protestant Reformation showed little direct interest in philosophy, their destruction of the traditional foundations of theological and intellectual authority harmonized with a revival of fideism and skepticism in thinkers such as Erasmus , Montaigne , and Francisco Sanches .

[ 149 ] Meanwhile, the gradual centralization of political power in nation-states was echoed by the emergence of secular political philosophies, as in the works of Niccolò Machiavelli (often described as the first modern political thinker, or a key turning point towards modern political thinking), Thomas More , Erasmus , Justus Lipsius , Jean Bodin , and Hugo Grotius .

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Tertullian (c. 155 – c. 240 AD) Clement of Alexandria (c. 150 – c. 215) Athanasius of Alexandria (c. 296–298 – 373) Augustine of Hippo (354–430) Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) William of Ockham (c. 1287 – 1347) Hugo Grotius (1583–1645) Blaise Pascal (1623–1662) Science and technology [ edit ] Main articles: Medieval science , Medieval technology , and Christianity and science Science, and particularly geometry and astronomy , was linked directly to the divine for most medieval scholars. The compass in this 13th-century manuscript is a symbol of creation.

Earlier attempts at reconciliation of Christianity with Newtonian mechanics appear quite different from later attempts at reconciliation with the newer scientific ideas of evolution or relativity .

[ 152 ] Many early interpretations of evolution polarized themselves around a struggle for existence . These ideas were significantly countered by later findings of universal patterns of biological cooperation . According to John Habgood , all man really knows here is that the universe seems to be a mix of good and evil , beauty and pain , and that suffering may somehow be part of the process of creation. Habgood holds that Christians should not be surprised that suffering may be used creatively by God, given their faith in the symbol of the Cross .

[ 152 ] Robert John Russell has examined consonance and dissonance between modern physics, evolutionary biology, and Christian theology.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] Christian philosophers Augustine of Hippo (354–430) and Thomas Aquinas [ 155 ] held that scriptures can have multiple interpretations on certain areas where the matters were far beyond their reach, therefore one should leave room for future findings to shed light on the meanings. The "Handmaiden" tradition, which saw secular studies of the universe as a very important and helpful part of arriving at a better understanding of scripture, was adopted throughout Christian history from early on.

[ 156 ] Also the sense that God created the world as a self operating system is what motivated many Christians throughout the Middle Ages to investigate nature.

[ 157 ] Modern historians of science such as J.L. Heilbron , [ 158 ] Alistair Cameron Crombie , David Lindberg , [ 159 ] Edward Grant , Thomas Goldstein , [ 160 ] and Ted Davis have reviewed the popular notion that medieval Christianity was a negative influence in the development of civilization and science. In their views, not only did the monks save and cultivate the remnants of ancient civilization during the barbarian invasions, but the medieval church promoted learning and science through its sponsorship of many universities which, under its leadership, grew rapidly in Europe in the 11th and 12th centuries, St. Thomas Aquinas, the Church's "model theologian", not only argued that reason is in harmony with faith, he even recognized that reason can contribute to understanding revelation, and so encouraged intellectual development. He was not unlike other medieval theologians who sought out reason in the effort to defend his faith.

[ 161 ] Some of today's scholars, such as Stanley Jaki , have claimed that Christianity with its particular worldview , was a crucial factor for the emergence of modern science.

[ 162 ] Some scholars and historians attributes Christianity to having contributed to the rise of the Scientific Revolution .

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] [ 73 ] [ 165 ] Professor Noah J Efron says that "Generations of historians and sociologists have discovered many ways in which Christians, Christian beliefs, and Christian institutions played crucial roles in fashioning the tenets, methods, and institutions of what in time became modern science. They found that some forms of Christianity provided the motivation to study nature systematically..." [ 166 ] Virtually all modern scholars and historians agree that Christianity moved many early-modern intellectuals to study nature systematically.

[ 167 ] Individual scientists' beliefs [ edit ] See also: List of Christians in science and technology , List of Catholic scientists , and List of Christian Nobel laureates Set of pictures for a number of notable Christian scientists and Inventors.

Christian Scholars and Scientists have made noted contributions to science and technology fields, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] as well as Medicine , [ 15 ] Many well-known historical figures who influenced Western science considered themselves Christian such as Nicolaus Copernicus , [ 168 ] Galileo Galilei , [ 169 ] Johannes Kepler , [ 170 ] Isaac Newton [ 171 ] Robert Boyle , [ 172 ] Francis Bacon , [ 173 ] Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , [ 174 ] Carl Friedrich Gauss , [ 175 ] [ 176 ] Emanuel Swedenborg , [ 177 ] Alessandro Volta , [ 178 ] Antoine Lavoisier , [ 179 ] André-Marie Ampère , John Dalton , [ 180 ] James Clerk Maxwell , [ 181 ] [ 182 ] William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin , [ 183 ] Louis Pasteur , [ 184 ] Michael Faraday , [ 185 ] and J. J. Thomson .

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Isaac Newton , for example, believed that gravity caused the planets to revolve about the Sun , and credited God with the design . In the concluding General Scholium to the Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica , he wrote: "This most beautiful System of the Sun, Planets and Comets, could only proceed from the counsel and dominion of an intelligent and powerful being." Other famous founders of science who adhered to Christian beliefs include Galileo, Johannes Kepler, and Blaise Pascal.

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] Prominent modern scientists advocating Christian belief include Nobel Prize–winning physicists Charles Townes ( United Church of Christ member) and William Daniel Phillips ( United Methodist Church member), evangelical Christian and past head of the Human Genome Project Francis Collins , and climatologist John T. Houghton .

[ 190 ] According to 100 Years of Nobel Prizes a review of Nobel prizes award between 1901 and 2000 reveals that (65.4%) of Nobel Prizes Laureates, have identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference.

[ 191 ] Overall, Christians have won a total of 72.5% in Chemistry between 1901 and 2000, [ 192 ] 65.3% in Physics , [ 192 ] 62% in Medicine , [ 192 ] 54% in Economics .

[ 192 ] Eastern Christianity [ edit ] See also: Christian influences in Islam , Byzantine science , List of Christian scientists and scholars of the medieval Islamic world , and Greek scholars in the Renaissance luminure from the Hunayn ibn-Ishaq al-'Ibadi manuscript of the Isagoge: Hunayn ibn-Ishaq was a famous and influential Christian scholar, physician, and scientist of ethnic Arab descent Byzantine science was essentially classical science, [ 193 ] and played an important and crucial role in the transmission of classical knowledge to the Islamic world and to Renaissance Italy .

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] Many of the most distinguished classical scholars held high office in the Eastern Orthodox Church .

[ 196 ] Therefore, Byzantine science was in every period closely connected with ancient-pagan philosophy , and metaphysics . Despite some opposition to pagan learning, many of the most distinguished classical scholars held high office in the Church.

[ 197 ] The writings of antiquity never ceased to be cultivated in the Byzantine empire due to the impetus given to classical studies by the Academy of Athens in the 4th and 5th centuries, the vigor of the philosophical academy of Alexandria , and to the services of the University of Constantinople , which concerned itself entirely with secular subjects, to the exclusion of theology , [ 198 ] which was taught in the Patriarchical Academy . Even the latter offered instruction in the ancient classics, and included literary, philosophical, and scientific texts in its curriculum. The monastic schools concentrated upon the Bible , theology, and liturgy . Therefore, the monastic scriptoria expended most of their efforts upon the transcription of ecclesiastical manuscripts, while ancient-pagan literature was transcribed, summarized, excerpted, and annotated by laymen or clergy like Photios , Arethas of Caesarea , Eustathius of Thessalonica , and Basilius Bessarion .

[ 199 ] Byzantine scientists preserved and continued the legacy of the great Ancient Greek mathematicians and put mathematics in practice. In early Byzantium (5th to 7th century) the architects and mathematicians Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles used complex mathematical formulas to construct the great Hagia Sophia church, a technological breakthrough for its time and for centuries afterwards due to its striking geometry, bold design and height. In late Byzantium (9th to 12th century) mathematicians like Michael Psellos considered mathematics as a way to interpret the world.

Middle Eastern Christians especially the adherents of the Church of the East ( Nestorians ), contributed to the Arab Islamic Civilization during the Umayyad and the Abbasid periods by translating works of Greek philosophers to Syriac and afterwards to Arabic .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] During the 4th through the 7th centuries, scholarly work in the Syriac and Greek languages was either newly initiated, or carried on from the Hellenistic period. Centers of learning and of transmission of classical wisdom included colleges such as the School of Nisibis , and later the School of Edessa , and the hospital and medical academy of Jundishapur ; libraries included the Library of Alexandria and the Imperial Library of Constantinople ; other centers of translation and learning functioned at Merv , Salonika , Nishapur and Ctesiphon , situated just south of what later became Baghdad.

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] Many scholars of the House of Wisdom were of Christian background; [ 202 ] the House of Wisdom was a library, translation institute, and academy established in Abbasid -era Baghdad , Iraq.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] Nestorians played a prominent role in the formation of Arab culture, [ 44 ] with the Jundishapur school being prominent in the late Sassanid , Umayyad and early Abbasid periods.

[ 205 ] Notably, eight generations of the Nestorian Bukhtishu family served as private doctors to caliphs and sultans between the 8th and 11th centuries.

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] The migration waves of Byzantine scholars and émigrés in the period following the Crusader sacking of Constantinople in 1204 and the end of the Byzantine Empire in 1453, is considered by many scholars key to the revival of Greek and Roman studies that led to the development of the Renaissance humanism , [ 208 ] and science . These émigrés brought to Western Europe the relatively well-preserved remnants and accumulated knowledge of their own (Greek) civilization, which had mostly not survived the Early Middle Ages in the West. According to the Encyclopædia Britannica : "Many modern scholars also agree that the exodus of Greeks to Italy as a result of this event marked the end of the Middle Ages and the beginning of the Renaissance".

[ 209 ] Catholic Church [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church and science See also: List of Catholic scientists and List of Roman Catholic cleric-scientists Jesuit scholars in China . Top: Matteo Ricci , Adam Schall and Ferdinand Verbiest (1623–88); Bottom: Paul Siu (Xu Guangqi) , Colao or Prime Minister of State, and his granddaughter Candide Hiu.

While refined and clarified over the centuries, the Roman Catholic position on the relationship between science and religion is one of harmony, and has maintained the teaching of natural law as set forth by Thomas Aquinas .  For example, regarding scientific study such as that of evolution, the church's unofficial position is an example of theistic evolution , stating that faith and scientific findings regarding human evolution are not in conflict, though humans are regarded as a special creation, and that the existence of God is required to explain both monogenism and the spiritual component of human origins. Catholic schools have included all manners of scientific study in their curriculum for many centuries.

[ 210 ] Galileo once stated "The intention of the Holy Spirit is to teach us how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go." [ 211 ] In 1981 John Paul II , then pope of the Roman Catholic Church , spoke of the relationship this way: "The Bible itself speaks to us of the origin of the universe and its make-up, not in order to provide us with a scientific treatise, but in order to state the correct relationships of man with God and with the universe. Sacred Scripture wishes simply to declare that the world was created by God, and in order to teach this truth it expresses itself in the terms of the cosmology in use at the time of the writer".

[ 212 ] The influence of the Church on Western letters and learning has been formidable. The ancient texts of the Bible have deeply influenced Western art, literature and culture. For centuries following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, small monastic communities were practically the only outposts of literacy in Western Europe. In time, the Cathedral schools developed into Europe's earliest universities and the church has established thousands of primary, secondary and tertiary institutions throughout the world in the centuries since. The Church and clergymen have also sought at different times to censor texts and scholars. Thus different schools of opinion exist as to the role and influence of the Church in relation to western letters and learning.

Numbers written with Cistercian numerals . From left to right: 1 in units place, 2 in tens place (20), 3 in hundreds place (300), 4 in thousands place (4000), then compound numbers 5555, 6789, 9394.

The Catholic Cistercian order used its own numbering system , which could express numbers from 0 to 9999 in a single sign.

[ 213 ] [ 214 ] According to one modern Cistercian, "enterprise and entrepreneurial spirit" have always been a part of the order's identity, and the Cistercians "were catalysts for development of a market economy" in 12th-century Europe.

[ 215 ] Until the Industrial Revolution , most of the technological advances in Europe were made in the monasteries.

[ 215 ] According to the medievalist Jean Gimpel, their high level of industrial technology facilitated the diffusion of new techniques: "Every monastery had a model factory, often as large as the church and only several feet away, and waterpower drove the machinery of the various industries located on its floor." [ 216 ] Waterpower was used for crushing wheat, sieving flour, fulling cloth and tanning – a "level of technological achievement [that] could have been observed in practically all" of the Cistercian monasteries.

[ 217 ] The English science historian James Burke examines the impact of Cistercian waterpower, derived from Roman watermill technology such as that of Barbegal aqueduct and mill near Arles in the fourth of his ten-part Connections TV series, called "Faith in Numbers".  The Cistercians made major contributions to culture and technology in medieval Europe: Cistercian architecture is considered one of the most beautiful styles of medieval architecture ; [ 218 ] and the Cistercians were the main force of technological diffusion in fields such as agriculture and hydraulic engineering .

[ 218 ] One view, first propounded by Enlightenment philosophers , asserts that the Church's doctrines are entirely superstitious and have hindered the progress of civilization.

Communist states have made similar arguments in their education in order to inculcate a negative view of Catholicism (and religion in general) in their citizens. The most famous incidents cited by such critics are the Church's condemnations of the teachings of Copernicus , Galileo Galilei and Johannes Kepler .

The Church's priest-scientists, many of whom were Jesuits , have been among the leading lights in astronomy , genetics , geomagnetism , meteorology , seismology , and solar physics , becoming some of the "fathers" of these sciences. Examples include important churchmen such as the Augustinian abbot Gregor Mendel (pioneer in the study of genetics), Roger Bacon (a Franciscan friar who was one of the early advocates of the scientific method ), and Belgian priest Georges Lemaître (the first to propose the Big Bang theory). Other notable priest scientists have included Albertus Magnus , Robert Grosseteste , Nicholas Steno , Francesco Grimaldi , Giambattista Riccioli , Roger Boscovich , and Athanasius Kircher . Even more numerous are Catholic laity involved in science: Henri Becquerel who discovered radioactivity ; Galvani , Volta , Ampere , Marconi , pioneers in electricity and telecommunications ; Lavoisier , "father of modern chemistry "; Vesalius , founder of modern human anatomy ; and Cauchy , one of the mathematicians who laid the rigorous foundations of calculus .

Throughout history many of the Roman Catholic clerics have made contributions to science, mostly during periods of Church domination of public life. These cleric-scientists include Nicolaus Copernicus , Gregor Mendel , Georges Lemaître , Albertus Magnus , Roger Bacon , Pierre Gassendi , Roger Joseph Boscovich , Marin Mersenne , Bernard Bolzano , Francesco Maria Grimaldi , Nicole Oresme , Jean Buridan , Robert Grosseteste , Christopher Clavius , Nicolas Steno , Athanasius Kircher , Giovanni Battista Riccioli , William of Ockham , and others. The Catholic Church has also produced many lay scientists and mathematicians , including 20th-century Nobel laureates like chemist Mario J. Molina , chemist John Polanyi , physicist Riccardo Giacconi , among many others.

Robert Grosseteste (1175–1253) Albertus Magnus (1200–1280) Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) Marin Mersenne (1588–1648) Christopher Clavius (1538–1612) Nicolas Steno (1638–1686) Athanasius Kircher (1602–1680) Gregor Mendel (1822–1884) Jesuits in science [ edit ] Main article: List of Jesuit scientists The Jesuits have made numerous significant contributions to the development of science. For example, the Jesuits have dedicated significant study to earthquakes, and seismology has been described as "the Jesuit science".

[ 219 ] The Jesuits have been described as "the single most important contributor to experimental physics in the seventeenth century".

[ 220 ] According to Jonathan Wright in his book God's Soldiers , by the 18th century the Jesuits had "contributed to the development of pendulum clocks, pantographs, barometers, reflecting telescopes and microscopes, to scientific fields as various as magnetism, optics and electricity. They observed, in some cases before anyone else, the colored bands on Jupiter 's surface, the Andromeda nebula and Saturn's rings. They theorized about the circulation of the blood (independently of Harvey ), the theoretical possibility of flight, the way the moon affected the tides, and the wave-like nature of light." [ 221 ] Protestant [ edit ] See also: Merton Thesis and Quakers in science Columbia University was established by the Church of England [ 116 ] Protestantism had an important influence on science. According to the Merton Thesis there was a positive correlation between the rise of Puritanism and Protestant Pietism on the one hand and early experimental science on the other.

[ 222 ] The Merton Thesis has two separate parts: Firstly, it presents a theory that science changes due to an accumulation of observations and improvement in experimental techniques and methodology ; secondly, it puts forward the argument that the popularity of science in 17th-century England and the religious demography of the Royal Society (English scientists of that time were predominantly Puritans or other Protestants) can be explained by a correlation between Protestantism and the scientific values.

[ 223 ] In his theory, Robert K. Merton focused on English Puritanism and German Pietism as having been responsible for the development of the Scientific Revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries. Merton explained that the connection between religious affiliation and interest in science was the result of a significant synergy between the ascetic Protestant values and those of modern science.

[ 224 ] Protestant values encouraged scientific research by allowing science to study God's influence on the world and thus providing a religious justification for scientific research.

[ 222 ] According of Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the United States by Harriet Zuckerman , a review of American Nobel prizes winners awarded between 1901 and 1972, 72% of American Nobel Prize laureates, have identified from Protestant background.

[ 225 ] Overall, Protestant have won a total of 84.2% of all the American Nobel Prizes in Chemistry , [ 225 ] 60% in Medicine , [ 225 ] 58.6% in Physics , [ 225 ] between 1901 and 1972.

Thought and work ethic [ edit ] See also: Protestant work ethic and Christian views on poverty and wealth Cover of the original German edition of The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism The notion of " Christian finance " refers to banking and financial activities which came into existence several centuries ago. Whether the activities of the Knights Templar (12th century), Mounts of Piety (appeared in 1462) or the Apostolic Chamber attached directly to the Vatican, a number of operations of a banking nature (money loan, guarantee, etc.) or a financial nature (issuance of securities, investments) is proved, despite the prohibition of usury and the Church distrust against exchange activities (opposed to production activities).

[ 226 ] Francisco de Vitoria , a disciple of Thomas Aquinas and a Catholic thinker who studied the issue regarding the human rights of colonized natives, is recognized by the United Nations as a father of international law, and now also by historians of economics and democracy as a leading light for the West's democracy and rapid economic development.

[ 227 ] Joseph Schumpeter , an economist of the 20th century, referring to the Scholastics , wrote, "it is they who come nearer than does any other group to having been the 'founders' of scientific economics." [ 228 ] Other economists and historians, such as Raymond de Roover, Marjorie Grice-Hutchinson, and Alejandro Chafuen, have also made similar statements.

The Protestant concept of God and man allows believers to use all their God-given faculties, including the power of reason. That means that they are allowed to explore God's creation and, according to Genesis 2:15, make use of it in a responsible and sustainable way. Thus a cultural climate was created that greatly enhanced the development of the humanities and the sciences .

[ 229 ] Another consequence of the Protestant understanding of man is that the believers, in gratitude for their election and redemption in Christ, are to follow God's commandments. Industry, frugality, calling, discipline, and a strong sense of responsibility are at the heart of their moral code.

[ 230 ] [ 231 ] In particular, John Calvin rejected luxury. Therefore, craftsmen, industrialists, and other businessmen were able to reinvest the greater part of their profits in the most efficient machinery and the most modern production methods that were based on progress in the sciences and technology. As a result, productivity grew, which led to increased profits and enabled employers to pay higher wages. In this way, the economy, the sciences, and technology reinforced each other. The chance to participate in the economic success of technological inventions was a strong incentive to both inventors and investors.

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] [ 234 ] [ 235 ] The Protestant work ethic was an important force behind the unplanned and uncoordinated mass action that influenced the development of capitalism and the Industrial Revolution . This idea is also known as the "Protestant ethic thesis" .

[ 236 ] In the book The Central Liberal Truth: How Politics Can Change a Culture and Save It from Itself Lawrence E. Harrison argues that Protestantism along with Confucianism, and Judaism have been more successful in promoting progress, culture and society. Due to the Protestant virtues of education, achievement, work ethic, merit, frugality, and honesty.

Some mainline Protestant denominations such as Episcopalians and Presbyterians and congregationalist tend to be considerably wealthier [ 237 ] and better educated (having high proportion of graduate and post-graduate degrees per capita) than most other religious groups in America , [ 238 ] and are disproportionately represented in the upper reaches of American business, [ 239 ] law and politics, especially the Republican Party .

[ 240 ] Large numbers of the most wealthy and affluent American families as the Vanderbilts , the Astors , Rockefeller , Du Pont , Roosevelt , Forbes , Whitneys , Mellons , the Morgans and Harrimans are Mainline Protestant families.

[ 237 ] [ 241 ] The Boston Brahmins , who were regarded as the nation's social and cultural elites, were often associated with the American upper class , Harvard University ; [ 242 ] and the Episcopal Church.

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] The Old Philadelphianss were often associated with the American upper class and the Episcopal Church and Quakerism .

[ 245 ] These families were influential in the development and leadership of arts, culture, science, medicine, law, politics, industry and trade in the United States.

The rise of Protestantism in the 16th contributed to the development of banking in Northern Europe. In the late 18th century, Protestant merchant families began to move into banking to an increasing degree, especially in trading countries such as the United Kingdom ( Barings ), Germany ( Schroders , Berenbergs ) [ 246 ] and the Netherlands ( Hope & Co.

, Gülcher & Mulder ) At the same time, new types of financial activities broadened the scope of banking far beyond its origins. One school of thought attributes Calvinism with setting the stage for the later development of capitalism in northern Europe.

[ 247 ] The Morgan family is an American Episcopal Church family and banking dynasty , which became prominent in the U.S. and throughout the world in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

[ 237 ] Catholic banking families includes House of Medici , [ 248 ] Welser family , Fugger family , [ 249 ] and Simonetti family .

Some academics have theorized that Lutheranism , the dominant traditional religion of the Nordic countries, had an effect on the development of social democracy there and the Nordic model . Schröder posits that Lutheranism promoted the idea of a nationwide community of believers and led to increased state involvement in economic and social life, allowing for nationwide welfare solidarity and economic co-ordination.

[ 250 ] [ 251 ] [ 252 ] Esa Mangeloja says that the revival movements helped to pave the way for the modern Finnish welfare state. During that process, the church lost some of its most important social responsibilities (health care, education, and social work) as these tasks were assumed by the secular Finnish state.

[ 253 ] Pauli Kettunen presents the Nordic model as the outcome of a sort of mythical "Lutheran peasant enlightenment", portraying the Nordic model as the result of a sort of "secularized Lutheranism"; [ 254 ] however, mainstream academic discourse on the subject focuses on "historical specificity", with the centralized structure of the Lutheran church being but one aspect of the cultural values and state structures that led to the development of the welfare state in Scandinavia.

[ 255 ] Festivals [ edit ] Main article: Liturgical year See also: Calendar of saints The Striezelmarkt in Dresden , Germany, is considered the first genuine Christmas market in the world.

[ 256 ] Roman Catholics , Anglicans , Eastern Christians , and traditional Protestant communities frame worship around the liturgical year . The liturgical cycle divides the year into a series of seasons, each with their theological emphases, and modes of prayer, which can be signified by different ways of decorating churches, colours of paraments and vestments for clergy, [ 257 ] scriptural readings, themes for preaching and even different traditions and practices often observed personally or in the home.

Western Christian liturgical calendars are based on the cycle of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, [ 257 ] and Eastern Christians use analogous calendars based on the cycle of their respective rites . Calendars set aside holy days, such as solemnities which commemorate an event in the life of Jesus or Mary, the saints , periods of fasting such as Lent , and other pious events such as memoria or lesser festivals commemorating saints. Christian groups that do not follow a liturgical tradition often retain certain celebrations, such as Christmas , Easter and Pentecost : these are the celebrations of Christ's birth , resurrection and the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Church, respectively. A few denominations make no use of a liturgical calendar.

[ 258 ] Christmas (or Feast of the Nativity )  is an annual festival commemorating the birth of Jesus Christ , observed as a religious and cultural celebration among billions of people around the world .

[ 259 ] [ 260 ] Christmas Day is a public holiday in many of the world's nations , [ 261 ] [ 262 ] [ 263 ] is celebrated religiously by a majority of Christians, [ 264 ] as well as culturally by many non-Christians, [ 265 ] and forms an integral part of the holiday season centered around it. Popular modern customs of the holiday include gift giving ; completing an Advent calendar or Advent wreath ; Christmas music and caroling ; viewing a Nativity play ; an exchange of Christmas cards ; church services ; a special meal ; and the display of various Christmas decorations , including Christmas trees , Christmas lights , nativity scenes , garlands , wreaths , mistletoe , and holly . In addition, several closely related and often interchangeable figures, known as Santa Claus , Father Christmas , Saint Nicholas , and Christkind , are associated with bringing gifts to children during the Christmas season and have their own body of traditions and lore.

[ 266 ] Easter or Resurrection Sunday , [ 267 ] [ 268 ] is a festival and holiday commemorating the resurrection of Jesus from the dead, described in the New Testament as having occurred on the third day after his burial following his crucifixion by the Romans at Calvary c.

30 AD.

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] Easter customs vary across the Christian world , and include sunrise services , exclaiming the Paschal greeting , clipping the church , [ 271 ] and decorating Easter eggs (symbols of the empty tomb ).

[ 272 ] [ 273 ] [ 274 ] The Easter lily , a symbol of the resurrection, [ 275 ] [ 276 ] traditionally decorates the chancel area of churches on this day and for the rest of Eastertide.

[ 277 ] Additional customs that have become associated with Easter and are observed by both Christians and some non-Christians include egg hunting , the Easter Bunny , and Easter parades .

[ 278 ] [ 279 ] [ 280 ] There are also various traditional Easter foods that vary regionally.

Saint Lucy's Day procession in Sweden Celebrating the Epiphany in Bulgaria Carnival of Venice Easter eggs are a popular cultural symbol of Easter Procession of pasos during the Holy Week in Spain Religious life [ edit ] Main article: Sacrament See also: Sacraments of the Catholic Church , Anglican sacraments , and Lutheran sacraments The seven sacraments of the Catholic church: Baptism , Confirmation , Matrimony , Eucharist , Penance , Holy Orders and the Anointing of the Sick .

Roman Catholic theology enumerates seven sacraments: [ 281 ] Baptism ( Christening ), Confirmation ( Chrismation ), Eucharist ( Communion ), Penance (Reconciliation), Anointing of the Sick (before the Second Vatican Council generally called Extreme Unction), Matrimony In Christian belief and practice, a sacrament is a rite , instituted by Christ, that mediates grace , constituting a sacred mystery . The term is derived from the Latin word sacramentum , which was used to translate the Greek word for mystery . Views concerning both what rites are sacramental, and what it means for an act to be a sacrament vary among Christian denominations and traditions.

[ 282 ] The most conventional functional definition of a sacrament is that it is an outward sign, instituted by Christ, that conveys an inward, spiritual grace through Christ. The two most widely accepted sacraments are Baptism and the Eucharist (or Holy Communion), however, the majority of Christians also recognize five additional sacraments: Confirmation ( Chrismation in the Orthodox tradition), Holy orders ( ordination ), Penance (or Confession ), Anointing of the Sick , and Matrimony (see Christian views on marriage ).

[ 282 ] Taken together, these are the Seven Sacraments as recognized by churches in the High Church tradition—notably Roman Catholic , Eastern Orthodox , Oriental Orthodox , Independent Catholic , Old Catholic , many Anglicans , and some Lutherans . Most other denominations and traditions typically affirm only Baptism and Eucharist as sacraments, while some Protestant groups, such as the Quakers, reject sacramental theology.

[ 282 ] Christian denominations , such as Baptists , which believe these rites do not communicate grace, prefer to call Baptism and Holy Communion ordinances rather than sacraments.

Coptic Children wearing traditional circumcision costumes.

Today, most Christian denominations are neutral about religious male circumcision , neither requiring it nor forbidding it. The practice is customary among the Coptic , Ethiopian , and Eritrean Orthodox Churches, and also some other African churches, as they require that their male members undergo circumcision.

[ 283 ] [ 284 ] [ 285 ] Even though most Christian denominations does not require male circumcision , [ 286 ] male circumcision is widely in many predominantly Christian countries and many Christian communities.

[ 287 ] [ 288 ] [ 289 ] [ 290 ] Christian communities in Africa , [ 291 ] [ 292 ] the Anglosphere countries , the Philippines, the Middle East, [ 293 ] [ 294 ] South Korea and Oceania have high circumcision rates, [ 295 ] [ 296 ] While Christian communities in Europe and South America have low circumcision rates. The United States and the Philippines are the largest majority Christian countries in the world to extensively practice circumcision. Scholar Heather L. Armstrong writes that, as of 2021, about half of Christian males worldwide are circumcised, with most of them being located in Africa, Anglosphere countries, and the Philippines.

[ 297 ] Worship can be varied for special events like baptisms or weddings in the service or significant feast days . In the early church , Christians and those yet to complete initiation would separate for the Eucharistic part of the worship. In many churches today, adults and children will separate for all or some of the service to receive age-appropriate teaching. Such children's worship is often called Sunday school or Sabbath school (Sunday schools are often held before rather than during services).

Family life [ edit ] Christian family saying grace before eating.

Christian culture puts notable emphasis on the family , [ 298 ] and according to the work of scholars Max Weber , Alan Macfarlane , Steven Ozment , Jack Goody and Peter Laslett , the huge transformation that led to modern marriage in Western democracies was "fueled by the religio-cultural value system provided by elements of Judaism , early Christianity , Roman Catholic canon law and the Protestant Reformation ".

[ 299 ] Historically, extended families were the basic family unit in the Catholic culture and countries .

[ 300 ] Most Christian denominations practice infant baptism [ 301 ] to enter children into the faith. Some form of confirmation ritual occurs when the child has reached the age of reason and voluntarily accepts the religion. Ritual circumcision is used to mark Coptic Christian [ 302 ] and Ethiopian Orthodox Christian [ 303 ] infant males as belonging to the faith. During the early period of capitalism , the rise of a large, commercial middle class, mainly in the Protestant countries of the Netherlands and England , brought about a new family ideology centred around the upbringing of children.

Puritanism stressed the importance of individual salvation and concern for the spiritual welfare of children. It became widely recognized that children possess rights on their own behalf. This included the rights of poor children to sustenance, membership in a community, education, and job training. The Poor Relief Acts in Elizabethan England put responsibility on each Parish to care for all the poor children in the area.

[ 304 ] And prior to the 20th century, three major branches of Christianity— Catholicism , Orthodoxy and Protestantism [ 305 ] —as well as leading Protestant reformers Martin Luther and John Calvin generally held a critical perspective of birth control .

[ 306 ] The church's Family History Library is the world's largest library dedicated to genealogical research .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints puts notable emphasis on the family , and the distinctive concept of a united family which lives and progresses forever is at the core of Latter-day Saint doctrine.

[ 307 ] Church members are encouraged to marry and have children, and as a result, Latter-day Saint families tend to be larger than average. All sexual activity outside of marriage is considered a serious sin. All homosexual activity is considered sinful and same-sex marriages are not performed or supported by the LDS Church. Latter-day Saint fathers who hold the priesthood typically name and bless their children shortly after birth to formally give the child a name and generate a church record for them.

Mormons tend to be very family-oriented and have strong connections across generations and with extended family, [ 308 ] reflective of their belief that families can be sealed together beyond death. Mormons also have a strict law of chastity , requiring abstention from sexual relations outside heterosexual marriage and fidelity within marriage.

A Pew Center study about Religion and Living arrangements around the world in 2019, found that Christians around the world live in somewhat smaller households, on average, than non-Christians (4.5 vs. 5.1 members). 34% of world's Christian population live in  two parent families with minor children, while 29% live in household with extended families , 11% live as couples without other family members, 9% live in household with least one child over the age of 18 with one or two parents, 7% live alone, and 6% live in single parent households.

[ 309 ] Christians in Asia and Pacific , Latin America and the Caribbean , Middle East and North Africa , and in Sub-Saharan Africa , overwhelmingly live in extended or two parent families with minor children.

[ 309 ] While more Christians in Europe and North America live alone or as couples without other family members.

[ 309 ] Cuisine [ edit ] Main article: Christian dietary laws Danish Christmas dinner In mainstream Nicene Christianity , there is no restriction on kinds of animals that can be eaten.

[ 310 ] [ 311 ] This practice stems from Peter's vision of a sheet with animals , in which Saint Peter "sees a sheet containing animals of every description lowered from the sky." [ 312 ] Nonetheless, the New Testament does give a few guidelines about the consumption of meat, practiced by the Christian Church today; one of these is not consuming food knowingly offered to pagan idols , [ 313 ] a conviction that the early Church Fathers , such as Clement of Alexandria and Origen preached.

[ 314 ] In addition, Christians traditionally bless any food before eating it with a mealtime prayer ( grace ), as a sign of thanking God for the meal they have.

[ 315 ] Slaughtering animals for food is  often done without the trinitarian formula , [ 316 ] [ 317 ] although the Armenian Apostolic Church , among other Orthodox Christians , have rituals that "display obvious links with shechitah , Jewish kosher slaughter." [ 318 ] The Bible, states Norman Geisler, stipulates one to "abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from meat of strangled animals".

[ 319 ] In the New Testament, Paul of Tarsus notes that some devout Christians may wish to abstain from consuming meat if it causes "my brother to stumble" in his faith with God.

[ 320 ] As such, some Christian monks , such as the Trappists , have adopted a policy of Christian vegetarianism .

[ 321 ] In addition, Christians of the Seventh-day Adventist tradition generally "avoid eating meat and highly spiced food".

[ 322 ] Christians in the Anglican , Catholic , Lutheran , Methodist , and Orthodox denominations traditionally observe a meat-free day , and meat free seasons especially during the liturgical season of Lent .

[ 323 ] [ 324 ] [ 325 ] [ 326 ] Some Christian denominations condone the moderate drinking of alcohol (moderationism), such as Anglicans, Catholics, Lutherans, and the Orthodox, [ 327 ] although others, such as Adventists, Baptists , Methodists, and Pentecostals either abstain from or prohibit the consumption of alcohol ( abstentionism and prohibitionism ).

[ 328 ] However, all Christian Churches, in view of the biblical position on the issue , universally condemn drunkenness as sinful .

[ 329 ] [ 330 ] Christian cooking combines the food of many cultures in which Christian have lived. A special Christmas family meal is traditionally an important part of the holiday's celebration, and the food that is served varies greatly from country to country. Some regions, such as Sicily , have special meals for Christmas Eve, when 12 kinds of fish are served. In the United Kingdom and countries influenced by its traditions, a standard Christmas meal includes turkey, goose or other large bird, gravy, potatoes, vegetables, sometimes bread and cider. Special desserts are also prepared, such as Christmas pudding , mince pies , fruit cake and Yule log .

[ 331 ] [ 332 ] Cleanliness [ edit ] Main articles: Ablution in Christianity , Hygiene in Christianity , and Cantharus (Christianity) Bishop Sebouh Chouldjian of the Armenian Apostolic Church washing the feet of children.

The Bible has many rituals of purification relating to menstruation , childbirth, sexual relations , nocturnal emission , unusual bodily fluids , skin disease , death, and animal sacrifices . The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church prescribes several kinds of hand washing for example after leaving the latrine, lavatory or bathhouse, or before prayer, or after eating a meal.

[ 333 ] The women in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church are prohibited from entering the church temple during menses ; and the men do not enter a church the day after they have had intercourse with their wives.

[ 334 ] Christianity has always placed a strong emphasis on hygiene , [ 335 ] Despite the denunciation of the mixed bathing style of Roman pools by early Christian clergy, as well as the pagan custom of women naked bathing in front of men, this did not stop the Church from urging its followers to go to public baths for bathing, [ 336 ] which contributed to hygiene and good health according to the Church Fathers , Clement of Alexandria and Tertullian . The Church also built public bathing facilities that were separate for both sexes near monasteries and pilgrimage sites; also, the popes situated baths within church basilicas and monasteries since the early Middle Ages.

[ 337 ] Pope Gregory the Great urged his followers on value of bathing as a bodily need.

[ 338 ] Great bath houses were built in Byzantine centers such as Constantinople and Antioch , [ 339 ] and the popes allocated to the Romans bathing through diaconia , or private Lateran baths, or even a myriad of monastic bath houses functioning in the 8th and 9th centuries.

[ 338 ] The popes maintained their baths in their residences, and bath houses including hot baths incorporated into Christian Church buildings or those of monasteries, which known as "charity baths" because they served both the clerics and needy poor people.

[ 340 ] Public bathing were common in medieval Christendom larger towns and cities such as Paris , Regensburg and Naples .

[ 341 ] [ 342 ] Catholic religious orders of the Augustinians ' and Benedictines ' rules contained ritual purification , [ 343 ] and inspired by Benedict of Nursia encouragement for the practice of therapeutic bathing; Benedictine monks played a role in the development and promotion of spas .

[ 344 ] Protestant Christianity also played a prominent role in the development of the British spas .

[ 344 ] Contrary to popular belief [ 345 ] bathing and sanitation were not lost in Europe with the collapse of the Roman Empire .

[ 346 ] [ 347 ] Soapmaking first became an established trade during the so-called " Dark Ages ". The Romans used scented oils (mostly from Egypt), among other alternatives. By the 15th century, the manufacture of soap in the Christendom had become virtually industrialized, with sources in Antwerp , Castile , Marseille , Naples and Venice .

[ 348 ] By the mid-19th century, the English urbanised middle classes had formed an ideology of cleanliness that ranked alongside typical Victorian concepts, such as Christianity, respectability and social progress .

[ 85 ] The Salvation Army has adopted movement of the deployment of the personal hygiene , [ 349 ] and by providing personal hygiene products.

[ 86 ] [ 350 ] The use of water in many Christian countries is due in part to the biblical toilet etiquette which encourages washing after all instances of defecation.

[ 351 ] The bidet is common in predominantly Catholic countries where water is considered essential for anal cleansing , [ 352 ] [ 353 ] and in some traditionally Orthodox and Protestant countries such as Greece and Finland respectively, where bidet showers are common.

[ 354 ] Christian pop culture [ edit ] Further information: Contemporary Christian music and Christian video game Christian music festival in Portugal .

Christian pop culture (or Christian popular culture), is the vernacular Christian culture that prevails in any given society .  The content of popular culture is determined by the daily interactions, needs and desires, and cultural 'movements' that make up everyday lives of Christians .  It can include any number of practices, including those pertaining to cooking, clothing, mass media and the many facets of entertainment such as sports and literature .

In modern urban mass societies, Christian pop culture has been crucially shaped by the development of industrial mass production , the introduction of new technologies of sound and image broadcasting and recording, and the growth of mass media industries—the film , broadcast radio and television , radio , video game , and the book publishing industries, as well as the print and electronic news media.

Items of Christian pop culture most typically appeal to a broad spectrum of Christians. Some argue that broad-appeal items dominate Christian pop culture because profit-making Christian companies that produce and sell items of Christian pop culture attempt to maximize their profits by emphasizing broadly appealing items. And yet the situation is more complex. To take the example of Christian pop music, it is not the case that the music industry can impose any product they wish. In fact, highly popular types of music have often first been elaborated in small, counter-cultural circles such as Christian punk rock or Christian rap .

Because the Christian pop industry is significantly smaller than the secular pop industry, a few organizations and companies dominate the market and have a strong influence over what is dominant within the industry.

Another source of Christian pop culture which makes it differ from pop culture is the influence from mega churches . Christian pop culture reflects the current popularity of megachurches, but also the uniting of smaller community churches. The culture has been led by Hillsong Church in particular, which resides in many countries including Australia , France , and the United Kingdom .

[ 355 ] Film industry [ edit ] Main article: Christian film industry ChristianCinema.com is a website that lists movies related to Christianity.

The Christian film industry is an umbrella term for films containing a Christian themed message or moral, produced by Christian filmmakers to a Christian audience, and films produced by non-Christians with Christian audiences in mind. They are often interdenominational films, but can also be films targeting a specific denomination of Christianity. Popular mainstream studio productions of films with strong Christian messages or biblical stories, like Ben-Hur , The Ten Commandments , The Passion of the Christ , [ 356 ] The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe , [ 357 ] The Book of Eli , [ 358 ] Machine Gun Preacher , The Star , [ 359 ] The Flying House , [ 360 ] Superbook and Silence , are not specifically part of the Christian film industry, being more agnostic about their audiences' religious beliefs. These films generally also have a much higher budget, production values and better known film stars, and are received more favourably with film critics.

The 2014 film God's Not Dead is one of the all-time most successful independent Christian films [ 361 ] and the 2015 film War Room became a Box Office number-one film .

[ 362 ] Televangelism [ edit ] Main article: Televangelism Further information: Christian television and Christian Radio Televangelist Joel Osteen at Lakewood Church , a megachurch in Houston , Texas .

Televangelism ( tele- "distance" and " evangelism ", meaning " ministry ", sometimes called teleministry ) is the use of media, specifically radio and television , to communicate Christianity .

[ 363 ] Televangelists are ministers , whether official or self-proclaimed, who devote a large portion of their ministry to television broadcasting . Some televangelists are also regular pastors or ministers in their own places of worship (often a megachurch ), but the majority of their followers come from TV and radio audiences. Others do not have a conventional congregation, and work primarily through television. The term is also used derisively by critics as an insinuation of aggrandizement by such ministers.

[ 364 ] Televangelism began as a uniquely American phenomenon, resulting from a largely deregulated media where access to television networks and cable TV is open to virtually anyone who can afford it, combined with a large Christian population that is able to provide the necessary funding. It became especially popular among Evangelical Protestant audiences, whether independent or organized around Christian denominations.

[ 365 ] [ 366 ] However, the increasing globalisation of broadcasting has enabled some American televangelists to reach a wider audience through international broadcast networks, including some that are specifically Christian in nature, such as Trinity Broadcasting Network (the world's largest religious television network ), [ 367 ] The God Channel , Christian Broadcasting Network , Australian Christian Channel , SAT-7 and Emmanuel TV . Domestically produced televangelism is increasingly present in some other nations such as Brazil . Christian television may include broadcast television or cable television channels whose entire broadcast programming schedule is television programs directly related to Christianity or shows including comedy , action, drama, reality, dramatizations and variety shows, movies , and mini-series ; which are part of the overall programming of a general-interest television station.

Some countries have more regulated media with either general restrictions on access or specific rules regarding religious broadcasting. In such countries, religious programming is typically produced by TV companies (sometimes as a regulatory or public service requirement) rather than private interest groups .

Christianophile [ edit ] Christian culture symbols: Christian Bible , rosary , and crucifix .

A Christianophile is a person who expresses a strong interest in or appreciation for Christianity, Christian culture, Christian history , Christendom or the Christian people .

[ 368 ] [ 369 ] That affinity may include Christianity itself or its history, philosophy , theology , music , literature , art , architecture , festivals etc.

[ 370 ] [ 371 ] [ 372 ] The term "Christianophile" can be contrasted with Christianophobe , someone who shows hatred or other forms of negative feelings towards all that is Christian.

[ 373 ] Christianity and Christian culture has a generally positive image in a number of non-Christian societies such as Hong Kong , [ 374 ] Macau , [ 375 ] India , Japan , [ 376 ] [ 377 ] [ 378 ] Lebanon , [ 379 ] Singapore , [ 380 ] [ 381 ] South Korea , [ 382 ] [ 383 ] and Taiwan .

[ 384 ] [ 385 ] In number of traditional Christian societies in Europe, there has been a revival of what has been called by some scholars "Christianophile", and a sympathy for Christianity and its culture, with politicians increasingly speaking of the "Christian roots and heritage" of their countries; this includes Austria , [ 386 ] [ 387 ] France , [ 388 ] Hungary , [ 389 ] Italy , [ 390 ] Poland , [ 391 ] Russia , [ 391 ] Serbia , [ 391 ] Slovakia , [ 391 ] and the United Kingdom .

[ 392 ] G. K. Chesterton has been called a Christianophile; he wrote in the early 20th century about the benefits of Christianity. Famous for his use of paradox, Chesterton explained that while Christianity had the most mysteries, it was the most practical religion.

[ 393 ] [ 394 ] He pointed to the advance of Christian civilizations as proof of its practicality.

[ 395 ] T. S. Eliot has shown a strong affinity to the Christian culture; according to him, the common tradition of Christianity and its culture which has made Europe what it is, and the culture of Europe been rooted in Christianity.

[ 396 ] Winston Churchill has shown a strong affinity to Protestant culture because he felt it "a step nearer Reason".

[ 397 ] Historian Geoffrey Blainey on his book A Short History of Christianity , discussed the role of Christianity in civilization , and the extent of Christian influence on the world.

[ 398 ] Some scholars criticize the concept Eurocentrism as a "Christianophile myth" because it has favored the components (mainly Christianity ) of European civilization and allowed eurocentrists to brand diverging societies and cultures as "uncivilized".

[ 399 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Society portal Aristotelianism Astrotheology Assyrian culture Celtic Christianity Christianese Christian influences in Islam Christian values Culture of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Cynicism (philosophy) Gnosticism International law Judeo-Christian values Multiculturalism and Christianity Natural law Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism Protestant culture Role of Christianity in civilization Stoicism Syriac Christianity The night of churches References [ edit ] ^ Pacini, Andrea (1998).

Christian Communities in the Arab Middle East: The Challenge of the Future . Clarendon Press. pp. 38, 55.

ISBN 978-0-19-829388-0 .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 21 October 2016 .

^ Jenkins, Philip (2020).

The Rowman & Littlefield Handbook of Christianity in the Middle East . Rowman & Littlefield. p. XLVIII.

ISBN 9781538124185 .

^ Caltron J.H Hayas, Christianity and Western Civilization (1953), Stanford University Press, p.2: "That certain distinctive features of our Western civilization – the civilization of western Europe and of America— have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo – Graeco – Christianity, Catholic and Protestant." ^ Matthews, Roy T.; Platt, F. DeWitt (1992).

The Western Humanities . Mayfield Publishing Co. pp. 209, 198– 199.

ISBN 978-0-87484-785-7 .

^ Spielvogel, Jackson J. (2016).

Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1715 (Cengage Learning ed.). Cengage Learning. p. 156.

ISBN 978-1-305-63347-6 .

^ a b Dawson, Christopher; Glenn Olsen (1961).

Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). CUA Press. p. 108.

ISBN 9780813216836 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ González, Justo L.; González, Ondina E. (12 November 2007).

Christianity in Latin America: A History . Cambridge University Press. p. 9.

ISBN 978-1-139-46787-2 .

^ a b c Curtis, Michael (2017).

Jews, Antisemitism, and the Middle East . Routledge. p. 173.

ISBN 9781351510721 .

^ a b D. Barr, Michael (2012).

Cultural Politics and Asian Values . Routledge. p. 81.

ISBN 9781136001666 .

^ a b Sheridan Gilley; Brian Stanley, eds. (2006).

The Cambridge History of Christianity: Volume 8, World Christianities C.1815-c.1914 . Cambridge University Press. p. 164.

ISBN 0521814561 .

Many of the scientists who contributed to these developments were Christians ^ a b Steane, Andrew (2014).

Faithful to Science: The Role of Science in Religion . OUP Oxford. p. 179.

ISBN 978-0191025136 .

the Christian contribution to science has been uniformly at the top level, but it has reached that level and it has been sufficiently strong overall ^ a b L. Johnson, Eric (2009).

Foundations for Soul Care: A Christian Psychology Proposal . InterVarsity Press. p. 63.

ISBN 978-0830875276 .

Many of the early leaders of the scientific revolution were Christians of various stripes, including Roger Bacon, Copernicus, Kepler, Francis Bacon, Galileo, Newton, Boyle, Pascal, Descartes, Ray, Linnaeus and Gassendi ^ "100 Scientists Who Shaped World History" . Archived from the original on 19 November 2005 . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ "50 Nobel Laureates and Other Great Scientists Who Believe in God" . Archived from the original on 24 May 2007 . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ a b S. Kroger, William (2016).

Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis in Medicine, Dentistry and Psychology . Pickle Partners Publishing.

ISBN 978-1787203044 .

Many prominent Catholic physicians and psychologists have made significant contributions to hypnosis in medicine, dentistry, and psychology.

^ "Religious Affiliation of the World's Greatest Artists" . Archived from the original on 11 December 2005 . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ a b "Wealthy 100 and the 100 Most Influential in Business" . Archived from the original on 19 November 2005 . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ a b c E. McGrath, Alister (2006).

Christianity: An Introduction . John Wiley & Sons. p. 336.

ISBN 1405108991 .

Virtually every major European composer contributed to the development of church music. Monteverdi, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Rossini, and Verdi are all examples of composers to have made significant contributions in this sphere. The Catholic church was without question one of the most important patrons of musical developments, and a crucial stimulus to the development of the western musical tradition.

^ A. Spinello, Richard (2012).

The Encyclicals of John Paul II: An Introduction and Commentary . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 147.

ISBN 978-1442219427 .

The insights of Christian philosophy 'would not have happened without the direct or indirect contribution of Christian faith' (FR 76). Typical Christian philosophers include St. Augustine, St. Bonaventure, and St. Thomas Aquinas. The benefits derived from Christian philosophy are twofold.

^ Roy Vincelette, Alan (2009).

Recent Catholic Philosophy: The Nineteenth Century . Marquette University Press.

ISBN 978-0874627565 .

Catholic thinkers contributed extensively to philosophy during the Nineteenth Century. Besides pioneering the revivals of Augustinianism and Thomism, they also helped to initiate such philosophical movements as Romanticism, Traditionalism, Semi-Rationalism, Spiritualism, Ontologism, and Integralism ^ Hyman, J.; Walsh, J.J. (1967).

Philosophy in the Middle Ages: The Christian, Islamic, and Jewish Traditions . New York: Harper & Row.

OCLC 370638 .

^ Brown, J. (24 July 2014).

Encyclopaedia Perthensis, Or, Universal Dictionary of the Arts, Sciences, Literature, Etc. : Intended to Supersede the Use of Other Books of Reference, Volume 18 . University of Minnesota. p. 179.

ISBN 978-0191025136 .

Christians has also contributed greatly to the abolition of slavery, or at least to the mitigation of the rigour of servitude.

^ Pinn, Anthony B, ed. (9 September 2021).

The Oxford Handbook of Humanism . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190921538.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-092154-5 .

^ Davies, 477 ^ Löffler, Klemens (1910). "Humanism".

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. VII. New York: Robert Appleton Company. pp. 538–542.

^ Hillerbrand, Hans J. (2016).

Encyclopedia of Protestantism: 4-volume Set . Pickle Partners Publishing. p. 174.

ISBN 978-1787203044 .

In the centuries succeeding the Reformation the teaching of Protestantism was consistent on the nature of work. Some Protestant theologians also contributed to the study of economics, especially the nineteenth-century Scottish minister Thomas Chalmers.

^ "Religion of History's 100 Most Influential People" . Archived from the original on 28 November 1999 . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ "Religion of Great Philosophers" . Archived from the original on 18 January 2000 . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ Baruch A. Shalev, 100 Years of Nobel Prizes (2003), Atlantic Publishers & Distributors, p.57: between 1901 and 2000 reveals that 654 Laureates belong to 28 different religions. Most (65.4%) have identified Christianity in its various forms as their religious preference.

ISBN 978-0935047370 ^ a b Riches 2000 , chs. 1 and 4.

^ G. Koenig, Harold (2009).

Religion and Spirituality in Psychiatry . Cambridge University Press. p. 31.

ISBN 9780521889520 .

The Bible is the most globally influential and widely read book ever written. ... it has been a major influence on the behavior, laws, customs, education, art, literature, and morality of Western civilization.

^ Burnside, Jonathan (2011).

God, Justice, and Society: Aspects of Law and Legality in the Bible . Oxford University Press. p. XXVI.

ISBN 9780199759217 .

^ a b Riches 2000 , ch. 1.

^ Chazan, Robert (2006).

The Jews of Medieval Western Christendom: 1000–1500 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 11.

ISBN 9780521616645 . Retrieved 26 January 2018 .

^ Encarta-encyclopedie Winkler Prins (1993–2002) s.v. "christendom. §1.3 Scheidingen". Microsoft Corporation/Het Spectrum.

^ Meyendorff, John (1982).

The Byzantine Legacy in the Orthodox Church . Yonkers: St Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0-913836-90-3 .

^ a b Cameron, Averil (2006).

The Byzantines . Oxford: Blackwell. pp.

42– 49.

ISBN 978-1-4051-9833-2 .

^ Dawson, Christopher; Olsen, Glenn (1961).

Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). CUA Press. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1683-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Pacini, Andrea (1998).

Christian Communities in the Arab Middle East: The Challenge of the Future . Clarendon Press. pp. 38, 55.

ISBN 978-0-19-829388-0 .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 21 October 2016 .

^ a b Hill, Donald.

Islamic Science and Engineering . 1993. Edinburgh Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-7486-0455-3 , p.4 ^ a b Brague, Rémi (15 April 2009).

The Legend of the Middle Ages . University of Chicago Press. p. 164.

ISBN 9780226070803 . Retrieved 11 February 2014 .

^ a b Ferguson, Kitty Pythagoras: His Lives and the Legacy of a Rational Universe Walker Publishing Company, New York, 2008, (page number not available – occurs toward end of Chapter 13, "The Wrap-up of Antiquity"). "It was in the Near and Middle East and North Africa that the old traditions of teaching and learning continued, and where Christian scholars were carefully preserving ancient texts and knowledge of the ancient Greek language." ^ Rémi Brague, Assyrians contributions to the Islamic civilization Archived 27 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Britannica, Nestorian ^ "Review of How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization by Thomas Woods, Jr" .

National Review Book Service . Archived from the original on 22 August 2006 . Retrieved 16 September 2006 .

^ Ware 1993 , p. 8.

^ Betts, Robert B. (1978).

Christians in the Arab East: A Political Study (2nd rev. ed.). Athens: Lycabettus Press.

ISBN 978-0-8042-0796-6 .

^ Meyendorff, John (1989).

Imperial unity and Christian divisions: The Church 450-680 A.D.

The Church in history. Vol. 2. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 978-0-88141-055-6 .

^ Heussi, Karl (1956).

Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte , 11., Tübingen (Germany), pp. 317–319, 325–326 ^ E. Marty, Martin (13 August 2022).

"Protestantism's influence in the modern world" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Cambridge University Historical Series, An Essay on Western Civilization in Its Economic Aspects , p. 40: Hebraism, like Hellenism, has been an all-important factor in the development of Western Civilization; Judaism, as the precursor of Christianity, has indirectly had had much to do with shaping the ideals and morality of western nations since the christian era.

^ Caltron J.H Hayas, Christianity and Western Civilization (1953), Stanford University Press, p. 2: "That certain distinctive features of our Western civilization—the civilization of western Europe and of America—have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo – Graeco – Christianity, Catholic and Protestant." ^ Miller, Peter N. (2006).

"History of Religion Becomes Ethnology: Some Evidence from Peiresc's Africa" .

Journal of the History of Ideas .

67 (4): 675– 696.

doi : 10.1353/jhi.2006.0035 .

ISSN 1086-3222 .

S2CID 170111458 .

^ Jack Zipes (2001).

The great fairy tale tradition : from Straparola and Basile to the Brothers Grimm : texts, criticism . New York: W.W. Norton.

ISBN 0-393-97636-X .

OCLC 44133076 .

^ "Europe: A History" .

Goodreads . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ a b Koch, Carl (1994).

The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission . Early Middle Ages: St. Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4 .

^ Koch, Carl (1994).

The Catholic Church: Journey, Wisdom, and Mission . The Age of Enlightenment: St. Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-298-4 .

^ Dawson, Christopher; Olsen, Glenn (1961).

Crisis in Western Education (reprint ed.). CUA Press.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1683-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Rüegg, Walter: "Foreword. The University as a European Institution", in: A History of the University in Europe. Vol. 1: Universities in the Middle Ages , Cambridge University Press, 1992, ISBN 0-521-36105-2 , pp. xix–xx ^ Verger 1999 ^ "Valetudinaria" .

broughttolife.sciencemuseum.org.uk . Archived from the original on 5 October 2018 . Retrieved 22 February 2018 .

^ Risse, Guenter B (April 1999).

Mending Bodies, Saving Souls: A History of Hospitals . Oxford University Press. p. 59.

ISBN 0-19-505523-3 .

^ Karl Heussi, Kompendium der Kirchengeschichte , 11. Auflage (1956), Tübingen (Germany), pp. 317–319, 325–326 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Forms of Christian education ^ a b Rüegg, Walter: "Foreword. The University as a European Institution", in: A History of the University in Europe. Vol. 1: Universities in the Middle Ages , Cambridge University Press, 1992, ISBN 0-521-36105-2 , pp. XIX–XX ^ a b Verger, Jacques [in French] (1999).

Culture, enseignement et société en Occident aux XIIe et XIIIe siècles (in French) (1st ed.). Presses universitaires de Rennes in Rennes.

ISBN 286847344X . Retrieved 17 June 2014 .

^ Susan Elizabeth Hough, Richter's Scale: Measure of an Earthquake, Measure of a Man , Princeton University Press, 2007, ISBN 0691128073 , p. 68.

^ Woods 2005 , p. 109.

^ Wright, Jonathan (2004).

God's Soldiers: Adventure, Politics, intrigue and Power: A History of the Jesuits . HarperCollins. p. 200.

^ "Jesuit" . Encyclopædia Britannica. 29 August 2023.

^ Rodney Stark , For the Glory of God: How Monotheism Led to Reformations, Science, Witch-Hunts and the End of Slavery , 2003, Princeton University Press , ISBN 0-691-11436-6 , page 123 ^ Wallace, William A. (1984).

Prelude, Galileo and his Sources. The Heritage of the Collegio Romano in Galileo's Science . NJ: Princeton University Press.

^ a b Lindberg, David C.

; Numbers, Ronald L.

(1986), "Introduction", God & Nature: Historical Essays on the Encounter Between Christianity and Science , Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, pp. 5, 12, ISBN 978-0-520-05538-4 ^ Cohen, I. Bernard (1990).

Puritanism and the rise of modern science: the Merton thesis . New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 978-0813515304 .

^ Cohen, H.

(1994).

The scientific revolution: a historiographical inquiry . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

320–321 .

ISBN 9780226112800 .

Google Print, pp. 320–321 ^ Ferngren, Gary B.

(2002).

Science and religion: a historical introduction . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 125.

ISBN 9780801870385 .

Google Print, p.125 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Church and social welfare ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Care for the sick ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Property, poverty, and the poor, ^ Weber, Max (1905).

The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism .

^ Cf.

Jeremy Waldron (2002), God, Locke, and Equality: Christian Foundations in Locke's Political Thought , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (UK), ISBN 978-0-521-89057-1 , pp. 189, 208 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Church and state ^ a b c Sir Banister Fletcher , History of Architecture on the Comparative Method .

^ Buringh, Eltjo; van Zanden, Jan Luiten: "Charting the 'Rise of the West': Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries", The Journal of Economic History , Vol. 69, No. 2 (2009), pp. 409–445 (416, table 1) ^ a b Eveleigh, Bogs (2002).

Baths and Basins: The Story of Domestic Sanitation . Stroud, England: Sutton.

^ a b Christianity in Action: The History of the International Salvation Army p.16 ^ Christianity has always placed a strong emphasis on hygiene: Warsh, Cheryl Krasnick; Strong-Boag, Veronica (2006).

Children's Health Issues in Historical Perspective . Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press. p. 315.

ISBN 978-0-88920-912-1 .

... From Fleming's perspective, the transition to Christianity required a good dose of personal and public hygiene ...

Cheryl Krasnick Warsh; Veronica Strong-Boag, eds. (2006).

Children's Health Issues in Historical Perspective . Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press. p. 315.

ISBN 9780889209121 .

... Thus bathing also was considered a part of good health practice. For example, Tertullian attended the baths and believed them hygienic. Clement of Alexandria, while condemning excesses, had given guidelines for Christians who wished to attend the baths ...

Squatriti, Paolo (2002).

Water and Society in Early Medieval Italy, AD 400–1000, Parti 400–1000 . Cambridge University Press. p. 54.

ISBN 9780521522069 .

... but baths were normally considered therapeutic until the days of Gregory the Great, who understood virtuous bathing to be bathing "on account of the needs of body" ...

Eveleigh, Bogs (2002).

Baths and Basins: The Story of Domestic Sanitation . Stroud, England: Sutton.

Christianity's role in the development and promotion of spas: Bradley, Ian (2012).

Water: A Spiritual History . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 9781441167675 .

Contribution of the Christian missionaries of better health care of the people through hygiene and introducing and distributing the soaps: Channa, Subhadra (2009).

The Forger's Tale: The Search for Odeziaku . Indiana University Press. p. 284.

ISBN 9788177550504 .

A major contribution of the Christian missionaries was better health care of the people through hygiene. Soap, tooth–powder and brushes came to be used increasingly in urban areas.

Thomas, John (2015).

Evangelising the Nation: Religion and the Formation of Naga Political Identity . Routledge. p. 284.

ISBN 9781317413981 .

cleanliness and hygiene became an important marker of being identified as a Christian ^ Gariepy, Henry (2009).

Christianity in Action: The History of the International Salvation Army . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p.

16 .

ISBN 978-0-8028-4841-3 .

^ Encyclopædia Britannica The tendency to spiritualize and individualize marriage ^ Rawson, Beryl Rawson (2010).

A Companion to Families in the Greek and Roman Worlds . John Wiley & Sons. p. 111.

ISBN 978-1-4443-9075-9 .

...Christianity placed great emphasis on the family and on all members from children to the aged...

^ Pritchard, Colin Pritchard (2006).

Mental Health Social Work: Evidence-Based Practice . Routledge. p. 111.

ISBN 9781134365449 .

^ Chadwick, Owen p. 242.

^ Hastings, p. 309.

^ Zanatta, Alberto; Zampieri, Fabio; Basso, Cristina; Thiene, Gaetano (31 July 2017).

"Galileo Galilei: Science vs. faith" .

Global Cardiology Science and Practice .

2017 (2): 10.

doi : 10.21542/gcsp.2017.10 .

PMC 5871402 .

PMID 29644222 .

^ Cameron 2009 .

^ John Harvey, The Gothic World .

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Symbolism" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ T. Mathews, The early churches of Constantinople: architecture and liturgy (University Park, 1971); N. Henck, "Constantius ho Philoktistes?", Dumbarton Oaks Papers 55 (2001), 279–304 ( available online Archived 27 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ Duffy, p. 133.

^ a b Kenneth Clarke ; Civilisation , BBC, SBN 563 10279 9; first published 1969.

^ Verger, Jacques. "The Universities and Scholasticism", in The New Cambridge Medieval History : Volume V c. 1198–c. 1300. Cambridge University Press, 2007, 257.

^ Riché, Pierre (1978): "Education and Culture in the Barbarian West: From the Sixth through the Eighth Century", Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, ISBN 0-87249-376-8 , pp. 126–7, 282–98 ^ Gardner, p. 148 ^ Gardner, Roy; Lawton, Denis; Cairns, Jo (2005), Faith Schools , Routledge, p. 148, ISBN 978-0-415-33526-3 ^ a b Geoffrey Blainey; A Short History of Christianity; Penguin Viking; 2011 ^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Robert Grosseteste" . Newadvent.org. 1 June 1910 . Retrieved 16 July 2011 .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: St. Albertus Magnus" . Newadvent.org. 1 March 1907 . Retrieved 16 July 2011 .

^ "Catholic Education" (PDF) .

^ "Laudato Si" .

Vermont Catholic .

8 (4, 2016–2017, Winter ): 73 . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ Clifton E. Olmstead (1960), History of Religion in the United States , Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., pp. 69–80, 88–89, 114–117, 186–188 ^ M. Schmidt, Kongregationalismus , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , 3. Auflage, Band III (1959), Tübingen (Germany), col. 1770 ^ McKinney, William. "Mainline Protestantism 2000".

Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , Vol. 558, Americans and Religions in the Twenty-First Century (July 1998), pp. 57–66.

^ "The Harvard Guide: The Early History of Harvard University" . News.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on 22 July 2010 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "Increase Mather" .

, Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition , Encyclopædia Britannica ^ Princeton University Office of Communications.

"Princeton in the American Revolution" . Retrieved 24 May 2011 .

The original Trustees of Princeton University "were acting in behalf of the evangelical or New Light wing of the Presbyterian Church, but the College had no legal or constitutional identification with that denomination. Its doors were to be open to all students, 'any different sentiments in religion notwithstanding.'" ^ a b McCaughey, Robert (2003).

Stand, Columbia : A History of Columbia University in the City of New York . New York, New York: Columbia University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 0-231-13008-2 .

^ "Duke University's Relation to the Methodist Church: the basics" . Duke University. 2002. Archived from the original on 12 June 2010 . Retrieved 27 March 2010 .

Duke University has historical, formal, on-going, and symbolic ties with Methodism, but is an independent and non-sectarian institution ... Duke would not be the institution it is today without its ties to the Methodist Church. However, the Methodist Church does not own or direct the University. Duke is and has developed as a private non-profit corporation which is owned and governed by an autonomous and self-perpetuating Board of Trustees.

^ Lyon, E. Wilson (1977).

The History of Pomona College, 1887–1969 . Anaheim, California: The Castle Press. pp.

3– 6.

OCLC 4114776 .

^ "The most and least educated U.S. religious group" . Pew Research Center. 16 October 2016.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Religion and Education Around the World" (PDF) . Pew Research Center. 19 December 2011 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ "المسيحيون العرب يتفوقون على يهود إسرائيل في التعليم" .

Bokra . Retrieved 28 December 2011 .

^ "biblical literature" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ Marvin Perry (1 January 2012).

Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1789 . Cengage Learning. p. 33.

ISBN 978-1-111-83720-4 .

^ "When the King Saved God" .

Vanity Fair . 2011 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 .

^ "Why I want all our children to read the King James Bible" .

The Guardian . 20 May 2012 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 .

^ "Best selling book of non-fiction" . Guinness World Records . Retrieved 9 December 2015 .

^ Ryken, Leland.

"How We Got the Best-Selling Book of All Time" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 9 December 2015 .

^ "The battle of the books" .

The Economist . 22 December 2007.

^ Ash, Russell (2001).

Top 10 of Everything 2002 . Dorling Kindersley.

ISBN 0-7894-8043-3 .

^ Mango 2007 , pp. 275–276.

^ Ross, James F., "Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae (ca. 1273), Christian Wisdom Explained Philosophically", in The Classics of Western Philosophy: A Reader's Guide , (eds.) Jorge J. E. Gracia, Gregory M. Reichberg, Bernard N. Schumacher (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2003), p. 165.

[1] ^ Roy Porter; The Greatest Benefit to Mankind - a Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present; Harper Collins; 1997; pp82-83 ^ Roy Porter; The Greatest Benefit to Mankind - a Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present; Harper Collins; 1997; p.90.

^ a b Miller, Timothy (1985). "The Birth of the Hospital in the Byzantine Empire".

The Henry E. Sigerist Supplements to the Bulletin of the History of Medicine (10). Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins: 142– 146.

PMID 3902734 .

^ Horden, Peregrine (2005). "The Earliest Hospitals in Byzantium, Western Europe, and Islam".

The Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

35 (3): 361– 389.

doi : 10.1162/0022195052564243 .

JSTOR 3657030 .

S2CID 145378868 .

^ Geoffrey Blainey; A Short History of Christianity; Penguin Viking; 2011; pp 214-215.

^ Roy Porter ; The Greatest Benefit to Mankind - a Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present ; Harper Collins; 1997; pp. 110-112 ^ Agnew, John (12 February 2010). "Deus Vult: The Geopolitics of Catholic Church".

Geopolitics .

15 (1): 39– 61.

doi : 10.1080/14650040903420388 .

S2CID 144793259 .

^ Robert Calderisi ; Earthly Mission - The Catholic Church and World Development ; TJ International Ltd; 2013; p.40 ^ "Catholic hospitals comprise one quarter of world's healthcare, council reports :: Catholic News Agency (CNA)" . Catholic News Agency. 10 February 2010 . Retrieved 17 August 2012 .

^ Hall, p. 100.

^ Murray, p. 45.

^ Frederick Copleston, A History of Philosophy, Volume II: From Augustine to Scotus (Burns & Oates, 1950), p. 1, dates medieval philosophy proper from the Carolingian Renaissance in the 8th century to the end of the 14th century, although he includes Augustine and the Patristic fathers as precursors. Desmond Henry, in Paul Edwards (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Macmillan, 1967), vol. 5, pp. 252–257, starts with Augustine and ends with Nicholas of Oresme in the late 14th century. David Luscombe, Medieval Thought (Oxford University Press, 1997), dates medieval philosophy from the conversion of Constantine in 312 to the Protestant Reformation in the 1520s. Christopher Hughes, in A.C. Grayling (ed.), Philosophy 2: Further through the Subject (Oxford University Press, 1998), covers philosophers from Augustine to Ockham. Jorge J.E. Gracia, in Nicholas Bunnin and E.P. Tsui-James (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Philosophy , 2nd ed. (Blackwell, 2003), p. 620, identifies medieval philosophy as running from Augustine to John of St. Thomas in the 17th century. Anthony Kenny, A New History of Western Philosophy, Volume II: Medieval Philosophy (Oxford University Press, 2005), begins with Augustine and ends with the Lateran Council of 1512.

^ Gracia, p. 1 ^ Charles Schmitt and Quentin Skinner (eds.), The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy (Cambridge University Press, 1988), p. 5, loosely define the period as extending "from the age of Ockham to the revisionary work of Bacon, Descartes and their contemporaries." ^ Brian Copenhaver and Charles Schmitt, Renaissance Philosophy (Oxford University Press, 1992), p. 4: "one may identify the hallmark of Renaissance philosophy as an accelerated and enlarged interest, stimulated by newly available texts, in primary sources of Greek and Roman thought that were previously unknown or partially known or little read." ^ Jorge J.E. Gracia in Nicholas Bunnin and E.P. Tsui-James (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Philosophy , 2nd ed. (Blackwell, 2002), p. 621: "the humanists ... restored man to the centre of attention and channeled their efforts to the recovery and transmission of classical learning, particularly in the philosophy of Plato." ^ Charles B. Schmitt and Quentin Skinner (eds.), The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy , pp. 61 and 63: "From Petrarch the early humanists learnt their conviction that the revival of humanae literae was only the first step in a greater intellectual renewal" "the very conception of philosophy was changing because its chief object was now man—man was at centre of every inquiry".

^ Richard Popkin, The History of Scepticism from Savonarola to Bayle (Oxford University Press, 2003).

^ Copenhaver and Schmitt, Renaissance Philosophy , pp. 274–284.

^ Schmitt and Skinner, The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy , pp. 430–452.

^ a b Religion and Science , John Habgood , Mills & Brown, 1964, pp., 11, 14–16, 48–55, 68–69, 90–91, 87 ^ Russell, Robert John (2008).

Cosmology: From Alpha to Omega . Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press. p. 344.

ISBN 978-0-8006-6273-8 .

^ Knight, Christopher C. (2008).

"God's Action in Nature's World: Essays in Honour of Robert John Russell" .

Science & Christian Belief .

20 (2): 214– 215.

^ Grant, Edward (2006).

Science and Religion, 400 B.C. to A.D. 1550 : from Aristotle to Copernicus (Johns Hopkins Paperbacks ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 222.

ISBN 0-8018-8401-2 .

^ Grant 2006, p. 111-114 ^ Grant 2006, p. 105-106 ^ "What Time Is It in the Transept?" .

The New York Times .

D. Graham Burnett book review of J.L.Heilbron's work, The Sun in the Church: Cathedrals as Solar Observatories. 24 October 1999 . Retrieved 1 August 2013 .

^ Lindberg, David; Numbers, Ronald L (October 2003).

When Science and Christianity Meet . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-48214-6 .

^ Goldstein, Thomas (April 1995).

Dawn of Modern Science: From the Ancient Greeks to the Renaissance . Da Capo Press.

ISBN 0-306-80637-1 .

^ Pope John Paul II (September 1998).

"Fides et Ratio (Faith and Reason), IV" . Retrieved 15 September 2006 .

^ Jaki, Stanley L. The Savior of Science, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company (July 2000), ISBN 0-8028-4772-2 .

^ Harrison, Peter (8 May 2012).

"Christianity and the rise of western science" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 28 August 2014 .

^ Noll, Mark , Science, Religion, and A.D. White: Seeking Peace in the "Warfare Between Science and Theology" (PDF) , The Biologos Foundation, p. 4, archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2015 , retrieved 14 January 2015 ^ Sheridan Gilley; Brian Stanley, eds. (2006).

The Cambridge History of Christianity: Volume 8, World Christianities C.1815-c.1914 . Cambridge University Press. p. 164.

ISBN 0521814561 .

^ Numbers, Ronald L. (8 November 2010).

Galileo Goes to Jail and Other Myths about Science and Religion .

Harvard University Press . p. 80.

ISBN 9780674057418 .

^ Numbers, Ronald L. (8 November 2010).

Galileo Goes to Jail and Other Myths about Science and Religion .

Harvard University Press . pp.

80– 81.

ISBN 9780674057418 .

^ Pro forma candidate to Prince-Bishop of Warmia, cf. Dobrzycki, Jerzy, and Leszek Hajdukiewicz, "Kopernik, Mikołaj", Polski słownik biograficzny (Polish Biographical Dictionary), vol. XIV, Wrocław, Polish Academy of Sciences , 1969, p. 11.

^ Sharratt, Michael (1994).

Galileo: Decisive Innovator . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 17, 213.

ISBN 0-521-56671-1 .

^ "Because he would not accept the Formula of Concord without some reservations, he was excommunicated from the Lutheran communion. Because he remained faithful to his Lutheranism throughout his life, he experienced constant suspicion from Catholics." John L. Treloar, "Biography of Kepler shows man of rare integrity. Astronomer saw science and spirituality as one." National Catholic Reporter , 8 October 2004, p. 2a. A review of James A. Connor Kepler's Witch: An Astronomer's Discovery of Cosmic Order amid Religious War, Political Intrigue and Heresy Trial of His Mother ,  Harper San Francisco.

^ Richard S. Westfall – Indiana University The Galileo Project . ( Rice University ) . Retrieved 5 July 2008 .

^ "The Boyle Lecture" .

St. Marylebow Church .

^ Bacon, Francis (1625).

The Essayes Or Covnsels, Civill and Morall, of Francis Lo. Vervlam, Viscovnt St. Alban . London. p. 90 . Retrieved 7 July 2019 .

^ Leibniz on the Trinity and the Incarnation: Reason and Revelation in the Seventeenth Century (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007, pp. xix–xx).

^ Dunnington 2004 , p. 300.

^ Dunnington, G. Waldo (2004).

Carl Friedrich Gauss: Titan of Science . The Mathematical Association of America.

ISBN 978-0-88385-547-8 .

OCLC 53933110 .

^ Swedenborg, E.

The True Christian Religion , particularly sections 163–184 (New York: Swedenborg Foundation, 1951).

^ "Gli scienziati cattolici che hanno fatto lItalia (Catholic scientists who made Italy)" . Zenit. Archived from the original on 16 April 2013.

^ Grimaux, Edouard.

Lavoisier 1743–1794.

(Paris, 1888; 2nd ed., 1896; 3rd ed., 1899), page 53.

^ "John Dalton" .

Science History Institute . June 2016 . Retrieved 20 March 2018 .

^ Theerman, Paul (1986). "James Clerk Maxwell and religion".

American Journal of Physics .

54 (4): 312– 317.

Bibcode : 1986AmJPh..54..312T .

doi : 10.1119/1.14636 .

^ Hutchinson, Ian (2006) [January 1998].

"James Clerk Maxwell and the Christian Proposition" . Archived from the original on 31 December 2012 . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ McCartney & Whitaker (2002), reproduced on Institute of Physics website ^ Vallery-Radot, Maurice (1994).

Pasteur . Paris: Perrin. pp.

377– 407.

^ Cantor , pp. 41–43, 60–64, and 277–280.

^ Peter J. Bowler, Reconciling Science and Religion: The Debate in Early-Twentieth-Century Britain (2014). University of Chicago Press. p. 35.

ISBN 9780226068596 . "Both Lord Rayleigh and J. J. Thomson were Anglicans." ^ Seeger, Raymond. 1986. "J. J. Thomson, Anglican," in Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith, 38 (June 1986): 131–132. The Journal of the American Scientific Affiliation. ""As a Professor, J.J. Thomson did attend the Sunday evening college chapel service, and as Master, the morning service. He was a regular communicant in the Anglican Church. In addition, he showed an active interest in the Trinity Mission at Camberwell. With respect to his private devotional life, J.J. Thomson would invariably practice kneeling for daily prayer, and read his Bible before retiring each night. He truly was a practicing Christian!" ( Raymond Seeger 1986, 132)." ^ "Christian Influences in the Sciences" .

rae.org . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.

^ "World's Greatest Creation Scientists from Y1K to Y2K" .

creationsafaris.com . Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 16 October 2015 .

^ Easterbrook, G. (15 August 1997). "SCIENTIFIC COMMUNITY: Science and God: A Warming Trend?".

Science .

277 (5328). American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS): 890– 893.

doi : 10.1126/science.277.5328.890 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 9281067 .

S2CID 39722460 .

^ Baruch A. Shalev (2003), 100 Years of Nobel Prizes , Atlantic Publishers & Distributors, p. 57 ^ a b c d Shalev, Baruch (2005).

100 Years of Nobel Prizes . p. 59 ^ "Byzantine Medicine - Vienna Dioscurides" .

Antiqua Medicina . University of Virginia. Archived from the original on 19 July 2012 . Retrieved 27 May 2007 .

^ George Saliba (27 April 2006).

"Islamic Science and the Making of Renaissance Europe" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved 1 March 2008 .

^ Robins, Robert Henry (1993). "Chapter I".

The Byzantine Grammarians: Their Place in History . Walter de Gruyter. p. 8.

ISBN 978-3-11-013574-9 .

^ The faculty was composed exclusively of philosophers, scientists, rhetoricians, and philologists ( Tatakes, Vasileios N.; Moutafakis, Nicholas J. (2003).

Byzantine Philosophy . Hackett Publishing. p. 189.

ISBN 0-87220-563-0 .

) ^ Some noteworthy exceptions to this tolerance include the closing of the Platonic Academy in 529; the obscurantism of Cosmas Indicopleustes ; and the condemnations of Ioannis Italos and Georgios Plethon for their devotion to ancient philosophy.

^ The faculty was composed exclusively of philosophers, scientists, rhetoricians, and philologists ( Tatakes, Vasileios N.; Moutafakis, Nicholas J. (2003).

Byzantine Philosophy . Hackett Publishing. p. 189.

ISBN 0-87220-563-0 .

) ^ Anastos, Milton V. (1962). "The History of Byzantine Science. Report on the Dumbarton Oaks Symposium of 1961".

Dumbarton Oaks Papers .

16 . Dumbarton Oaks, Trustees for Harvard University: 409– 411.

doi : 10.2307/1291170 .

JSTOR 1291170 .

^ Kaser, Karl The Balkans and the Near East: Introduction to a Shared History p. 135.

^ Yazberdiyev, Dr. Almaz Libraries of Ancient Merv Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Dr. Yazberdiyev is Director of the Library of the Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan, Ashgabat.

^ Hyman and Walsh Philosophy in the Middle Ages Indianapolis, 1973, p. 204' Meri, Josef W. and Jere L. Bacharach, Editors, Medieval Islamic Civilization Vol.1, A-K, Index, 2006, p. 304.

^ Hyman and Walsh Philosophy in the Middle Ages Indianapolis, 3rd edition, p. 216 ^ Meri, Josef W. and Jere L. Bacharach, Editors, Medieval Islamic Civilization Vol.1, A – K, Index, 2006, p. 451 ^ The American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 22:2 Mehmet Mahfuz Söylemez, The Jundishapur School: Its History, Structure, and Functions , p.3.

^ Bonner, Bonner; Ener, Mine; Singer, Amy (2003).

Poverty and charity in Middle Eastern contexts . SUNY Press. p. 97.

ISBN 978-0-7914-5737-5 .

^ Ruano, Eloy Benito; Burgos, Manuel Espadas (1992).

17e Congrès international des sciences historiques: Madrid, du 26 août au 2 septembre 1990 . Comité international des sciences historiques. p. 527.

ISBN 978-84-600-8154-8 .

^ Byzantines in Renaissance Italy ^ "Fall of Constantinople" . Encyclopædia Britannica. 22 May 2023.

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia" . New Advent . Retrieved 16 June 2013 .

^ Machamer, Peter (1998).

The Cambridge Companion to Galileo .

Cambridge University Press . p.

306 .

ISBN 0-521-58841-3 .

^ Pope John Paul II , 3 October 1981 to the Pontifical Academy of Science, "Cosmology and Fundamental Physics" ^ King, David (1995). "A forgotten Cistercian system of numerical notation".

Citeaux Commentarii Cistercienses .

46 ( 3– 4): 183– 217.

^ Chrisomalis, Stephen (2010).

Numerical notation : a comparative history . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 350.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511676062 .

ISBN 978-0-511-67683-3 .

OCLC 630115876 .

^ a b Rob Baedeker (24 March 2008).

"Good Works: Monks build multimillion-dollar business and give the money away" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved 7 August 2009 .

^ Gimpel, p 67. Cited by Woods.

^ Woods, p 33 ^ a b Herbert Thurston.

"Cistercians in the British Isles" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . NewAdvent.org . Retrieved 18 June 2008 .

^ Susan Elizabeth Hough, Richter's Scale: Measure of an Earthquake, Measure of a Man , Princeton University Press, 2007, ISBN 0-691-12807-3 , p. 68.

^ Lindberg, David C.

; Numbers, Ronald Leslie (1986).

God and nature. Historical essays on the encounter between Christianity and science .

Berkeley, California : University of California Press . p.

154 .

ISBN 978-052005-538-4 .

^ Wright, Jonathan (2005).

God's Soldiers. Adventure, Politics, Intrigue, and Power—A History of the Jesuits . New York City: The Doubleday Religious Publishing Group . p.

200 .

ISBN 978-038550-080-7 .

^ a b Sztompka, Piotr (2003), Robert King Merton , in Ritzer, George , The Blackwell Companion to Major Contemporary Social Theorists , Malden, Massachusetts Oxford: Blackwell, p. 13, ISBN 9781405105958 ^ Gregory, Andrew (1998), Handout for course 'The Scientific Revolution' at The Scientific Revolution ^ Becker, George (1992), "The Merton Thesis: Oetinger and German Pietism, a significant negative case".

Sociological Forum (Springer) 7 (4), pp. 642–660 ^ a b c d Harriet Zuckerman , Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the United States New York, The Free Press, 1977, p.68: Protestants turn up among the American-reared laureates in slightly greater proportion to their numbers in the general population. Thus 72 percent of the seventy-one laureates but about two-thirds of the American population were reared in one or another Protestant denomination-) ^ J. Le Goff, Marchands et banquiers au Moyen Âge, Puf Quadrige, 2011, p. 75 ^ de Torre, Fr. Joseph M. (1997).

"A Philosophical and Historical Analysis of Modern Democracy, Equality, and Freedom Under the Influence of Christianity" . Catholic Education Resource Center.

^ Schumpeter, Joseph (1954).

History of Economic Analysis . London: Allen & Unwin.

^ Gerhard Lenski (1963), The Religious Factor: A Sociological Study of Religion's Impact on Politics, Economics, and Family Life , Revised Edition,  A Doubleday Anchor Book, Garden City, N.Y., pp.348–351 ^ Cf.

Robert Middlekauff (2005), The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763–1789 , Revised and Expanded Edition, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-516247-9 , p. 52 ^ Jan Weerda, Soziallehre des Calvinismus , in Evangelisches Soziallexikon , 3. Auflage (1958), Stuttgart (Germany), col. 934 ^ Eduard Heimann , Kapitalismus , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , 3. Auflage, Band III (1959), Tübingen (Germany), col. 1136–1141 ^ Hans Fritz Schwenkhagen, Technik , in Evangelisches Soziallexikon , 3. Auflage, col. 1029–1033 ^ Georg Süßmann, Naturwissenschaft und Christentum , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , 3. Auflage, Band IV, col. 1377–1382 ^ C. Graf von Klinckowstroem, Technik. Geschichtlich , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , 3. Auflage, Band VI, col. 664–667 ^ Kim, Sung Ho (Fall 2008).

"Max Weber" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, CSLI, Stanford University . Retrieved 21 August 2011 .

^ a b c B. Drummond Ayres Jr. (19 December 2011).

"The Episcopalians: An American Elite With Roots Going Back to Jamestown" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 17 August 2012 .

^ Irving Lewis Allen, "WASP—From Sociological Concept to Epithet", Ethnicity , 1975 154+ ^ Hacker, Andrew (1957). "Liberal Democracy and Social Control".

American Political Science Review .

51 (4): 1009–1026 [p. 1011].

doi : 10.2307/1952449 .

JSTOR 1952449 .

S2CID 146933599 .

^ Baltzell (1964).

The Protestant Establishment . New York, Random House. p.

9 .

^ W. Williams, Peter (2016).

Religion, Art, and Money: Episcopalians and American Culture from the Civil War to the Great Depression . University of North Carolina Press. p. 176.

ISBN 9781469626987 .

The names of fashionable families who were already Episcopalian, like the Morgans, or those, like the Fricks, who now became so, goes on interminably: Aldrich, Astor, Biddle, Booth, Brown, Du Pont, Firestone, Ford, Gardner, Mellon, Morgan, Procter, the Vanderbilt, Whitney. Episcopalians branches of the Baptist Rockefellers and Jewish Guggenheims even appeared on these family trees.

^ B. Rosenbaum, Julia (2006).

Visions of Belonging: New England Art and the Making of American Identity . Cornell University Press. p. 45.

ISBN 9780801444708 .

By the late nineteenth century, one of the strongest bulwarks of Brahmin power was Harvard University. Statistics underscore the close relationship between Harvard and Boston's upper strata.

^ C. Holloran, Peter (1989).

Boston's Wayward Children: Social Services for Homeless Children, 1830-1930 . Fairleigh Dickinson Univ Press. p. 73.

ISBN 9780838632970 .

^ J. Harp, Gillis (2003).

Brahmin Prophet: Phillips Brooks and the Path of Liberal Protestantism . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 13.

ISBN 9780742571983 .

^ Baltzell, E. Digby (2011).

Philadelphia Gentlemen: The Making of a National Upper Class . Transaction Publishers. p. 236.

ISBN 9781412830751 .

^ Percy Ernst Schramm, Neun Generationen: Dreihundert Jahre deutscher "Kulturgeschichte" im Lichte der Schicksale einer Hamburger Bürgerfamilie (1648–1948). Vol. I and II, Göttingen 1963/64.

^ McKinnon, AM (2010).

"Elective affinities of the Protestant ethic: Weber and the chemistry of capitalism" (PDF) .

Sociological Theory .

28 (1): 108– 126.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9558.2009.01367.x .

hdl : 2164/3035 .

S2CID 144579790 .

^ Crum, Roger J.

Severing the Neck of Pride: Donatello's "Judith and Holofernes" and the Recollection of Albizzi Shame in Medicean Florence . Artibus et Historiae, Volume 22, Edit 44, 2001. pp. 23–29.

^ Negotiating the French Pox in Early Modern Germany by Claudia Stein ^ Schröder, Martin (2013).

Integrating Varieties of Capitalism and Welfare State Research . London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 96, 144– 145, 149, 155, 157.

^ Markkola, Pirjo (2011). Kettunen, Pauli; Petersen, Klaus (eds.).

"The Lutheran Nordic Welfare States" .

Beyond Welfare State Models. Transnational Historical Perspectives on Social Policy . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing: 102– 118.

ISBN 9781849809603 – via Google Books.

^ Kettunen, Pauli (2010).

"The Sellers of Labour Power as Social Citizens: A Utopian Wage Work Society in the Nordic Visions of Welfare" (PDF) .

NordWel Studies in Historical Welfare State Research : 16– 45.

^ Sinnemäki, Kaius; Portman, Anneli; Tilli, Jouni; Nelson, Robert H, eds. (2019).

On the Legacy of Lutheranism in Finland: Societal Perspectives .

doi : 10.21435/sfh.25 .

ISBN 9789518581355 .

^ Nelson, Robert H. (2017).

Lutheranism and the Nordic Spirit of Social Democracy: A Different Protestant Ethic . Bristol: ISD. pp. 21, 121.

ISBN 978-87-7184-416-0 – via Google Books.

^ Hilson, Mary (2008).

The Nordic Model: Scandinavia since 1945 . London: Reaktion Books. pp.

112– 133.

ISBN 9781861894618 – via Google Books.

^ "Christmas Markets in Germany and Europe" .

The German Way & More . Retrieved 30 October 2019 .

^ a b Fortescue, Adrian (1912).

"Christian Calendar" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Robert Appleton Company . Retrieved 18 July 2014 .

^ Hickman.

Handbook of the Christian Year .

^ "The Global Religious Landscape | Christians" . Pew Research Center. 18 December 2012.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2015 . Retrieved 23 May 2014 .

^ "Christmas Strongly Religious For Half in U.S. Who Celebrate It" . Gallup, Inc. 24 December 2010.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2012 . Retrieved 16 December 2012 .

^ Canadian Heritage – Public holidays Archived 24 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine – Government of Canada . Retrieved 27 November 2009.

^ 2009 Federal Holidays Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine – U.S. Office of Personnel Management . Retrieved 27 November 2009.

^ Bank holidays and British Summer time Archived 15 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine – HM Government . Retrieved 27 November 2009.

^ Ehorn, Lee Ellen; Hewlett, Shirely J.; Hewlett, Dale M. (1 September 1995).

December Holiday Customs . Lorenz Educational Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-4291-0896-6 .

^ Nick Hytrek, "Non-Christians focus on secular side of Christmas" Archived 14 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Sioux City Journal , 10 November 2009. Retrieved 18 November 2009.

^ "Poll: In a changing nation, Santa endures" . Associated Press. 22 December 2006.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ Gamman, Andrew; Bindon, Caroline (2014).

Stations for Lent and Easter . Kereru Publishing Limited. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0473276812 .

Easter Day, also known as Resurrection Sunday, marks the high point of the Christian year. It is the day that we celebrate the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

^ Boda, Mark J.; Smith, Gordon T. (2006).

Repentance in Christian Theology . Liturgical Press. p. 316.

ISBN 978-0814651759 . Retrieved 19 April 2014 .

Orthodox, Catholic, and all Reformed churches in the Middle East celebrate Easter according to the Eastern calendar, calling this holy day "Resurrection Sunday," not Easter.

^ Bernard Trawicky; Ruth Wilhelme Gregory (2000).

Anniversaries and Holidays .

American Library Association .

ISBN 978-0838906958 .

Easter is the central celebration of the Christian liturgical year. It is the oldest and most important Christian feast, celebrating the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The date of Easter determines the dates of all movable feasts except those of Advent.

^ Aveni, Anthony (2004).

"The Easter/Passover Season: Connecting Time's Broken Circle", The Book of the Year: A Brief History of Our Seasonal Holidays .

Oxford University Press . pp.

64– 78.

ISBN 0-19-517154-3 .

^ Simpson, Jacqueline; Roud, Steve (2003).

"clipping the church" .

Oxford Reference . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198607663.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780198607663 .

^ Anne Jordan (2000).

Christianity .

Nelson Thornes .

ISBN 978-0748753208 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 .

Easter eggs are used as a Christian symbol to represent the empty tomb. The outside of the egg looks dead but inside there is new life, which is going to break out. The Easter egg is a reminder that Jesus will rise from His tomb and bring new life. Eastern Orthodox Christians dye boiled eggs red to represent the blood of Christ shed for the sins of the world.

^ The Guardian, Volume 29 . H. Harbaugh. 1878 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 .

Just so, on that first Easter morning, Jesus came to life and walked out of the tomb, and left it, as it were, an empty shell. Just so, too, when the Christian dies, the body is left in the grave, an empty shell, but the soul takes wings and flies away to be with God. Thus you see that though an egg seems to be as dead as a stone, yet it really has life in it; and also it is like Christ's dead body, which was raised to life again. This is the reason we use eggs on Easter. (In olden times they used to color the eggs red, so as to show the kind of death by which Christ died, – a bloody death.) ^ Gordon Geddes, Jane Griffiths (2002).

Christian belief and practice .

Heinemann .

ISBN 978-0435306915 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 .

Red eggs are given to Orthodox Christians after the Easter Liturgy. They crack their eggs against each other's. The cracking of the eggs symbolizes a wish to break away from the bonds of sin and misery and enter the new life issuing from Christ's resurrection.

^ Collins, Cynthia (19 April 2014).

"Easter Lily Tradition and History" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 20 April 2014 .

The Easter Lily is symbolic of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Churches of all denominations, large and small, are filled with floral arrangements of these white flowers with their trumpet-like shape on Easter morning.

^ Schell, Stanley (1916).

Easter Celebrations . Werner & Company. p.

84 .

We associate the lily with Easter, as pre-eminently the symbol of the Resurrection.

^ Luther League Review: 1936–1937 . Luther League of America. 1936.

^ Vicki K. Black (2004).

The Church Standard, Volume 74 . Church Publishing, Inc.

ISBN 978-0819225757 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 .

In parts of Europe, the eggs were dyed red and were then cracked together when people exchanged Easter greetings. Many congregations today continue to have Easter egg hunts for the children after the services on Easter Day.

^ The Church Standard, Volume 74 . Walter N. Hering. 1897 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 .

When the custom was carrierd over into Christian practice the Easter eggs were usually sent to the priests to be blessed and sprinked with holy water. In later times the coloring and decorating of eggs was introduced, and in a royal roll of the time of Edward I., which is preserved in the Tower of London, there is an entry of 18d. for 400 eggs, to be used for Easter gifts.

^ Brown, Eleanor Cooper (2010).

From Preparation to Passion . Xulon Press.

ISBN 978-1609577650 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 .

So what preparations do most Christians and non-Christians make? Shopping for new clothing often signifies the belief that Spring has arrived, and it is a time of renewal. Preparations for the Easter Egg Hunts and the Easter Ham for the Sunday dinner are high on the list too.

^ Cf.

Catechism of the Catholic Church , 1210 Archived 9 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Cross/Livingstone.

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . p. 1435f.

^ N. Stearns, Peter (2008).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern World .

Oxford University Press . p. 179.

ISBN 9780195176322 .

Uniformly practiced by Jews, Muslims, and the members of Coptic, Ethiopian, and Eritrean Orthodox Churches, male circumcision remains prevalent in many regions of the world, particularly Africa, South and East Asia, Oceania, and Anglosphere countries.

^ Customary in some Coptic and other churches: "The Coptic Christians in Egypt and the Ethiopian Orthodox Christians— two of the oldest surviving forms of Christianity— retain many of the features of early Christianity, including male circumcision. Circumcision is not prescribed in other forms of Christianity ... Some Christian churches in South Africa oppose the practice, viewing it as a pagan ritual, while others, including the Nomiya church in Kenya, require circumcision for membership and participants in focus group discussions in Zambia and Malawi mentioned similar beliefs that Christians should practice circumcision since Jesus was circumcised and the Bible teaches the practice." "The decision that Christians need not practice circumcision is recorded in Acts 15 ; there was never, however, a prohibition of circumcision, and it is practiced by Coptic Christians." "circumcision" , The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition, 2001–05.

^ Pitts-Taylor, Victoria (2008).

Cultural Encyclopedia of the Body [2 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 394.

ISBN 9781567206913 .

For most part, Christianity does not require circumcision of its followers. Yet, some Orthodox and African Christian groups do require circumcision. These circumcisions take place at any point between birth and puberty.

^ S. Ellwood, Robert (2008).

The Encyclopedia of World Religions .

Infobase Publishing . p. 95.

ISBN 9781438110387 .

It is obligatory among Jews, Muslims, and Coptic Christians. Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant Christians do not require circumcision. Starting in the last half of the 19th century, however, circumcision also became common among Christians in Europe and especially in North America.

^ Gruenbaum, Ellen (2015).

The Female Circumcision Controversy: An Anthropological Perspective . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 61.

ISBN 9780812292510 .

Christian theology generally interprets male circumcision to be an Old Testament rule that is no longer an obligation ... though in many countries (especially the United States and Sub-Saharan Africa, but not so much in Europe) it is widely practiced among Christians ^ Hunting, Katherine (2012).

Essential Case Studies in Public Health: Putting Public Health Into Practice . Jones & Bartlett Publishers. pp.

23– 24.

ISBN 9781449648756 .

Neonatal circumcision is the general practice among Jews, Christians, and many, but not all Muslims.

^ R. Wylie, Kevan (2015).

ABC of Sexual Health . John Wiley & Sons. p. 101.

ISBN 9781118665695 .

Although it is mostly common and required in male newborns with Moslem or Jewish backgrounds, certain Christian-dominant countries such as the United States also practice it commonly.

^ R. Peteet, John (2017).

Spirituality and Religion Within the Culture of Medicine: From Evidence to Practice . Oxford University Press. pp.

97– 101.

ISBN 9780190272432 .

male circumcision is still observed among Ethiopian and Coptic Christians, and circumcision rates are also high today in the Philippines and the US.

^ Creighton, Sarah; Liao, Lih-Mei (2019).

Female Genital Cosmetic Surgery: Solution to What Problem?

. Cambridge University Press. p. 63.

ISBN 9781108435529 .

Christians in Africa, for instance, often practise infant male circumcision.

^ Nga, Armelle (30 December 2019).

"The Ritual of Circumcision in Africa: The Case of South Africa" . Africanews.

This practice is old and widespread among African Christians with very close links to their beliefs. It can be executed traditionally or in hospital.

^ Bakos, Gergely Tibor (2011).

On Faith, Rationality, and the Other in the Late Middle Ages:: A Study of Nicholas of Cusa's Manuductive Approach to Islam . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 228.

ISBN 9781606083420 .

Although it is stated that circumcision is not a sacrament necessary for salvation, this rite is accepted for the Ethiopian Jacobites and other Middle Eastern Christians.

^ J. Sharkey, Heather (2017).

A History of Muslims, Christians, and Jews in the Middle East . Cambridge University Press. p. 63.

ISBN 9780521769372 .

On the Coptic Christian practice of male circumcision in Egypt, and on its practice by other Christians in western Asia.

^ "Circumcision protest brought to Florence" .

Associated Press . 30 March 2008.

However, the practice is still common among Christians in the United States, Oceania, South Korea, the Philippines, the Middle East and Africa. Some Middle Eastern Christians actually view the procedure as a rite of passage.

^ Ian Ross, Jeffrey (2015).

Religion and Violence: An Encyclopedia of Faith and Conflict from Antiquity to the Present . Routledge. p. 169.

ISBN 9781317461098 .

For instance, the majority of South Koreans, Americans, and Filipinos, as well as African Christians, practice circumcision.

^ L. Armstrong, Heather (2021).

Encyclopedia of Sex and Sexuality: Understanding Biology, Psychology, and Culture [2 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. pp.

115– 117.

ISBN 9781610698757 .

^ Rawson, Beryl Rawson (2010).

A Companion to Families in the Greek and Roman Worlds . John Wiley & Sons. p. 111.

ISBN 9781444390759 .

Christianity placed great emphasis on the family and on all members from children to the aged ^ "The Collapse of Marriage by Don Browning – The Christian Century" .

Religion-online.org . 7 February 2006. pp.

24– 28. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 10 July 2007 .

^ Pritchard, Colin Pritchard (2006).

Mental Health Social Work: Evidence-Based Practice . Routledge. p. 111.

ISBN 9781134365449 .

in cultures with stronger 'extended family traditions', such as Asian and Catholic countries ^ "Major Branches of Religions Ranked by Number of Adherents" . 19 August 1999. Archived from the original on 19 August 1999.

^ Thomas Riggs (2006). "Christianity: Coptic Christianity".

Worldmark Encyclopedia of Religious Practices: Religions and denominations . Thomson Gale.

ISBN 978-0-7876-6612-5 .

^ "Circumcision" .

Columbia Encyclopedia . Columbia University Press. 2011.

^ Vivian C. Fox, "Poor Children's Rights in Early Modern England", Journal of Psychohistory , January 1996, Vol. 23 Issue 3, pp 286–306 ^ "Children of the Reformation" . Touchstone . Retrieved 11 January 2010 .

^ "Onan's Onus" . Touchstone . Retrieved 20 March 2009 .

^ Brinley, Douglas E. (1998), Together forever: Gospel perspectives for marriage and family , Salt Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, p.

48 , ISBN 1-57008-540-4 , OCLC 40185703 ^ Bushman (2008 , p. 59) (In the temple, husbands and wives are sealed to each other for eternity. The implication is that other institutional forms, including the church, might disappear, but the family will endure); "Mormons in America" . Pew Research Center. January 2012.

(A 2011 survey of Mormons in the United States showed that family life is very important to Mormons, with family concerns significantly higher than career concerns. Four out of five Mormons believe that being a good parent is one of the most important goals in life, and roughly three out of four Mormons put having a successful marriage in this category); "New Pew survey reinforces Mormons' top goals of family, marriage" .

Deseret News . 12 January 2012.

; See also: "The Family: A Proclamation to the World" .

^ a b c [Religion and Living Arrangements Around the World: Muslims and Hindus have larger households than Christians and religious 'nones,' in patterns influenced by regional norms], Pew Research Center , 12 December 2019 ^ Wright, Professor Robin M; Vilaça, Aparecida (28 May 2013).

Native Christians: Modes and Effects of Christianity among Indigenous Peoples of the Americas . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 171.

ISBN 978-1-4094-7813-3 .

Before Christianity, they could not eat certain things from certain animals ( uumajuit ), but after eating they can now do anything they want to.

^ Geisler, Norman L. (1 September 1989).

Christian Ethics: Contemporary Issues and Options . Baker Books. p. 334.

ISBN 978-1-58558-053-8 .

The eating of animals is not forbidden.

The Scriptures do not forbid the eating and partaking of animals. This does not mean that all animals are to be eaten (Mark 7:19; Acts 11:9; 1 Tim. 4:4). It is clear in the Scriptures that we are not supposed to eat animals that are alive or with blood (Gen. 9:2–4; Deut. 12:16, 23–24).

^ Ehrman, Bart D. (1 May 2006).

Peter, Paul, and Mary Magdalene: The Followers of Jesus in History and Legend . Oxford University Press. p.

60 .

ISBN 978-0-19-974113-7 . Retrieved 2 May 2014 .

In the meantime, Peter in Joppa has a middday vision in which he sees a sheet containing animals of every description lowered from the sky. He hears a voice from heaven telling him to "kill and eat." Peter is naturally taken aback, because eating some of these animals would mean breaking the Jewish rules about kosher foods. But then he hears a voice that tells him, "What God has cleansed, you must not call common [unclean]" (that is, you do not need to refrain from eating nonkosher foods; 10: 15). The same sequence of events happens three times.

^ "The Weaker Brother".

Third Way .

25 (10): 25. December 2002.

Christ came for the Gentiles as well as the Jews (the real meaning of that vision in Acts 10:9;16) but he also calls us to look out for each other and not do things that will cause our brothers and sisters to stumble. In Corinthians Paul urges the believers to consider not eating meat when with people who assume that meat must be offered to idols before consumption: 'Food will not bring us close to God,' he writes. 'We are no worse off if we do not eat, and no better off if we do. But take care that this liberty of yours does not somehow become a stumbling block for the weak.' (1 Corinthians 8:8–9) ^ Binder, Stephanie E. (14 November 2012).

Tertullian, On Idolatry and Mishnah Avodah Zarah .

Brill Academic Publishers . p. 87.

ISBN 978-90-04-23478-9 .

Clement of Alexandria and Origen also forbid eating meat dedicated to idolatry and partaking in meals with demons, which, by association, are the meals of fornicators and idolatrous adulterers. Marcianus Aristides merely testifies that Christians do not eat what has been sacrificed to idols; and Hippolytus only notes the interdiction against eating such food.

^ Deem, Rich (21 June 2008).

"Should Christians Eat Meat or Should We Be Vegetarians?" . Evidence for God from Science. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2014 .

Later, laws were instituted that declared certain meats to be "clean" and others to be "unclean". The system provided a means of proving one's obedience to God and had some health benefits. After Jesus Christ came, God declared all meats to be clean. Current slaughterhouse practices comply with the dictate to remove the blood, so virtually all meat today is acceptable to eat according to God.

^ Salamon, Hagar (7 November 1999).

Ethiopian Jews in Christian Ethiopia . University of California Press. p. 101.

ISBN 978-0-520-92301-0 .

The Christians do " Basema ab wawald wamanfas qeeus ahadu amlak " [in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit one God] and then slaughter. The Jews say " Baruch yitharek amlak yisrael " [Blessed is the King (God) of Israel].

^ Efron, John M. (1 October 2008).

Medicine and the German Jews: A History . Yale University Press. p. 206.

ISBN 978-0-300-13359-2 .

By contrast, the most common mode of slaughtering four-legged animals among Christians in the nineteenth century was through the deliverance of a stunning blow to the head, usually with a mallet or poleax.

^ Grumett, David; Muers, Rachel (26 February 2010).

Theology on the Menu: Asceticism, Meat and Christian Diet . Routledge. p. 121.

ISBN 978-1-135-18832-0 .

The Armenian and other Orthodox rituals of slaughter display obvious links with shechitah , Jewish kosher slaughter.

^ Norman L. Geisler (1989).

Christian Ethics . Baker Book. p.

206 .

ISBN 978-0-8010-3832-7 .

^ Phelps, Norm (2002).

The Dominion of Love: Animal Rights According to the Bible . Lantern Books. p. 171.

ISBN 978-1-59056-009-9 .

Nevertheless, toward the end of the chapter, Paul suggests that even Christians with strong faith may want to abstain from eating meat offered to pagan deities if any chance that their example will tempt fellow Christians of weaker faith into inadvertent idolatry. He concludes by saying, "Therefore, if food causes my brother to stumble, I will never eat meat again, so that I will not cause my brother to stumble." (1 Corinthians 8:13) ^ Walters, Peter; Byl, John (2013).

Christian Paths to Health and Wellness . Human Kinetics. p. 184.

ISBN 978-1-4504-2454-7 .

Traditional Hindus and Trappist monks adopt vegetarian diets as a practice of their faith.

^ Daugherty, Helen Ginn (1995).

An Introduction to Population . Guilford Press. pp.

150 .

ISBN 978-0-89862-616-2 .

Seventh-Day Adventists are also urged, but not required, to avoid eating meat and highly spiced food (Snowdon, 1988).

^ "What does The United Methodist Church say about fasting?" . The United Methodist Church. Archived from the original on 27 April 2014 . Retrieved 2 May 2014 .

^ Barrows, Susanna; Room, Robin (1991).

Drinking: Behavior and Belief in Modern History . University of California Press. p.

340 .

ISBN 978-0-520-07085-1 . Retrieved 2 May 2014 .

The main legally enforced prohibition in both Catholic and Anglican countries was that against meat. During Lent, the most prominent annual season of fasting in Catholic and Anglican churches, authorities enjoined abstinence from meat and sometimes 'white meats' (cheese, milk, and eggs); in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century England butchers and victuallers were bound by heavy recognizances not to slaughter or sell meat on the weekly 'fish days,' Friday and Saturday.

^ Lund, Eric (January 2002).

Documents from the History of Lutheranism, 1517-1750 . Fortress Press. p. 166.

ISBN 978-1-4514-0774-7 .

Of the Eating of Meat: One should abstain from the eating of meat on Fridays and Saturdays, also in fasts, and this should be observed as an external ordinance at the command of his Imperial Majesty.

^ Vitz, Evelyn Birge (1991).

A Continual Feast . Ignatius Press. p. 80.

ISBN 978-0-89870-384-9 . Retrieved 2 May 2014 .

In the Orthodox groups, on ordinary Wednesdays and Fridays no meat, olive oil, wine, or fish can be consumed.

^ Scratchley, David (1996).

Alcoholism and Other Drug Problems . Simon and Schuster. p.

298 .

ISBN 978-0-684-82314-0 .

Although the Jewish, Roman Catholic, Orthodox, Episcopal, and Lutheran traditions generally allow moderate drinking for those who can do so, it is simply incorrect to accuse them of condoning drunkenness.

^ Conlin, Joseph (11 January 2008).

The American Past: A Survey of American History, Enhanced Edition . Cengage Learning. p. 748.

ISBN 978-0-495-56609-0 .

Protestants who called themselves "fundamentalists" (they believed in the literal truth of the Bible--Baptists, Methodists, Pentecostals) were dry.

^ Domenico, Roy P.; Hanley, Mark Y. (1 January 2006).

Encyclopedia of Modern Christian Politics . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-313-32362-1 .

Drunkenness was biblically condemned, and all denominations disciplined drunken members.

^ Cobb, John B. (2003).

Progressive Christians Speak: A Different Voice on Faith and Politics . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 136.

ISBN 978-0-664-22589-6 .

For most of Christian history, as in the Bible, moderate drinking of alcohol was taken for granted while drunkenness was condemned.

^ Broomfield, Andrea (2007) Food and cooking in Victorian England: a history pp.149–150. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007 ^ Muir, Frank (1977) Christmas customs & traditions p.58. Taplinger Pub. Co., 1977 ^ "Is the Church of Ethiopia a Judaic Church ?" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 March 2016 .

^ "THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF THE ETHIOPIAN ORTHODOX TEWAHEDO CHURCH LITURGY" . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ Warsh, Cheryl Krasnick (2006).

Children's Health Issues in Historical Perspective . Veronica Strong-Boag. Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press. p. 315.

ISBN 9780889209121 .

From Fleming's perspective, the transition to Christianity required a good dose of personal and public hygiene ^ Cheryl Krasnick Warsh; Veronica Strong-Boag, eds. (2006).

Children's Health Issues in Historical Perspective . Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press. p. 315.

ISBN 9780889209121 .

Thus bathing also was considered a part of good health practice. For example, Tertullian attended the baths and believed them hygienic. Clement of Alexandria, while condemning excesses, had given guidelines for Christian] who wished to attend the baths ^ Thurlkill, Mary (2016).

Sacred Scents in Early Christianity and Islam: Studies in Body and Religion . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

6– 11.

ISBN 978-0739174531 .

Clement of Alexandria (d. c. 215 CE) allowed that bathing contributed to good health and hygiene ... Christian skeptics could not easily dissuade the baths' practical popularity, however; popes continued to build baths situated within church basilicas and monasteries throughout the early medieval period ^ a b Squatriti, Paolo (2002).

Water and Society in Early Medieval Italy, AD 400-1000, Parti 400–1000 . Cambridge University Press. p. 54.

ISBN 9780521522069 .

but baths were normally considered therapeutic until the days of Gregory the Great, who understood virtuous bathing to be bathing 'on account of the needs of body' ^ Kazhdan, Alexander , ed. (1991), Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-504652-6 ^ Ashpitel, Arthur (1851), Observations on baths and wash-houses , JSTOR 60239734 , OCLC 501833155 ^ Black, Winston (2019).

The Middle Ages: Facts and Fictions . ABC-CLIO. p. 61.

ISBN 9781440862328 .

Public baths were common in the larger towns and cities of Europe by the twelfth century.

^ Kleinschmidt, Harald (2005).

Perception and Action in Medieval Europe . Boydell & Brewer. p. 61.

ISBN 9781843831464 .

The evidence of early medieval laws that enforced punishments for the destruction of bathing houses suggests that such buildings were not rare. That they ... took a bath every week. At places in southern Europe, Roman baths remained in use or were even restored ... The Paris city scribe Nicolas Boileau noted the existence of twenty-six public baths in Paris in 1272 ^ Hembry, Phyllis (1990).

The English Spa, 1560-1815: A Social History . Fairleigh Dickinson Univ Press.

ISBN 9780838633915 .

^ a b Bradley, Ian (2012).

Water: A Spiritual History . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 9781441167675 .

^ Melissa Snell.

"The Bad Old Days - Weddings and Hygiene" .

About.com Education . Archived from the original on 30 January 2017 . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ "The Great Famine and the Black Death – 1315–1317, 1346–1351 – Lectures in Medieval History – Dr. Lynn H. Nelson, Emeritus Professor, Medieval History, KU" . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ "Middle Ages Hygiene" . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ Anionic and Related Lime Soap Dispersants, Raymond G. Bistline Jr., in Anionic Surfactants: Organic Chemistry , Helmut Stache, ed., Volume 56 of Surfactant science series, CRC Press, 1996, chapter 11, p. 632, ISBN 0-8247-9394-3 .

^ History of The Salvation Army – Social Services of Greater New York , retrieved 30 January 2007.

Archived 7 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Taiz, Lillian (2001).

Hallelujah Lads & Lasses . Univ of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 9780807849354 . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ E. Clark, Mary (2006).

Contemporary Biology: Concepts and Implications . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 9780721625973 .

^ E. Clark, Mary (2006).

Contemporary Biology: Concepts and Implications . University of Michigan Press. p. 613.

ISBN 9780721625973 .

Douching is commonly practiced in Catholic countries. The bidet ... is still commonly found in France and other Catholic countries.

^ Made in Naples. Come Napoli ha civilizzato l'Europa (e come continua a farlo) [ Made in Naples. How Naples civilised Europe (And still does it) ] (in Italian). Addictions-Magenes Editoriale. 2013.

ISBN 978-8866490395 .

^ H, Santiago (8 July 2014).

"A hose: the strange device next to every Finnish toilet" .

^ Wagner, Tom (2014). "Branding, Music, and Religion: Standardization and Adaptation in the Experience of the 'Hillsong Sound' ". In Jean-Claude Usunier and Jörg Stolz (ed.).

Religions as Brands: New Perspectives on the Marketization of Religion and Spirituality . Farnham, UK: Routledge. pp.

59– 74.

ISBN 978-1-4094-6755-7 .

^ "Christian Movies at the Box Office" .

Box Office Mojo . Retrieved 23 April 2019 .

^ "Christian" .

Box Office Mojo . Retrieved 25 April 2011 .

^ Chen, Sandie Angulo (15 January 2010).

"Will Christian Audiences Embrace Denzel's 'Book of Eli'?" .

Moviefone . Archived from the original on 2 July 2010 . Retrieved 15 January 2010 .

^ Flores, Terry (7 April 2015).

"Oscar-Nommed Timothy Reckart to Make Feature Directing Debut on Sony Toon (EXCLUSIVE)" .

Variety . Retrieved 22 December 2016 .

^ Erickson, Hal (2005).

Television Cartoon Shows: An Illustrated Encyclopedia, 1949 Through 2003 (2nd ed.). McFarland & Co. pp.

808– 809.

ISBN 978-1476665993 .

^ Jeannie Law (December 2016).

" 'God's Not Dead 3' Is in the Works, Says Actor-Producer David AR White (Interview)" .

The Christian Post .

^ Simanton, Keith (6 September 2015).

"Weekend Report -'War Room' Walks to #1" .

Box Office Mojo . Retrieved 6 September 2015 .

^ Stewart, Tim (13 January 2015).

"televangelism" .

Dictionary of Christianese . Archived from the original on 13 December 2017 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

^ "Bishop Fulton Sheen: The First 'Televangelist'" .

Time . 14 April 1952.

^ "S. Parkes Cadman dies in coma at 71" (PDF) .

The New York Times . 12 July 1936 . Retrieved 26 January 2009 .

^ "Radio Religion" .

Time . 21 January 1946. Archived from the original on 25 January 2008 . Retrieved 16 December 2007 .

^ Elaine Woo (2 December 2013).

"Paul Crouch dies at 79; founder of the Trinity Broadcasting Network" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 6 July 2014 .

He bought more television stations, then piled on cable channels and eventually satellites until he had built the world's largest Christian television system ^ Flusty, Steven (2004).

De-Coca-colonization: Making the Globe from the Inside Out . New York, London: Routledge. p. 208.

ISBN 9780415945387 .

^ Sandford Graham, Gerald (2008).

Perspectives of Empire: Essays Presented to Gerald S. Graham . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 9780582502642 .

^ Henry Liddell, Robert Scott, Henry Jones, and Roderick McKenzie.

A Greek-English Lexicon . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996. pp. 1189, 1939.

^ M. Paraskeva, João (2016).

Curriculum Epistemicide: Towards An Itinerant Curriculum Theory . Routledge. pp.

87– 95.

ISBN 9781317562016 .

^ Amin, Samir (1994).

Re-Reading the Postwar Period . Monthly Review Press.

ISBN 9780853458937 .

^ Sandford Graham, Gerald (2003).

Christianophobia: A Faith Under Attack . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. XVIII.

ISBN 9780802869852 .

^ Shun-hing Chan.

Rethinking Folk Religion in Hong Kong: Social Capital, Civic Community and the State Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine . Hong Kong Baptist University.

^ Hao, Zhidong (2011).

Macau History and Society .

Hong Kong University Press .

ISBN 978-988-8028-54-2 .

Archived from the original on 8 April 2020 . Retrieved 14 November 2015 .

^ Heide Fehrenbach, Uta G. Poiger (2000).

Transactions, transgressions, transformations: American culture in Western Europe and Japan . Berghahn Books. p. 62.

ISBN 978-1-57181-108-0 .

^ Kimura, Junko; Belk, Russell (September 2005). "Christmas in Japan: Globalization Versus Localization".

Consumption Markets & Culture .

8 (3): 325– 338.

doi : 10.1080/10253860500160361 .

S2CID 144740841 .

^ "A Little Faith: Christianity and the Japanese" . Nippon.com: Your Doorway to Japan. 22 November 2019.

Christian culture in general has a positive image.

^ Kaufman, Asher "Tell Us Our History': Charles Corm, Mount Lebanon and Lebanese Nationalism" pages 1-28 from Middle Eastern Studies , Vol. 40, No. 3, May 2004 page 2.

^ B. H. Goh, Robbie (2009).

"Christian identities in Singapore: religion, race and culture between state controls and transnational flows" .

Journal of Cultural Geography .

26 . routledge: 1– 23.

doi : 10.1080/08873630802617135 .

S2CID 144728013 .

^ Goh∗, Robbie B. H. (4 February 2019).

"Christian identities in Singapore: religion, race and culture between state controls and transnational flows" .

Journal of Cultural Geography .

26 : 1– 23.

doi : 10.1080/08873630802617135 .

S2CID 144728013 .

^ Sukman, Jang (2004). "Historical Currents and Characteristics of Korean Protestantism after Liberation".

Korea Journal .

44 (4): 133– 156.

^ Samuel P. Huntington (2007).

The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order . Simon and Schuster. p. 101.

ISBN 9781416561248 .

^ Huang, Chun-chieh (1994). Harrell, Stevan; Huang, Chun-chieh (eds.).

Introduction . Cultural Change in Postwar Taiwan (10–14 April 1991; Seattle). Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

ISBN 9780813386324 .

^ Makeham, John (2005). "Chapter 6 : Indigenization Discourse in Taiwanese Confucian Revivalism". In Makeham, John; Hsiau, A-chin (eds.).

Cultural, Ethnic, and Political Nationalism in Contemporary Taiwan: Bentuhua (1 ed.). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

doi : 10.1057/9781403980618 .

ISBN 9781403970206 .

^ V. Hellerich, Siegmar (1995).

Religionizing, Romanizing Romantics . University of Georgia Press. p. 70.

ISBN 9781317931737 .

^ "Sebastian Kurz: In New Yorks antiquierter Artusrunde" .

diepresse.com (in German). 27 September 2014 . Retrieved 4 February 2019 .

^ V. Hellerich, Siegmar (1995).

Religionizing, Romanizing Romantics . University of Georgia Press. p. 68.

ISBN 9781317931737 .

^ "Hungary's Orban calls for central Europe to unite around Christian roots" .

NBC News . 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ Parlato, Vittorio (2010).

"Le chiese ortodosse in Italia, oggi" .

Studi Urbinati, A - Scienze giuridiche, politiche ed economiche .

61 (3): 483– 501.

^ a b c d Bourdeaux, Michael (2003). "Trends in Religious Policy".

Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia . Taylor and Francis. pp.

46– 52.

ISBN 9781857431377 .

^ Bingham, John (16 April 2014).

"David Cameron puts God back into politics" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ "Why I Believe in Christianity – Society of Gilbert Keith Chesterton" . 6 December 2010.

^ Hauser, Chris (Fall 2011).

"Faith and Paradox: G.K. Chesterton's Philosophy of Christian Paradox" .

The Dartmouth Apologia: A Journal of Christian Thought .

6 (1): 16– 20. Archived from the original on 14 July 2015 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

^ "Christianity" . 6 December 2010.

^ Spurr, Barry, Anglo-Catholic in Religion: T. S. Eliot and Christianity, The Lutterworth Press (2009) ^ Gilbert, Martin ; Churchill, Randolph (1966).

Winston S. Churchill, The Official Biography (eight volumes) . London: William Heinemann.

ISBN 978-09-16308-08-7 .

^ Peter Kurti (2012). "Review of A short history of Christianity by Geoffrey Blainey".

Policy .

28 (1).

Centre for Independent Studies : 58.

ISSN 1032-6634 .

^ Heraclides, Alexis (2015).

Humanitarian Intervention in the Long Nineteenth Century: Setting the Precedent . Manchester, United Kingdom: Manchester University Press. pp. 31, 37.

ISBN 9781526133823 .

Works cited [ edit ] Bushman, Richard Lyman (2008).

Mormonism: A Very Short Introduction . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-531030-6 .

.

Cameron, Averil (2009).

Οι Βυζαντινοί (in Greek). Athens: Psychogios.

ISBN 978-960-453-529-3 .

Mango, Cyril A.

(2007).

Η Αυτοκρατορία της Νέας Ρώμης [ Byzantium: The Empire of the New Rome ] (in Greek). Translated by Dimitris Tsoungarakis. Athens: Educational Institution of the National Bank of Greece.

Meyendorff, John (1982).

The Byzantine Legacy in the Orthodox Church . Yonkers: St Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 0-913836-90-7 .

Woods, Thomas Jr (2005).

How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization . Regnery Publishing, Inc.

ISBN 0-89526-038-7 .

Riches, John (2000).

The Bible: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0192853431 .

Ware, Bishop Kallistos (Timothy) (29 April 1993), The Orthodox Church (new ed.), New York: Penguin Books, ISBN 978-0-14-014656-1 Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Christian culture .

Buxhoeveden, Daniel; Woloschak, Gayle, eds. (2011).

Science and the Eastern Orthodox Church (1. ed.). Farnham: Ashgate.

ISBN 9781409481614 .

Noll, Mark (2006).

The Civil War as a Theological Crisis . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 0-8078-3012-7 .

Orlandis, Jose (1993).

A Short History of the Catholic Church . Scepter Publishers.

ISBN 1-85182-125-2 .

Power, Eileen (1995), Postand, Michael Moissey (ed.), Medieval women , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-59556-8 Shahar, Shulamith (2003), The Fourth Estate: A History of Women in the Middle Ages , New York: Routledge Stark, Rodney (1996).

The Rise of Christianity . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-02749-4 .

Stearns, Peter (2000).

Gender in World History . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-22310-2 .

Thomas, Hugh (1999).

The Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1440-1870 . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-83565-5 .

Witte, John (1997), From Sacrament to Contract: Marriage, Religion, and Law in the Western Tradition , Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, ISBN 978-0-664-25543-5 Eva Baer .

Ayyubid metalwork with Christian images . BRILL, 1989 Portal : Christianity v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_culture&oldid=1303791511 " Categories : Christian culture Christianity and society Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images CS1 uses Greek-language script (el) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian culture 12 languages Add topic

