Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Views and popularity 1.1.1 On the role of women 1.2 Shariati and socialism 1.2.1 Epistemology 2 Political philosophy Toggle Political philosophy subsection 2.1 Commitment to democracy 3 Sociology 4 Modern problems 5 Legacy 6 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 6.1 Major works 6.2 Other works 6.3 Translation 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Ali Shariati 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский Scots Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Iranian sociologist and philosopher (1933–1977) "Shariati" redirects here. For other uses, see Shariati (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ali Shariati" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ali Shariati علی شریعتی Shariati in 1972 Born Ali Shariati Mazinani ( 1933-11-23 ) 23 November 1933 Kahak , Sabzevar , Imperial State of Persia Died 18 June 1977 (1977-06-18) (aged 43) Southampton , United Kingdom Resting place Sayyidah Zaynab Mosque , Damascus , Syria 33°26′41.8″N 36°20′30.6″E ﻿ / ﻿ 33.444944°N 36.341833°E ﻿ / 33.444944; 36.341833 Nationality Iranian Alma mater Ferdowsi University of Mashhad University of Paris ( Ph.D.

) Occupation(s) Sociologist, Historian Years active 1952–1975 Employer Ferdowsi University of Mashhad Organization Hosseiniye Ershad Political party Freedom Movement of Iran [ 1 ] Spouse Pouran Shariat Razavi Children 4 Ali Shariati Mazinani ( Persian : علی شریعتی مزینانی , 23 November 1933 – 18 June 1977) was an Iranian revolutionary [ 2 ] and sociologist who specialised in the sociology of religion . He is regarded as one of the most influential Iranian intellectuals of the 20th century.

[ 3 ] He has been referred to as the "ideologue of the Islamic Revolution ", although his ideas did not ultimately serve as the foundation for the Islamic Republic.

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Ali Shariati, also known as Ali Masharati, was born in 1933 in Mazinan , a suburb of Sabzevar in northeastern Iran .

[ 5 ] His father's family were clerics.

[ 6 ] His father, Mohammad-Taqi, was a teacher and Islamic scholar. In 1947, he established the Centre for the Propagation of Islamic Truth in Mashhad , Khorasan Province .

[ 7 ] It was a social Islamic forum that became involved in the oil nationalisation movement of the 1950s.

[ 8 ] Shariati's mother came from a small land-owning family in Sabzevar, a town near Mashhad.

[ 6 ] [ 9 ] During his years at the Teacher's Training College in Mashhad, Shariati encountered young individuals from economically disadvantaged backgrounds and for the first time witnessed the poverty and hardships prevalent in Iran at that time. At the same time, he was exposed to many aspects of Western philosophical and political thought. He attempted to explain and offer solutions for the problems faced by Muslim societies through traditional Islamic principles interwoven with, and understood from, the point of view of modern sociology and philosophy. His articles from this period for the Mashhad daily newspaper, Khorasan , display his developing eclecticism and acquaintance with the ideas of modernist thinkers such as Jamal al-Din al-Afghani and Sir Allama Muhammad Iqbal among the Muslim community, and Sigmund Freud and Alexis Carrel .

[ 10 ] In 1952, he became a high school teacher and founded the Islamic Students' Association, which led to his arrest following a demonstration.

[ citation needed ] In 1953, the year of Mossadeq's overthrow , he became a member of the National Front . He received his bachelor's degree from the University of Mashhad in 1955. In 1957, he was arrested again by the Iranian police, along with sixteen other members of the National Resistance Movement.

[ citation needed ] Shariati then earned a scholarship to continue his graduate studies at the University of Paris under the supervision of the Iranist Gilbert Lazard . He left Paris after earning a PhD in Persian language in 1964.

[ 11 ] [ page needed ] During this period in Paris, Shariati started collaborating with the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN) in 1959. The following year, he began to read Frantz Fanon and translated an anthology of his work into Persian.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Shariati introduced Fanon's thought into Iranian revolutionary émigré circles. He was arrested in Paris on 17 January 1961 during a demonstration in honour of Patrice Lumumba .

[ citation needed ] The same year he joined Ebrahim Yazdi , Mostafa Chamran and Sadegh Qotbzadeh in founding the Freedom Movement of Iran abroad. In 1962, he continued studying sociology and the history of religions in Paris and followed the courses of Islamic scholar Louis Massignon , Jacques Berque and the sociologist Georges Gurvitch . He also came to know the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre that same year, and published Jalal Al-e Ahmad 's book Gharbzadegi (or Occidentosis ) in Iran.

[ citation needed ] Shariati then returned to Iran in 1964, where he was arrested and imprisoned for engaging in subversive political activities while in France. He was released after a few weeks, at which point he began teaching at the University of Mashhad.

[ citation needed ] The tomb of Shariati The mausoleum of Shariati in 2001 Shariati went to Tehran , where he began lecturing at the Hosseiniye Ershad Institute. These lectures were hugely popular among his students and were spread by word of mouth throughout all economic sectors of society, including the middle and upper classes, where interest in his teachings began to grow.

[ citation needed ] His continued success again aroused the interest of the government. He was arrested, along with many of his students. Widespread pressure from the people and an international outcry eventually led to his release on 20 March 1975, after eighteen months in solitary confinement.

Shariati was allowed to leave for England . Shortly after, on 18 June 1977, he was found dead in Southampton at the house he was renting from psychology professor Doctor Butterworth. He is believed to have been killed by the SAVAK, the Iranian security service during the time of the Shah. However, in Ali Rahnema 's biography of Shariati, he is said to have died of a heart attack under mysterious circumstances, although no hospital or medical records have been found. He is buried next to Sayyidah Zaynab , the granddaughter of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and the daughter of Ali , in Damascus . Iranian pilgrims often visit his grave.

[ citation needed ] Views and popularity [ edit ] Main article: Shariatism Shariati and his family one day after his release from prison Shariati sought to revive the revolutionary currents of Shi'ism .

[ 14 ] His interpretation of Shiism encouraged revolution in the world and promised salvation after death.

[ 15 ] He referred to his brand of Shiism as "red Shiism" which he contrasted with non-revolutionary "black Shiism" or Safavid Shiism .

[ 16 ] His ideas have been compared to the Catholic Liberation Theology movement founded in South America by Peruvian Gustavo Gutierrez and Brazilian Leonardo Boff .

[ 17 ] Shariati was a prominent philosopher of Islam , who argued that a good society would conform to Islamic values. He suggested that the role of government was to guide society in the best possible manner rather than manage it in the best possible way.

[ 18 ] He believed that the most learned members of the Ulema (clergy) should play a leadership role in guiding society because they best understand how to administer an Islamic value system based on the teachings of the Prophets of God and the 12 Shia Twelver Imams.

[ 19 ] He argued that the role of the clergy was to guide society under Islamic values to advance human beings towards reaching their highest potential, rather than to provide or serve the hedonistic desires of individuals as in the West.

[ 19 ] At the same time, Shariati was very critical of some clerics and defended the Marxists . "Our mosques, the revolutionary left and our preachers," he declared, "work for the benefit of the deprived people and against the lavish and lush [...] Our clerics who teach jurisprudence and issue fatwas are right-wingers, capitalist, and conservative; simply our fiqh is at the service of capitalism." [ 20 ] Shariati's works were highly influenced by Louis Massignon and the Third Worldism that he encountered as a student in Paris, including ideas that class war and revolution would bring about a just and classless society . He was also highly influenced by the epistemic decolonisation thinking of his time. He is said to have adopted the idea of Gharbzadegi from Jalal Al-e Ahmad and given it "its most vibrant and influential second life".

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] He sought to translate these ideas into cultural symbols of Shiism that Iranians could relate to. Shariati believed Shia should not only await the return of the 12th Imam , but should actively work to hasten his return by fighting for social justice "even to the point of embracing martyrdom ". He said that "every day is Ashoura , every place is the Karbala ".

[ 23 ] When he was writing the three letters to Fanon, unlike him, Shariati believed that it is not true that one must put away religion to fight imperialism. He felt that people could fight imperialism solely by recovering their cultural identity. In some countries, such an identity was intertwined with fundamental religious beliefs. Shariati refers to the maxim of returning to ourselves.

[ 24 ] Social theorist Asef Bayat has recorded his observations as a witness and participant in the Iranian revolution of 1979. He asserts that Shariati emerged at the time of the revolution as "an unparalleled revolutionary intellectual" with his portraits widely present during the marches and protests. His nickname as "mo'allem-e enqilab" ("revolutionary mentor") was chanted by millions, and his literature and tapes had already been widely available before the revolution. Bayat recalls that "[his] father, barely literate, had his own copies" of Shariati's works.

[ 25 ] On the role of women [ edit ] In Expectations from the Muslim Woman , also called Our Expectations of the Muslim Woman , first given in 1975, [ 26 ] Shariati discusses women's rights in Islam. The point of his lecture is not to show that women's rights do not exist in Islam, but to show that what Shariati saw as anti-Islamic traditions have had tragic results for Muslim women. He uses Fatima Zahra , the daughter of Muhammad , as an example of a woman who played a significant role in political life.

He begins his lecture by stating that: Most often, we are satisfied by pointing out that Islam gives great value to science or establishes progressive rights for women. Unfortunately we never actually use or benefit from this value or these rights.

[ 27 ] He continues by stating that: From the 18th through to the 20th century (particularly after World War 2) any attempt to address the special problem of the social rights of women and their specific characteristics has been seen as a mere by-product of a spiritual or psychic shock or the result of a revolutionary crisis in centers of learning or as a response to political currents and international movements. Thus, traditional societies, historical societies, religious societies, either in the East or in the West (be they tribal, Bedouin, civilized Muslim or non-Muslim societies, in whatever social or cultural stage of civilization they may be) have all been directly or indirectly influenced by these thoughts, intellectual currents and even new social realities.

[ 27 ] He argues that the liberation of women has begun in the West, and many fear it occurring in the Muslim world. In part because they are misinformed, and have not looked at Islam through a historical perspective, and are relying on their misinterpretation of Islam: In such societies the newly-educated class, the pseudo-intellectuals, who are in the majority, strongly and vigorously welcome this crisis. They themselves even act as one of the forces that strengthen this corrupting and destructive transformation.

[ 27 ] Shariati believed that women in Iran under the Shah were only sexually liberated and did not have any social freedom. He attributed this in part to the "rather bourgeois cognition" and in part to the Freudian ideal of sexual liberation.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] To Shariati, Freud was one of the agents of the bourgeois: Up to the appearance of Freud (who was one of the agents of the bourgeoisie), it was through the liberal bourgeois spirit that scientific sexualism was manifested. It must be taken into consideration that the bourgeoisie is always an inferior class.

[ 30 ] He concludes that a scholar or scientist who lives, thinks, and studies during the bourgeois age, measures collective, cultural, and spiritual values based on the economy, production and consumption.

[ 30 ] Shariati and socialism [ edit ] It seems that his eagerness to explore socialism began with the translation of the book Abu Zarr : The God-Worshipping Socialist by Egyptian Abdul Hamid Jowdat-al-Sahar. According to this book, Abu Dhar was the very first socialist.

[ 31 ] Then, Shariati's father declared that his son believed that the principles of Abu Dhar are fundamental. Some described Shariati as the modern Abu Dhar in Iran.

[ 32 ] Of all his thoughts, there is his insistence on the necessity of revolutionary action. Shariati believed that Marxism could not provide the Third World with the ideological means for its own liberation. One of his premises was that Islam by nature is a revolutionary ideology. Therefore, Islam could relate to the modern world as an ideology. According to Shariati, the historical and original origin of human problems was the emergence of private ownership. He believed that in the modern era, the appearance of the machine was the second most fundamental change in the human condition. Private ownership and the emergence of the machine, if considered one of two curves of history, belong to the second period of history. The first period is collective ownership. However, Shariati gave a critique of the historical development of religion and the modern philosophical and ideological movements and their relationship to both private ownership and the emergence of the machine.

[ 33 ] Epistemology [ edit ] Shariati developed the idea of the social, cultural and historical contingencies of religious knowledge in sociology.

[ citation needed ] He believed in the earthly religion and the social context in which the meaning of society is construed. He also emphasised that he understood religion historically because he was a sociologist. He said he was concerned with the historical and social Tawhid , not with the truth of the Quran or of Muhammad or Ali.

[ 34 ] Political philosophy [ edit ] In the first place, Shariati criticised Western liberal democracy .

[ citation needed ] He pointed out that there is a direct relationship between democracy , liberalism and the plundering of nations. He believed that liberal democracy is the enemy of humankind. He also referred to the fact that the ruling economic system of liberal democracy is unjust and contrary to the rights of people. He maintained that in such a society, someone who is weak is already subjected to defeat and annihilation. There are basic foundations in Shariati's thoughts and his criticism of liberal democracy. The first foundation is related to the contrast between the religious worldview and the non-religious one. He explained history, society and humanity according to a monistic [ clarification needed ] worldview. He explained liberalism as something intrinsically connected with inequality and discrimination. Freedom and equality based on spirituality were the very basis of pre-modern societies, which were devastated in one period of history.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ citation needed ] Shariati believed that the government of Imam Ali could be considered the best form of democracy. On this occasion, he tried to interpret the behaviour of Imam Ali in contrast with his enemy.

[ 35 ] [ clarification needed ] He called this "commitment democracy". It appears that Shariati did not accept the Western definition of democracy, although he had no problem with democracy. According to him, a religious government is a democratic right of Muslim citizens. He believed that one of the basic problems of Western democracy is demagogy . Nowadays, the votes of voters are directed to special channels with the help of advertising instruments. In such a condition, only one who is critically conscious can dispose of distractions and surface-level arguments to vote effectively for themselves and their communities. He maintains that the Western democracy, based on "gold, cruelty and tricking" ( Zar, Zour va Tazvir ), is an anti-revolutionary regime that is different from ideological guidance.

[ 35 ] [ clarification needed ] Commitment to democracy [ edit ] To better explain the commitment to democracy, he first divides between two concepts.

[ citation needed ] One of them is Syasat and the other is politics.

Syasat is a philosophy by which the government would be responsible for changing and building society.

Syasat is a progressive and dynamic thing. The aim of the government in the philosophy of Syasat is to change social foundations, institutions and even societal norms, including culture, morality and desires. In simple words, Syasat entails the construction of the people's existence.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ citation needed ] On the contrary, there is no construction in politics. In other words, politics follows from the people. Politics does not construct the experience of people. Of course, Shariati prefers Syasat over politics because the former is more progressive. He considers making humanity ( ensan sazi ) important. His utopia is constructed with three concepts of Gnosis , equality and freedom . Commitment democracy appeared out of his lecture in Hoseyniyeh Ershad , [ clarification needed ] a famous lecture with the name of " Ummah and Imamate ". According to him, an Imam wants to guide humans not only in political, cultural and social economic dimensions but also in all existential dimensions. He believes that an Imam is alive everywhere and at every point in time. On one hand, Imamate is not a metaphysical belief but a revolutionary guiding philosophy. He added that an Imam has to guide people not according to his desire like a dictator, but according to Islamic ideology and authentic values.

[ 35 ] [ clarification needed ] Sociology [ edit ] Some scholars classify him among the current religious neo-thinkers.

[ citation needed ] According to this standpoint, Shariati accepted the rationality of the West. Shariati called the theoretical foundation of the West civilisation and called its appearances Tajadod (renewal). He emphasised accepting civilisation and criticised Tajadod . He also believed that civilisation has to be considered as something deep. He also highly acknowledged the importance of empirical science and knowledge. He appreciated the empirical methodology and criticised traditionalism for its disregard for scientific methodology. On another hand, he criticised the Modernists because they confuse the Western ideological theories with valid scientific epistemology . According to Shariati, the knowledge of reason is self-evident. Therefore, he suggested thinking of reason as the axiom for understanding the other sources, namely the holy book or Quran , ḥadīth (tradition), sīra (prophetic biography) and ijmāʿ (consensus). Shariati also dismissed consensus as a source for understanding religion . He insisted on the concepts of knowledge and time along with the holy book and tradition, and stressed the important role of methodology and changing of viewpoint.

[ 36 ] Shariati, who was a fan of Georges Gurvitch in his analysis of sociology , believed that there was no special pattern for the analysis of social affairs and historical events.

[ citation needed ] He thought that there was no unity of religion and society, but rather there were many religions and societies. He referred to the active role of the scholar of human science during investigation and scientific research.

[ citation needed ] He believed that there was a relationship between the values of scholarship and the effects of those values on the conclusions of an investigation. He believed that it was not necessary to extend the other conclusions of other Western scholars to Iranian society. However, he criticised the Western ideological schools, including nationalism , liberalism and Marxism. He maintained that there was conformity and correspondence between Western philosophy and Iranian society. According to Shariati, democracy is inconsistent with revolutionary evolution and progress. One of his criticisms of Western ideology is its imitation of those ideologies.

[ verification needed ] One of his other criticisms is the denial of spirituality in Western philosophy. Those ideologies attempt to prevent humans from achieving transcendental goals and any evolutionary movements.

[ verification needed ] In this vein, he firmly criticised capitalism , and at the same time he admired socialism because it would lead humanity to evolution and free it from utilitarianism . However, he firmly criticised Karl Marx . According to Shariati, Marx's theory on the economy as the infrastructure and foundation of humanity and society was incorrect. Conversely, Sharia places the human, not the economy, as the foundation and origin of society.

[ 37 ] [ clarification needed ] Modern problems [ edit ] Shariati saw human history as composed of two stages: the stage of collectivity and the stage of private ownership .

[ 33 ] He explained that the first stage, collectivity, was concerned with social equality and spiritual oneness. The second stage, which is the current era, could be considered as the domination of the many by one. The second stage began with the emergence of private ownership. Various types of private ownership in history have included slavery , serfdom , feudalism and capitalism — among others.

[ 33 ] According to the concept of social ownership , all material and spiritual resources are accessible to everyone, but monopolies polarised the human community. According to Shariati, private ownership is the main cause of all modern problems. These problems change men's brotherhood and love to duplicity, deceit, hatred, exploitation, colonisation and massacre . This polarisation has manifested itself in different forms throughout history. For example, in ancient times, there were slave economies that transitioned to capitalist societies in modern times.

Machinism , or the dependence on machines, can be considered the latest stage of private ownership. Machinism began in the nineteenth century, and human beings have had to confront the many anxieties and problems arising from it.

[ 38 ] Legacy [ edit ] This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: Poorly written.

Please help improve this section if you can.

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 1980 Iranian stamp honoring Shariati There are many adherents and opponents of Shariati's views, and Shariati's personality is largely unknown.

[ clarification needed ] Ali Khamenei knew Shariati as a pioneer of Islamic teaching according to the requirements of his generation. According to Sayyed Ali Khamenei, Shariati had both positive and negative characteristics. Khamenei believes that it is unfair to consider Shariati as someone who firmly disagreed with the Mullahs. One of the positive sides of Shariati was his ability to explain his thoughts with suitable and simple language for his generation. Shariati was somewhat supportive of Mullahs in Iran.

[ 39 ] [ clarification needed ] Some scholars like Elizabeth F. Thompson try to envisage some similarities between Shariati and his role in the Islamic revolution in Iran with Sayyed Qutb 's role in Egypt . One similarity is that both paved the way for the imminent revolution in their countries. Both desired Islamic cultural dominance. Both were fans of being revolutionary about ruling values and norms. They considered Islamism a third way between those of America and the Soviet Union. At the same time, they were not wholly utopian, and they were partly Islamic.

[ clarification needed ] Of course, there are differences between them, for example, Shariati was a leftist while Qutb was a conservative. According to Mahmoud Taleghani , Shariati was a thinker who created a school for revolution. The school guided young people to revolutionary action. Beheshti believes that Shariati's work was fundamental to the Islamic revolution.

[ 9 ] According to Hamid Enayat , Shariati was not only a theorist but also an adherent of Islamic radicalism. Enayat believes that Shariati can be considered the founder of Islamic socialism. Enayat considers him one of the most beloved and popular individuals in Islamic radicalism and socialism.

[ 40 ] [ clarification needed ] According to Hamid Algar , Shariati was the number one ideologue of the Islamic revolution.

[ 41 ] Publications [ edit ] Despite Shariati's early death, he authored some 200 publications including articles, seminar papers and lecture series [ 42 ] in addition to more than a hundred books.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Major works [ edit ] Hajj (The Pilgrimage) [ 45 ] Hubut in Kavir Guftuguhaye Tanha’i Marxism and Other Western Fallacies: An Islamic Critique Where Shall We Begin?

[ 46 ] Mission of a Free Thinker [ 46 ] The Free Man and Freedom of the Man Extraction and Refinement of Cultural Resources Martyrdom (book) Ali An approach to Understanding Islam A Visage of Prophet Muhammad [ 46 ] A Glance of Tomorrow's History [ 46 ] Reflections of Humanity A Manifestation of Self-Reconstruction and Reformation Selection and/or Election Norouz, Declaration of Iranian's Livelihood, Eternity Expectations from the Muslim Woman Horr ( Battle of Karbala ) Kavir (Desert) Abu-Dahr Red Shi'ism vs. Black Shi'ism Jihad and Shahadat Reflections of a Concerned Muslim on the Plight of Oppressed People A Message to the Enlightened Thinkers Art Awaiting the Saviour Fatemeh is Fatemeh The Philosophy of Supplication Religion versus Religion [ 47 ] Man and Islam – see chapter "Modern Man and His Prisons" Arise and Bear Witness [ 48 ] Lessons on Islamology Ali is Alone Community and Leadership Religion against Religion We and Iqbal Historical Determinism What is to be Done?' "The Intelligentsia's Task for Reconstruction of Society" [ 49 ] Ba Mukhatabhaye Ashna Other works [ edit ] Hegel und Ali Shariati: Geschichtsphilosophische Betrachtungen im Geiste der islamischen Revolution im Iran doi : 10.1515/hgjb-2014-0158 Paradox as Decolonization: Ali Shariati's Islamic Lawgiver doi : 10.1177/0090591720977804 Translation [ edit ] Shariati translated many books into Persian. Besides the work of Abu Zarr mentioned above, he translated Jean-Paul Sartre 's What Is Literature?

and Che Guevara 's Guerilla Warfare . He also began to work on the translation of Franz Fanon's A Dying Colonialism . He admired Amar Ouzegane as a major Marxist Muslim and began to translate his book Le meilleur combat ( The Best Struggle ).

[ 50 ] See also [ edit ] Intellectual Movements in Iran Islamic Marxism Islamic revival List of Islamic scholars Philosophy in Iran Red Shi'ism vs. Black Shi'ism Religious Intellectualism in Iran Jalal Al-e-Ahmad Hamid Algar Geydar Dzhemal , a modern philosopher of political Islam, revolutionist and social activist Abdulaziz Sachedina , a student of Shariati Alevi , also called Red Head Alevi Shiites.

References [ edit ] ^ Chehabi, Houchang; Abisaab, Rula Jurdi (2006).

Distant Relations: Iran and Lebanon in the Last 500 Years .

I.B. Tauris . p. 183.

ISBN 1860645615 .

^ "30th Anniversary of the Foundation of the Islamic Republic" . Qantara . Retrieved 11 December 2012 .

^ Gheissari, Ali (1998).

Iranian Intellectuals in the Twentieth Century . Austin: University of Texas Press.

^ Abrahamian, Ervand (1993). "Ali Shariati: Ideologue of the Iranian Revolution". In Edmund Burke and Ira Lapidus (eds.), Islam, Politics, and Social Movements . Los Angeles: University of California Press. First published in MERIP Reports (January 1982): 25–28.

^ Rahnema, Ali (1998, 2000).

An Islamic Utopian. A Political Biography of Ali Shari'ati . London: I.B. Tauris, p. 35.

^ a b Rakel, E.P. (2008).

The Iranian Political Elite, State and Society Relations, and Foreign Relations since the Islamic Revolution . University of Amsterdam.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2022.

^ Rahnema (1998, 2000), p. 13.

^ Rahnema (1998, 2000), pp. 13–18.

^ a b Abrahamian, Ervand (1989).

Radical Islam: The Iranian Mojahedin . I.B.Tauris. p. 105.

ISBN 1850430772 .

^ Rahnema (1998, 2000), pp. 61–68.

^ Rahnema (1998, 2000).

^ Shatz, Adam (2024).

The Rebel's Clinic: The Revolutionary Lives of Frantz Fanon . London: Head of Zeus. p. 225.

ISBN 9781035900046 .

Not surprisingly, perhaps, some of Fanon's devout Muslim readers, both in the Algerian movement and beyond, would embrace his account of the veil as a celebration of resistance grounded in the principles of Islam. One of them was an Iranian graduate student in Paris, Ali Shariati, who made contact with the FLN's Federation de France in 1959 and helped to translate some of Fanon's writings into Persian the following year. Shariati, who went on to become a major influence on Iran's Islamic revolutionaries, shared his vision of Islam as an inherently revolutionary faith in a letter to Fanon.

^ «La jeune génération est un enjeu» Archived 5 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine , interview with Gilles Kepel in L'Express , 26 January 2006 (in French) ^ Ostovar, Afshon P. (2009).

"Guardians of the Islamic Revolution: Ideology, Politics, and the Development of Military Power in Iran (1979–2009)" (PhD Dissertation) . University of Michigan . Retrieved 26 July 2013 .

^ Milani, Abbas (2010).

The Myth of the Great Satan: A New Look at America's Relations with Iran . Hoover Press. p. 122.

ISBN 978-0-8179-1136-2 .

^ Shariati, Ali. " Red Shi'ism vs. Black Shi'ism ".

^ Nasr, Vali (2006).

The Shia Revival , Norton, p. 129.

^ YouTube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0evSkdzXF_4 .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ a b YouTube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6RjiWLcuyQA .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ Shariati, Ali (1980). "Jahatgiri-ye Tabaqati-e Islam" [Class bias of Islam].

Ali Shariati: Collected Works . Vol. 10. Tehran. pp.

37– 38.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Mottahedeh, Roy, The Mantle of the Prophet: Religion and Politics in Iran , p. 330.

^ Afari, Janet (2009).

Sexual Politics in Modern Iran (1st ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 240.

^ Nasr, Vali (2006).

The Shia Revival , Norton, pp. 128–9.

^ Gharagozlu, Naser (2006).

From Blank Revolution to Islamic Revolution . p. 87.

^ Bayat, Asef (2017).

Revolution without Revolutionaries: Making Sense of the Arab Spring . Stanford University Press. p. 47.

ISBN 9781503602588 .

^ Moqadam, Mahbubeh (2023).

"Ali Shariati and Crafting a Collective Revolutionary Islamic Identity for Women: A Socio-Historical Perspective" .

Journal of Asian and African Studies .

60 (3): 1943– 1957.

doi : 10.1177/00219096231207891 .

^ a b c "Our Expectations on the Muslim Woman (Part 1)" .

Al-Islam . 16 February 2017.

^ Ferdows, Adele K. (1983).

"Women and the Islamic Revolution" .

International Journal of Middle East Studies .

15 (2): 288.

doi : 10.1017/S0020743800052326 .

JSTOR 162994 .

^ "Expectations from the Muslim Woman (Part 2)" .

Dr Ali Shariati website .

^ a b "Expectations from the Muslim Woman (Part 1)" .

Dr Ali Shariati website .

^ Abrahamian, Ervand (1982).

Iran Between Two Revolutions . Princeton University Press. p. 465.

ISBN 0691101345 . Retrieved 25 May 2017 .

^ Abrahamian (1989), p. 106.

^ a b c Manouchehri, Abbas (1988).

Ali Shariati and The Islamic Renaissance (PhD dissertation). University of Missouri. p. 78.

^ Ghamari-Tabrizi, Behrooz; Soroush, Abdolkarim. John L. Esposito; Emad El-Din Shahin (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Islam and Politics .

Online publ. date: Dec 2013.

^ a b c Emam Jomeh Zadeh, Seyed Javad; Rouhani, Hosein (2007).

"Comparative inquiry on Western democracy and democracy commitment of Ali Shariati" .

Social sciences (in Persian).

Mashhad University . pp.

59– 78.

^ "40th memorial ceremony of Dr. Shariati held in London" . Tehran: Iran Daily.

^ Qoreishi, Fardin (2001).

"Shariati and thinking on west from religious neo reflection" .

Nameh Pajouhesh . Vol.

3– 4, no. 5. pp.

178– 179.

^ Behdad, Sohrab (October 1994).

"A Disputed Utopia: Islamic Economics in Revolutionary Iran" (PDF) .

Comparative Studies in Society and History .

36 (4). Cambridge University Press: 775– 813.

doi : 10.1017/S0010417500019435 .

S2CID 32027587 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2020.

^ "بازخواني مصاحبه رهبر معظم انقلاب درباره مرحوم شريعتي | خبرگزاری فارس" . Archived from the original on 9 January 2017 . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ Enayat, Hamid (2008).

Modern Islamic Political Thought . Acls History E Book Project.

ISBN 978-1597404600 .

^ Vakili, Abdollah (1991).

Ali Shariati and the mystical tradition of Islam . Institute of Islamic studies, Mc Gill University . pp.

30– 37.

^ Lafraie, Najibullah (2009).

Revolutionary Ideology and Islamic Militancy: The Iranian Revolution and Interpretations of the Quran , I.B.Tauris, p. 127.

^ Heikal, Mohamed Hassanein (1982).

Iran, the untold story: an insider's account of America's Iranian adventure and its consequences for the future . Pantheon Books, p. 129.

^ Scott, Charles W. (1984).

Pieces of the Game: The Human Drama of Americans Held Hostage in Iran , Peachtree Publ., p. 118.

^ "Hajj – Dr. Ali Shariati" . Al-islam . Retrieved 11 December 2012 .

^ a b c d "Ali Shariati علی شریعتی" . Shariati . Retrieved 11 December 2012 .

^ "Shariati, Ali" . Ezania. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007 . Retrieved 11 December 2012 .

^ "Martyrdom: Arise and Bear Witness – Ali Shariati" . Scribd . Retrieved 11 December 2012 .

^ Abrahamian (1989), p. 109.

^ Abrahamian (1989), p. 107.

Further reading [ edit ] Akhavi, Shahrough (2018). "Ali Shar'iati". In Esposito, John L.; Shahin, Emad El-Din (eds.).

Key Islamic Political Thinkers .

Oxford University Press . pp.

85– 103.

ISBN 9780190900366 .

Byrd, Dustin J. (2019). "Ali Shariati (1933–1977)". In Ness, Immanuel; Cope, Zak (eds.).

The Palgrave Encyclopedia of Imperialism and Anti-Imperialism .

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

1– 16.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-91206-6_10-1 .

ISBN 978-3-319-91206-6 .

Latifiyan, Ali . 1995. "Reviewing the Performance of Intellectuals from 1941 to 1979", Tehran: Imam Sadiq University Gheissari, Ali. 1998.

Iranian Intellectuals in the Twentieth Century . Austin: University of Texas Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ali Shariati .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Ali Shariati .

The Official WebSite of Dr Ali Shariati Biography and publications 'Ali Shari'ati: Between Marx and the Infinite' A review essay of Ali Rahnema's biography of Shari'ati with an extensive discussion on the philosopher's political significance by Nathan Coombs Humanity and the People Power: A Tribute to Dr. Ali Shariati by Dr. Mohammad Omar Farooq 'Ali Shari'ati: Islamic Fundamentalist, Marxist Ideologist and Sufi Mystic by David Zeidan Critical Religious Reason: Ali Shari'ati on Religion, Philosophy and Emancipation by Abbas Manoochehri The forgotten revolutionary: Ali Shariati by Lawrence Reza Ershaghi Our Expectations of the Muslim Woman , lecture by Dr. Ali Shariati, translated into English by Laleh Bakhtiar v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Political prisoners in Iran Prison Activists Habib Afkari Raheleh Ahmadi Maryam Akbari Monfared Zahra Bahrami Emad Bahavar Esmail Bakhshi Mahmudali Chehregani Atena Daemi Golrokh Ebrahimi Iraee Amir Abbas Fakhravar Alireza Farshi Parvaneh Forouhar Ali-Asghar Gharavi Kouhyar Goudarzi Zeynab Jalalian Vida Hajebi Tabrizi Saeed Hajjarian Leila Hosseinzadeh Soheila Hejab Jafar Kazemi Amir Khorram Amir Khosrow Dalirsani Dhabihu'llah Mahrami Mohammad Maleki Azar Mansouri Farideh Mashini Mohsen Mirdamadi Ahmad Moftizadeh Narges Mohammadi Abdollah Momeni Youcef Nadarkhani Sharifeh Mohammadi Shiva Nazar Ahari Keyvan Rafiee Alireza Rajaei Arash Sadeghi Mahan Sadrat Fatemeh Sepehri Kavous Seyed-Emami Reza Shahabi Jamshid Sharmahd Ghasem Sholeh-Saadi Abbas Lisani Ali Shariati Majid Tavakoli Habibollah Peyman Sayed Ziaoddin Nabavi Actors Taraneh Alidoosti Hengameh Ghaziani Katayoun Riahi Artists Atena Farghadani Amir Emad Mirmirani Athletes Voria Ghafouri Ali Akbar Heidari Mohammad Karimi Hossein Mahini Amir Reza Nasr Azadani Navid Afkari Bloggers Soheil Arabi Sattar Beheshti Doctors Nasser Fahimi Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi Mohammad Ali Taheri Filmmakers Keywan Karimi Jafar Panahi Mahnaz Mohammadi Mohammad Nourizad Hossein Rajabian Mohammad Rasoulof Journalists Bahman Ahmadi Amouee Mahsa Amrabadi Ahmad Batebi Masoud Bastani Abdolali Bazargan Mohammad Ghouchani Niloofar Hamedi Adnan Hassanpour Zahra Kazemi Masoud Lavasani Saeed Laylaz Elaheh Mohammadi Sam Mahmoudi Said Matinpour Kasra Nouri Siamak Pourzand Hossein Rafiee Taghi Rahmani Roxana Saberi Majid Saeedi Cecilia Sala Faraj Sarkohi Kianush Sanjari Mohsen Sazegara Mohammad Seddigh Kaboudvand Hengameh Shahidi Mashallah Shamsolvaezin Heshmat Tabarzadi Roya Toloui Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe Ruhollah Zam Ahmad Zeidabadi Ardeshir Pashang Lawyers Mohammad Ali Dadkhah Saleh Kamrani Nasrin Sotoudeh Shadi Sadr Mohammad Seifzadeh Abdolfattah Soltani Mohammad Najafi Military Amir Farshad Ebrahimi Saeed Emami Akbar Ganji Hamid Pourmand Musicians Dariush Eghbali Shervin Hajipour Mehdi Rajabian Toomaj Salehi Mehdi Yarrahi Programmer Amir Emad Mirmirani Poets Baktash Abtin MohammadReza Alee Payam Mona Borzouei Piruz Dilanchi Mehdi Akhavan-Sales Mohammad-Taqi Bahar Keramat Daneshian Arzhang Davoodi Mohammad Farrokhi Yazdi Khosrow Golsorkhi Morteza Keyvan Ahmad Shamlou Sedigheh Vasmaghi Mohammad Mahdavifar Politicians Mohsen Aminzadeh Morteza Alviri Shahrbanoo Amani Abbas Amir-Entezam Mohsen Armin Mohammad Atrianfar Seyyed Ebrahim Amini Emadeddin Baghi Jila Baniyaghoob Mehdi Bazargan Nasrollah Entezam Iraj Eskandari Hossein Fatemi Dariush Forouhar Sadegh Ghotbzadeh Mehdi Hajati Bahareh Hedayat Faezeh Hashemi Rafsanjani Amir Hossein Heshmat Saran Amir-Abbas Hoveyda Anvar Khamei Mohammad-Reza Khatami Khalil Maleki Mir-Hossein Mousavi Ali-Akbar Mousavi Khoeini Farajollah Mizani Ahmad Moftizadeh Behzad Nabavi Abdollah Nouri Reza Radmanesh Abdollah Ramezanzadeh Gholam Hossein Sadighi Abolghasem Sarhaddizadeh Ali Shakouri-Rad Ali Shariati Mahdi Tajik Mostafa Tajzadeh Mansour Osanlou Ebrahim Yazdi Scientists Taqi Arani Ramin Jahanbegloo Omid Kokabee Seyed Hossein Mousavian Ehsan Tabari Kian Tajbakhsh Ali Younesi Writers Ali Mohammad Afghani Bozorg Alavi Najaf Daryabandari Mahmoud Dowlatabadi Mahmoud Etemadzadeh Ahmad Mahmoud Abbas Milani Shahrokh Meskoob Fariborz Raisdana Ahmad Samii Gilani Brayim Younisi Kourosh Zaim Nasser Zarafshan Sadegh Zibakalam Category:Political prisoners in Iran Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nsszm
Cached time: 20250817084732
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.056 seconds
Real time usage: 1.340 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11297/1000000
Revision size: 45680/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 255642/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24032/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 168546/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.609/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23076461/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1092.767      1 -total
 18.92%  206.787      1 Template:Reflist
 12.36%  135.069      1 Template:Infobox_person
 10.95%  119.644     20 Template:Fix
  9.28%  101.455     15 Template:Citation_needed
  7.99%   87.296     14 Template:Cite_book
  7.90%   86.284      1 Template:Langx
  7.65%   83.629      1 Template:Social_and_political_philosophy
  6.62%   72.371     33 Template:Delink
  5.63%   61.521      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:159182:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817084732 and revision id 1305000737. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ali_Shariati&oldid=1305000737 " Categories : 1933 births 1977 deaths Iranian Shia scholars of Islam People from Sabzevar Freedom Movement of Iran politicians Iranian democracy activists Iranian dissidents Iranian essayists 20th-century Iranian philosophers Iranian sociologists Iranian writers Islamic philosophers Muslim reformers University of Paris alumni Iqbal scholars 20th-century poets Iranian Islamists Shia Islamists 20th-century essayists Critics of Marxism Political prisoners in Iran Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from May 2020 Use British English from May 2017 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with hCards Articles containing Persian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2025 Articles containing Arabic-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2025 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from June 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2017 Articles with disputed statements from May 2017 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2025 Articles needing cleanup from March 2021 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from March 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from March 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 12:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ali Shariati 42 languages Add topic

