Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 List 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Soviet republic 22 languages Alemannisch Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Republic formed of workers' councils "Council republic" redirects here; not to be confused with Council of the Republic .

For the Soviet republics of the Soviet Union, see Republics of the Soviet Union . For other uses, see Soviet (disambiguation) .

Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e 1936 map of the Soviet Union A soviet republic (from Russian : советская республика , romanized : sovetskaya respublika ), also called a council republic , conciliar republic or sovietic republic , is a republic in which the government is formed of soviets ( workers' councils ) and politics are based on soviet democracy . During the Revolutions of 1917–1923 , various revolutionary workers' movements across Europe declared independence or otherwise formed governments as soviet republics.

[ 1 ] Although the term is usually associated with the republics of the Soviet Union , it was not initially used to represent the political organisation of the Soviet Union , but merely a system of government.

History [ edit ] Further information: Soviet (council) The earliest known examples of workers' councils on a smaller scale occurred during the Russian Revolution of 1905 , including the Revolution in the Kingdom of Poland (1905–1907) , which spread throughout the lands of the Russian Empire ; early soviets were active particularly in Central Russia and Congress Poland , where workers took over factories, districts, and sometimes even entire towns or regions before the tsarist authorities reclaimed control.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Near the end of the First World War , soviet republics started appearing on a larger scale as short-lived communist revolutionary governments that were established in what had been the Russian Empire after the October Revolution and under its influence. These states included some such as the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Latvian Socialist Soviet Republic which won independence from Russia during the civil war period. Others such as the Ukrainian Soviet Republic and the Socialist Soviet Republic of Byelorussia later became union republics of the Soviet Union and are now independent states. Still others such as the Kuban Soviet Republic and the Bukharan People's Soviet Republic were absorbed into other polities and no longer formally exist under those names.

In the turmoil following World War I, the Russian example inspired the formation of Soviet republics in other areas of Europe including Hungary , Bavaria , Slovakia and Bremen .

[ 4 ] Soviets also appeared within towns throughout Poland, known as rady delegatów robotniczych (councils of workers' delegates), mostly throughout 1918 and 1919. One year later a Provisional Polish Revolutionary Committee was created under the patronage of Soviet Russia with the goal to establish a Soviet republic within Poland (it was later dissolved following the Red Army 's defeat in the Polish–Soviet War ). Short-lived Irish Soviets also briefly emerged during the Irish War of Independence , most notably the Limerick Soviet . Soviet republics, most notably the Chinese Soviet Republic (Jiangxi Soviet), later appeared in China during the early stages of the Chinese Civil War . Other than these cases, "soviet republic" typically refers to the administrative republics of the Soviet Union .

List [ edit ] See also: List of communist states The Soviet Union or any of its two very distinct types of republics: The larger union republics , representing the main ethnic groups of the Union and with the constitutional right to secede from it.

The smaller autonomous republics , located within some of the union republics and representing ethnic minorities. Typically, in regard to governance, autonomous republics were subordinate to the union republics they were located in.

Arbeiter- und Soldatenräte (Workers' and Soldiers' Councils) during the German Revolution of November 1918, including Bremen (January–February 1919), Braunschweig (November 1918 to February 1919), Würzburg (April 1919), Bavaria (April–May 1919) and Alsace (8–22 November 1918).

Bukharan People's Soviet Republic , its name later changed to the Bukharan Soviet Socialist Republic (October 1920–February 1925).

Chinese Soviet Republic , also known as the "Jiangxi Soviet" (November 1931–September 1937) led by the Chinese Communist Party .

Commune of the Working People of Estonia (November 1918–February 1919).

Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic (January–April 1918) in the south of Finland only.

Galician Soviet Socialist Republic (15 July–21 September 1920) in Soviet-occupied territory during the Polish–Soviet War .

Hunan Soviet (ca. 1927) led by the Chinese Communist Party.

Hungarian Soviet Republic (March–August 1919) led by the Hungarian Communist Party.

Latvian Socialist Soviet Republic (December 1918–January 1920).

Limerick Soviet (15–27 April 1919) during a general strike against British military rule.

Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic (December 1918–February 1919).

Other Irish Soviets (1919–1922) mainly in the province of Munster .

Persian Socialist Soviet Republic also known as the Soviet Republic of Gilan (June 1920–September 1921).

Republic of Užice (Autumn 1941), a Partisan -governed military state during World War II .

Shanghai Civil Government (22 March - 1 April 1927), violently dissolved on the orders Chiang Kai-Shek, resulting in the Chinese Civil War .

Slovak Soviet Republic (16 June–7 July 1919) directly supported by the Hungarian Soviet Republic.

Socialist Soviet Republic of Byelorussia (January–February 1919).

Socialist Soviet Republic of Lithuania and Belorussia (February–August 1919).

Soviet Republic of Naissaar (December 1917–February 1918) on an Estonian island in the Baltic Sea.

Ukrainian People's Republic of Soviets (December 1917–March 1918).

Ukrainian Soviet Republic (March–April 1918).

See also [ edit ] People's republic Council communism Category:Early Soviet republics Irish soviets References [ edit ] ^ Weaver, Matthew Lon (1 January 2010).

Religious Internationalism: The Ethics of War and Peace in the Thought of Paul Tillich . Mercer University Press. p. 65.

ISBN 9780881461886 .

^ Tych, Feliks (2018). "Przedmowa". In Wielgosz, Przemysław (ed.).

O rewolucji: 1905, 1917 . Instytut Wydawniczy „Książka i Prasa”. pp.

7– 29.

ISBN 9788365304599 .

^ Luksemburg, Róża (2018). Wielgosz, Przemysław (ed.).

O rewolucji: 1905, 1917 .

Instytut Wydawniczy „Książka i Prasa” .

ISBN 9788365304599 .

^ Stephen A. Smith. "Towards a Global History of Communism." The Oxford Handbook of the History of Communism . Stephen A. Smith, ed. Oxford University Press, 2014. p. 8.

ISBN 9780191667510 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soviet_republic&oldid=1305485077 " Categories : Soviet republics Dictatorship of the proletariat Government of the Soviet Union Socialism Republic Types of socialism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 09:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soviet republic 22 languages Add topic

