Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 2.1 Interference 2.2 Quantitative Relationships 2.3 Thin-film interference 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Newton's rings 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Optical phenomenon Newton's rings observed through a microscope . The smallest increments on the superimposed scale are 100 μm.  The illumination is from below, leading to a bright central region.

Newton's rings interference pattern created by a plano-convex lens illuminated by 650 nm red laser light, photographed using a low-light microscope . The illumination is from above, leading to a dark central region.

Newton's rings is a phenomenon in which an interference pattern is created by the reflection of light between two surfaces, typically a spherical surface and an adjacent touching flat surface. It is named after Isaac Newton , who investigated the effect in 1666. When viewed with monochromatic light , Newton's rings appear as a series of concentric, alternating bright and dark rings centered at the point of contact between the two surfaces. When viewed with white light, it forms a concentric ring pattern of rainbow colors because the different wavelengths of light interfere at different thicknesses of the air layer between the surfaces.

History [ edit ] The phenomenon was first described by Robert Hooke in his 1665 book Micrographia . Its name derives from the mathematician and physicist Sir Isaac Newton, who studied the phenomenon in 1666 while sequestered at home in Lincolnshire in the time of the Great Plague that had shut down Trinity College , Cambridge. He recorded his observations in an essay entitled "Of Colours".  The phenomenon became a source of dispute between Newton, who favored a corpuscular nature of light, and Hooke, who favored a wave-like nature of light.

[ 1 ] Newton did not publish his analysis until after Hooke's death, as part of his  treatise " Opticks " published in 1704.

[ 2 ] Theory [ edit ] Arrangement to view Newton's Rings: a convex lens is placed on top of a flat surface.

The pattern is created by placing a very slightly convex curved glass on an optical flat glass.  The two pieces of glass make contact only at the center. At other points there is a slight air gap between the two surfaces, increasing with radial distance from the center.

Consider monochromatic (single color) light incident from the top that reflects from both the bottom surface of the top lens and the top surface of the optical flat below it.

[ 3 ] The light passes through the glass lens until it comes to the glass-to-air boundary, where the transmitted light goes from a higher refractive index ( n ) value to a lower n value. The transmitted light passes through this boundary with no phase change. The reflected light undergoing internal reflection (about 4% of the total) also has no phase change.  The light that is transmitted into the air travels a distance, t , before it is reflected at the flat surface below. Reflection at this air-to-glass boundary causes a half-cycle (180°) phase shift because the air has a lower refractive index than the glass. The reflected light at the lower surface returns a distance of (again) t and passes back into the lens.  The additional path length is equal to twice the gap between the surfaces.  The two reflected rays will interfere according to the total phase change caused by the extra path length 2 t and by the half-cycle phase change induced in reflection at the flat surface. When the distance 2 t is zero (lens touching optical flat) the waves interfere destructively, hence the central region of the pattern is dark.

A similar analysis for illumination of the device from below instead of from above shows that in this case the central portion of the pattern is bright, not dark.  When the light is not monochromatic, the radial position of the fringe pattern has a "rainbow" appearance.

Interference [ edit ] Closeup of a section of the top glass on the optical flat, showing how interference fringes form. At positions where the path length difference is equal to an odd multiple (2 n + 1) of a half-wavelength ( a ), the reflected waves reinforce, resulting in a bright spot.  At positions where the path length difference is equal to an even multiple (2 n ) of a half-wavelength ( b ), ( Lambda by 2) the reflected waves cancel, resulting in a dark spot. This results in a pattern of concentric bright and dark rings, interference fringes.

In areas where the path length difference between the two rays is equal to an odd multiple of half a wavelength (λ/2) of the light waves, the reflected waves will be in phase , so the "troughs" and "peaks" of the waves coincide.  Therefore, the waves will reinforce (add) through constructive interference and the resulting reflected light intensity will be greater.  As a result, a bright area will be observed there.

At other locations, where  the path length difference is equal to an even multiple of a half-wavelength, the reflected waves will be 180° out of phase , so a "trough" of one wave coincides with a "peak" of the other wave. This is destructive interference: the waves will cancel (subtract) and the resulting light intensity will be weaker or zero.  As a result, a dark area will be observed there.  Because of the 180° phase reversal due to reflection of the bottom ray, the center where the two pieces touch is dark.

This interference results in a pattern of bright and dark lines or bands called " interference fringes " being observed on the surface.   These are similar to contour lines on maps, revealing differences in the thickness of the air gap.  The gap between the surfaces is constant along a fringe.  The path length difference between two adjacent bright or dark fringes is one wavelength λ of the light, so the difference in the gap between the surfaces is one-half wavelength.  Since the wavelength of light is so small, this technique can measure very small departures from flatness.  For example, the wavelength of red light is about 700 nm, so using red light the difference in height between two fringes is half that, or 350 nm, about 1 ⁄ 100 the diameter of a human hair.  Since the gap between the glasses increases radially from the center, the interference fringes form concentric rings.  For glass surfaces that are not axially symmetric, the fringes will not be rings but will have other shapes.

Quantitative Relationships [ edit ] Newton's rings seen in two plano-convex lenses with their flat surfaces in contact.  One surface is slightly convex, creating the rings.  In white light, the rings are rainbow-colored, because the different wavelengths of each color interfere at different locations.

Rainbow-colored Newton's rings on an Agfacolor slide (slightly right of center on the houses and upper right on the mountains).

For illumination from above, with a dark center, the radius of the N th bright ring is given by r N = [ λ λ R ( N − − 1 2 ) ] 1 / 2 , {\displaystyle r_{N}=\left[\lambda R\left(N-{1 \over 2}\right)\right]^{1/2},} where N is the bright-ring number, R is the radius of curvature of the glass lens the light is passing through, and λ is the wavelength of the light.  The above formula is also applicable for dark rings for the ring pattern obtained by transmitted light.

Given the radial distance of a bright ring, r , and a radius of curvature of the lens, R ,  the air gap between the glass surfaces, t , is given to a good approximation by t = r 2 2 R , {\displaystyle t={r^{2} \over 2R},} where the effect of viewing the pattern at an angle oblique to the incident rays is ignored.

Thin-film interference [ edit ] Main article: Thin-film interference The phenomenon of Newton's rings is explained on the same basis as thin-film interference , including effects such as "rainbows" seen in thin films of oil on water or in soap bubbles.  The difference is that here the "thin film" is a thin layer of air.

References [ edit ] ^ Westfall, Richard S. (1980).

Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 171.

ISBN 0-521-23143-4 .

^ Isaac Newton (1704).

Opticks or, a Treatise of the reflexions, refractions, inflexions and colours of light . Retrieved 9 May 2025 .

^ Young, Hugh D.; Freedman, Roger A.; Ford, Albert Lewis (2012).

Sears and Zemansky's University Physics with Modern Physics (13 ed.). San Francisco: Addison Wesley. p. 1178.

ISBN 978-0-321-69686-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Airy, G. B. (1833).

"VI. On the phænomena of Newton's rings when formed between two transparent substances of different refractive powers" .

Philosophical Magazine . Series 3.

2 (7): 20– 30.

doi : 10.1080/14786443308647959 .

ISSN 1941-5966 .

Illueca, C.; Vazquez, C.; Hernandez, C.; Viqueira, V. (1998).

"The use of Newton's rings for characterizing ophthalmic lenses" .

Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics .

18 (4): 360– 371.

doi : 10.1046/j.1475-1313.1998.00366.x .

ISSN 0275-5408 .

PMID 9829108 .

S2CID 222086863 . Retrieved 14 July 2024 .

Dobroiu, Adrian; Alexandrescu, Adrian; Apostol, Dan; Nascov, Victor; Damian, Victor S. (2000). "Improved method for processing Newton's rings fringe patterns". In Necsoiu, Teodor; Robu, Maria; Dumitras, Dan C (eds.).

SIOEL '99: Sixth Symposium on Optoelectronics . Proceedings. Vol. 4068. pp.

342– 347.

doi : 10.1117/12.378693 .

ISSN 0277-786X .

S2CID 120241545 .

Tolansky, S. (2009). "XIV. New contributions to interferometry. Part II—New interference phenomena with Newton's rings".

The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science .

35 (241): 120– 136.

doi : 10.1080/14786444408521466 .

ISSN 1941-5982 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Newton's rings .

Newton's Ring from Eric Weisstein's World of Physics Explanation of and expression for Newton's rings [ usurped ] Newton-gyűrűk (Newton's rings) Video of a simple experiment with two lenses, and Newton's rings on mica observed. (On the website FizKapu .) (in Hungarian) v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c. 1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) Roger Cotes (student) William Whiston (student) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Newton%27s_rings&oldid=1289585015 " Categories : Interference Optical phenomena Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Hungarian-language sources (hu) This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 14:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Newton's rings 31 languages Add topic

