Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 In China 1.1.1 Other usage in Chinese rhetoric 1.2 Outside China 2 List of people's wars 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents People's war 20 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Maoist military strategy For the term's use in the historiography of World War II in the United Kingdom, see Angus Calder § The People's War .

People's war Simplified Chinese 人民战争 Traditional Chinese 人民戰爭 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin rénmín zhànzhēng Wade–Giles Jenmin chancheng other Mandarin Xiao'erjing ژٌ مٍ جً ﺟْﻊ Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Jànman zíncàang Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e People's war or protracted people's war is a Maoist military strategy. First developed by the Chinese communist revolutionary leader Mao Zedong (1893–1976), the basic concept behind people's war is to maintain the support of the population and draw the enemy deep into the countryside (stretching their supply lines) where the population will bleed them dry through guerrilla warfare and eventually build up to mobile warfare . It was used by the Chinese communists against the Imperial Japanese Army in World War II , and by the Chinese Soviet Republic in the Chinese Civil War .

The term is used by Maoists for their strategy of long-term armed revolutionary struggle. After the Sino-Vietnamese War in 1979, Deng Xiaoping abandoned people's war for "People's War under Modern Conditions", which moved away from reliance on troops over technology. With the adoption of " socialism with Chinese characteristics ", economic reforms fueled military and technological investment. Troop numbers were also reduced and professionalisation encouraged.

The strategy of people's war was used heavily by the Viet Cong in the Vietnam War . However, protracted war should not be confused with the "foco" theory employed by Che Guevara and Fidel Castro in the Cuban Revolution of 1959.

Overview [ edit ] In China [ edit ] Simplified guerrilla warfare organization The classic "3-phase" Maoist model as adapted by North Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh and Võ Nguyên Giáp.

[ 1 ] In its original formulation by Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party Mao Zedong , people's war exploits the few advantages that a small revolutionary movement has—broad-based popular support can be one of them—against a state 's power with a large, professional, well-equipped and well-funded army. People's war strategically avoids decisive battles, since a tiny force of a few dozen soldiers would easily be routed in an all-out confrontation with the state. Instead, it favours a three-phase strategy of protracted warfare , with carefully chosen battles that can realistically be won.

In phase one, the revolutionary force conducting people's war starts in a remote area with mountainous or forested terrain in which its enemy is weak. It attempts to establish a local stronghold known as a revolutionary base area . As it grows in power, it enters phase two, establishes other revolutionary base areas and spreads its influence through the surrounding countryside, where it may become the governing power and gain popular support through such programmes as land reform . Eventually in phase three, the movement has enough strength to encircle and capture small cities, then larger ones, until finally it seizes power in the entire country.

Within the Chinese Red Army , the concept of people's war was the basis of strategy against the Japanese, and against a hypothetical Soviet invasion of China. The concept of people's war became less important with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the increasing possibility of conflict with the United States over Taiwan . In the 1980s and 1990s the concept of people's war was changed to include more high-technology weaponry.
Historian David Priestland dates the beginning of the policy of people's war to the publication of a "General Outline for Military Work" in May 1928, by Chinese Central Committee. This document established official military strategies to the Chinese Red Army during the Chinese Civil War .

[ 2 ] The strategy of people's war has political dimensions in addition to its military dimensions.

[ 3 ] In China, the early People's Liberation Army was composed of peasants who had previously lacked political significance and control over their place in the social order.

[ 4 ] Its internal organization was egalitarian between soldiers and officers, and its external relationship with rural civilians was egalitarian.

[ 3 ] Military success against an adversaries with major material advantages (in Mao's experience, the Nationalist forces and the invading Japanese army), required weakening the adversary through attrition and strengthening one's own forces through accumulation, a method which could only succeed if the guerilla army had the people's support.

[ 5 ] : 9 As sociologist Alessandro Russo summarizes, the political existence of peasants via the PLA was a radical exception to the rules of Chinese society and "overturned the strict traditional hierarchies in unprecedented forms of egalitarianism." [ 6 ] Other usage in Chinese rhetoric [ edit ] In 2014 Party leadership in Xinjiang commenced a People's War against the “Three Evil Forces” of separatism, terrorism, and extremism. They deployed two hundred thousand party cadres to Xinjiang and launched the Civil Servant-Family Pair Up program. Xi was dissatisfied with the initial results of the People's War and replaced Zhang Chunxian with Chen Quanguo in 2016. Following his appointment Chen oversaw the recruitment of tens of thousands of additional police officers and the division of society into three categories: trustworthy, average, untrustworthy. He instructed his subordinated to “Take this crackdown as the top project,” and “to preempt the enemy, to strike at the outset.” Following a meeting with Xi in Beijing Chen Quanguo held a rally in Ürümqi with ten thousand troops, helicopters, and armored vehicles. As they paraded he announced a “smashing, obliterating offensive,” and declared that they would “bury the corpses of terrorists and terror gangs in the vast sea of the People's War.” [ 7 ] In February 2020, the Chinese Communist Party launched an aggressive campaign described by General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping as a "people's war" to contain the spread of the coronavirus .

[ 8 ] Outside China [ edit ] Mao's doctrine of people's war influenced various Third World revolutionary movements including the Naxalites and the Shining Path .

[ 5 ] : 9 From 1965 to 1971, China held yearly military training for Palestinian fedayeen , including instruction in Mao Zedong Thought on guerilla warfare and people's war.

[ 9 ] : 115–116 From 1966 to 1970, Syria was indirectly ruled by the neo-Ba'athist and totalitarian regime of General Salah Jadid , which actively promoted the ideas of Marxism–Leninism and the Maoist concept of People's War against Zionism , which was expressed in its huge support for leftist Palestinian fedayeen groups, granting them considerable autonomy and allowing them to carry out attacks on Israel from Syrian territory.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Just a few months after the coming to power , Jadid's regime completed the formation of the Palestinian paramilitary Ba'athist group called al-Sa'iqa , which carried out attacks on Israel from Jordanian and Lebanese territory, but was completely under the control of the neo-Ba'athist regime in Syria.

[ 12 ] Mao-era China contended that the Arab defeat in the Six-Day War demonstrated that only people's war, not other strategies or methods, could defeat imperialism in the Middle East.

[ 9 ] : 47 The Popular Front for the Liberation of the Occupied Arabian Gulf 's (PFLOAG) goal was to use people's war to establish a socialist Arab state in the Gulf region.

[ 9 ] : 58 In non-communist states such as Iran, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps used the protracted people's war against Ba'athist Iraq during the Iran-Iraq war .

[ 13 ] List of people's wars [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Conflicts in the following list are failed and successful wars labelled as people's wars by Maoists, and also both failed and ongoing attempts to start and develop people's wars. In addition to the conflicts in the list, there also have been conflicts not primarily led by Maoists or seen as people's wars, but had Maoist groups involved within them who viewed the conflicts partly as such, including the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine ( Arab–Israeli conflict ) and the Communist Party of Burma ( Myanmar civil war ).

Date Conflict State Rebel group Revolutionary base area Deaths Result 1 August 1927 – 7 December 1949 Chinese Civil War China Chinese Communist Party Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army (1927–1937) People's Liberation Army (1946–1950) Communist-controlled China 13 million+ killed Communist victory 2 April 1948 – 21 September 1988 Communist insurgency in Myanmar Burma Communist Party of Burma People's Liberation Army Shan State 3,000+ killed Government victory 1 November 1955 – 30 April 1975 Vietnam War South Vietnam Viet Cong People's Liberation Armed Forces of South Vietnam War zone C (1966–72) Lộc Ninh (1972–75) 1,326,494–4,249,494 killed Communist victory 23 May 1959 – 2 December 1975 Laotian Civil War Laos Lao People's Party Pathet Lao Xam Neua 20,000–62,000 killed Communist victory 1961 – 1979 Nicaraguan Revolution Nicaragua Sandinistas Sandinista Popular Army North Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region 30,000+ killed Communist victory c.

December 1962 – 3 November 1990 Communist insurgency in Sarawak Malaysia North Kalimantan Communist Party North Kalimantan People's Army Sarawak 400–500 killed Government victory 1965 – 1983 Communist insurgency in Thailand Thailand Communist Party of Thailand People's Liberation Army of Thailand Nakhon Phanom Province 6,500+ killed Government victory 18 May 1967 – present Naxalite–Maoist insurgency India Communist Party of India (Maoist) People's Liberation Guerrilla Army Red corridor 14,000+ killed since 1996 Ongoing 17 January 1968 – 17 April 1975 Cambodian Civil War Khmer Republic Communist Party of Kampuchea Khmer Rouge Ratanakiri Province 275,000–310,000 killed Communist victory 29 March 1969 – present Communist rebellion in the Philippines Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Samar 40,000+ killed Ongoing 12 September 1972 – present Maoist insurgency in Turkey Turkey Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Liberation Army of the Workers and Peasants of Turkey Maoist Communist Party People's Liberation Army Tunceli Province Ongoing 1972 – 1974 Araguaia Guerrilla War Brazil Communist Party of Brazil Araguaia Guerrilla Force State of Goiás 90+ Maoists killed Government victory, failed to develop a people's war 1976 – 1996 GRAPO insurgency Spain Communist Party of Spain (Reconstituted) First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Groups 84+ killed Government victory, failed to develop a people's war 1977 – present Maoist insurgency in Afghanistan (including the Soviet–Afghan War and the anti-Taliban insurgency ) Afghanistan Liberation Organization of the People of Afghanistan Afghanistan Liberation Organization Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan 120+ Maoists killed (only the ALO) Ongoing 17 May 1980 – Ongoing Internal conflict in Peru Peru Communist Party of Peru–Shining Path People's Guerilla Army Ayacucho Region 70,000+ killed Shining Path declines, but continues insurgency 25 January 1982 Amol uprising Iran Union of Iranian Communists (Sarbedaran) Amol County 300+ killed Government victory, failed to develop a people's war 1 June 1993 – present Maoist insurgency in Ecuador Ecuador Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Chimborazo Province Ongoing 1993 – 2021 Maoist insurgency in Bangladesh Bangladesh Purbo Banglar Communist Party Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Khulna 1,200+ killed Government victory 13 February 1996 – 21 November 2006 Nepalese Civil War Nepal Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) People's Liberation Army, Nepal Rapti Zone 17,800+ killed Comprehensive Peace Accord 2008 – present Maoist insurgency in Bhutan Bhutan Communist Party of Bhutan (Marxist–Leninist–Maoist) Bhutan Tiger Force Sarpang District Ongoing See also [ edit ] On Protracted War Soviet partisans Viet Cong and PAVN strategy, organization and structure Strategy and tactics of guerrilla warfare Colombian conflict (1964–present) Paraguayan People's Army insurgency References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Võ Nguyên Giáp, Big Victory, Great Task , (Pall Mall Press, London (1968).

^ Priestland, Davis (2009).

The Red Flag: A History of Communism . New York: Grove Press. p. 253.

^ a b Russo, Alessandro (2020).

Cultural Revolution and Revolutionary Culture . Durham: Duke University Press . p. 36.

ISBN 978-1-4780-1218-4 .

OCLC 1156439609 .

^ Russo, Alessandro (2020).

Cultural Revolution and Revolutionary Culture . Durham: Duke University Press . pp.

36– 37.

ISBN 978-1-4780-1218-4 .

OCLC 1156439609 .

^ a b Cook, Alexander C., ed. (2013). "Introduction".

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ Russo, Alessandro (2020).

Cultural Revolution and Revolutionary Culture . Durham: Duke University Press . p. 37.

ISBN 978-1-4780-1218-4 .

OCLC 1156439609 .

^ Khatchadourian, Raffi.

"Surviving the Crackdown in Xinjiang" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved April 15, 2021 .

^ Xie, Huanchi (February 20, 2020).

"Xi stresses winning people's war against novel coronavirus" .

Xinhua News Agency . Archived from the original on February 28, 2020.

Xi Jinping, general secretary of the Communist Party of China Central Committee, on Monday stressed resolutely winning the people's war of epidemic prevention and control with firmer confidence, stronger resolve and more decisive measures.

^ a b c Har-El, Shai (2024).

China and the Palestinian Organizations: 1964–1971 .

Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-3-031-57827-4 .

^ Meininghaus, Esther (2016).

Creating Consent in Ba'thist Syria: Women and Welfare in a Totalitarian State . London: I.B. Tauris. p. 75.

ISBN 978-1-78453-115-7 .

^ Keegan, John (1983).

World Armies (2nd ed.). Detroit, MI: Gale. p. 562.

ISBN 0-8103-1515-7 .

^ Kerr, Malcolm H. (1973).

"Hafiz Asad and the Changing Patterns of Syrian Politics" .

International Journal .

28 (4): 689– 706.

doi : 10.2307/40201173 .

ISSN 0020-7020 .

JSTOR 40201173 .

^ Guarding History: The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and the Memory of the Iran-Iraq War .

Archived August 17, 2023, at the Wayback Machine .

Sources [ edit ] VK Shashikumar.

Red Terror: India under siege from within , CNN-IBN, March 16, 2006.

v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=People%27s_war&oldid=1303127095 " Categories : Cold War history of China Guerrilla warfare Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Maoism Maoist terminology Military history of the People's Republic of China Military strategy Revolution terminology Wars by type Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2019 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2023 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 06:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents People's war 20 languages Add topic

