Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Serenus of Antinoöpolis 7 languages Català Deutsch Français Italiano Magyar Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek mathematician (c. 300–360) Serenus of Antinoöpolis ( Ancient Greek : Σερῆνος ; c. 300 – c. 360 AD) was a Greek mathematician from the Late Antique Thebaid in Roman Egypt .

Life and work [ edit ] Serenus came either from Antinoeia or from Antinoöpolis , a city in Egypt founded by Hadrian on top of an older settlement. Two sources confirm that he was born in Antinoöpolis. It was once believed that he was born in Antissa , but this has been shown to have been based on an error.

Serenus wrote a commentary on the Conics of Apollonius , which is now lost. We hear from Theon of Alexandria that the main result of the commentary was that of a number of angles that are subtended at a point on a diameter of a circle that is not the center, then with equal arcs of that circle, the angle nearer to the center is always less than the angle farther away from the center.

[ 1 ] But he was also a prime mathematician in his own right, having written two works entitled On the Section of a Cylinder and On the Section of a Cone , works that came to be connected to Apollonius' Conics .  This connection helped them to survive through the ages.

In the preface of On the Section of a Cylinder , Serenus states that his motivation for writing this work, as summarized by Heath, was that "many persons who were students of geometry were under the erroneous that the oblique section of a cylinder was different from the oblique section of a cone known as an ellipse, whereas it is of course the same curve." [ 1 ] The work consists of thirty-three propositions.

Proposition six proves the existence an oblique cylinder of the parallel circular sections subcontrary to the series of which the bases are two.

[ 2 ] Proposition nine proves that the section by any plane not parallel to that of the bases or of one of the subcontrary sections but cutting all the generators is not a circle.

[ 2 ] Propositions fourteen and sixteen, the main results, are follow ups of the previous propositions where the said section is proved to have the property of the ellipse.

[ 2 ] Proposition seventeen puts the property that was found in propositions fourteen and sixteen into the Apollonian form using the latus rectum .

[ 2 ] Propositions twenty-nine to thirty-three deal with an optical problem. He gives a definition of parallels that was generally ridiculed.

In propositions one though fifty-seven of On the Section of a Cone , Serenus deals largely with the areas of triangular sections of right and scalene cones that are created by planes passing through the vertex. He shows when the area of a triangle of a certain class of triangles is at its maximum. Propositions fifty-eight through sixty-nine form a separate section of the book and deal with the volumes of right cones in relation to their heights, their bases and the areas of triangular sections through the axis.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Heath p. 519 (1981) ^ a b c d Heath p. 520 (1981) References [ edit ] Heath, Thomas Little (1981).

A History of Greek Mathematics, Volume II . Dover publications.

ISBN 0-486-24074-6 .

Ivor Bulmer-Thomas , Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York 1970-1990).

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Serenus of Antinoöpolis" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Scans of editions of On the Section of a Cylinder and On the Section of a Cone at wilbourhall.org (text in German, Latin and Ancient Greek) v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Vatican 2 Israel Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Serenus_of_Antinoöpolis&oldid=1285925445 " Categories : Ancient Greek geometers Roman-era Greeks 300s births 360 deaths 4th-century mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 16:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Serenus of Antinoöpolis 7 languages Add topic

