Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Publications and online resources Toggle Publications and online resources subsection 2.1 Regnum Vegetabile 2.2 Databases 3 Awards 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents International Association for Plant Taxonomy 14 languages বাংলা Беларуская Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Español Italiano Nederlands Polski Русский Slovenščina Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Plant biodiversity organization International Association for Plant Taxonomy Formation July 18, 1950 Headquarters Bratislava , Slovakia President Lúcia G. Lohmann Website www .iaptglobal .org The International Association for Plant Taxonomy ( IAPT ) is an organization established to promote an understanding of plant biodiversity , facilitate international communication of research between botanists , and oversee matters of uniformity and stability in plant names. 
The IAPT was founded on July 18, 1950, at the Seventh International Botanical Congress in Stockholm , Sweden .

[ 1 ] The IAPT headquarters is located in Bratislava , Slovakia . 
Its president, since 2023, is Lúcia G. Lohmann of the Universidade de São Paulo; vice-president is Fabián Michelangeli of the New York Botanical Garden; and secretary-general is Mauricio Bonifacino of the Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay.

Both the taxonomic journal Taxon and the series Regnum Vegetabile are published by the IAPT. The latter series includes the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants , Index Nominum Genericorum , and Index Herbariorum .

Purpose [ edit ] The IAPT's primary purpose is the promotion and understanding of biodiversity—the discovery, naming, classification , and systematics of plants—for both living and fossil plants . 
Additionally, it promotes the study and conservation of plant biodiversity, and works to raise awareness of the general public to this issue. 
The organization also facilitates international cooperation among botanists working in the fields of plant systematics, taxonomy , and nomenclature . 
This is accomplished in part through sponsorship of meetings and publication of resources, such as reference publications and journals.

IAPT was founded in 1950 as a not-for-profit organisation for the purposes of publication of a periodical ( Taxon ) dealing with activities of the association and with objects of general importance for plant taxonomy, the publication of books and indices of utility for plant taxonomists ( Regnum Vegetabile ), the establishment and maintenance of committees for specific taxonomic and nomenclatural purposes, and the organization of international symposia on problems of plant systematics.

[ 2 ] The IAPT also seeks to achieve uniformity and stability in plant names .  It accomplishes this through the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants , previously known as the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature , and through the oversight of the International Bureau for Plant Taxonomy and Nomenclature.

Publications and online resources [ edit ] The association's official journal is Taxon , the only medium for the publication of both proposals to conserve or reject names [ 2 ] and proposals to amend the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants .

Regnum Vegetabile [ edit ] Regnum Vegetabile [ 3 ] is a series of books on topics of interest to plant taxonomists. Many of the volumes are literature surveys or monographs in the area of plant systematics. There are several volumes of general use: International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (vol. 159, 2018, ICN ), a set of rules and recommendations dealing with the formal names that are given to plants. The current edition is known as the "Shenzhen Code", as it was drafted in 2017 at the Eighteenth International Botanical Congress in Shenzhen, China.

International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants , 8th edition (vol. 151, 2010), a companion to the ICN that sets forth rules regarding the names of plant cultivars .

Index Nominum Genericorum (vols. 100–102 & 113), an index of all published generic names covered by the ICN , including the place of publication and information about the type species. The index is prepared in collaboration with the Smithsonian Institution. An electronic version is available online.

Index Herbariorum , the first six editions (vol. 15, 31, 86, 92, 93, 106, 109, 114, 117, 120), a directory and guide to the herbaria of the world, including contact information, abbreviation codes, and important collections located in each herbarium. Nowadays, the Index Herbariorum is an online database, managed by The New York Botanical Garden, and available for on-line searching.

International Directory of Botanical Gardens (updated as vol. 95, 1977), a directory to botanical gardens and arboreta around the world.

The series includes many additional volumes of interest to specialists in specific subdisciplines of botany, in addition to the ones listed above.

Databases [ edit ] In addition to electronic versions of its print publications, the IAPT maintains the "Names in Current Use", a database of scientific names of extant botanical genera.

[ 4 ] Awards [ edit ] The IAPT established two Engler Medals in honour of Adolf Engler in 1986: the Engler Medal in Gold awarded every six years for outstanding lifetime contributions to plant taxonomy and presented since 1987 at each International Botanical Congress (IBC), and the Engler Medal in Silver (medal sensu lato) awarded from 1987 to 2001 for a monograph or other work in systematic botany and presented from 1990 to 2002 at various meetings, congresses, symposia, etc. 
In 2002 the latter medal was divided into three awards for outstanding publications in these areas: the Engler Medal in Silver (medal sensu stricto) awarded for monographic or floristic plant systematics; the Stafleu Medal awarded for historical, bibliographic, and/or nomenclatural aspects of plant systematics; and the Stebbins Medal awarded for phylogenetic plant systematics and/or plant evolution. 
The medals honor Adolf Engler (24 March 1844–10 October 1930), Frans Antonie Stafleu (8 September 1921–16 December 1997), and George Ledyard Stebbins, Jr.

(6 January 1906–19 January 2000).

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ IAPT web site . Retrieved on 2007-12-18.

^ a b IAPT Strategic Plan Archived 2006-07-06 at Archive-It " (PDF). 2004.

Taxon 53 (1): 2.

^ ISSN 0080-0694 .

^ "Names in Current Use" .

Archived from the original on 2008-02-12 . Retrieved 2008-01-01 .

^ IAPT (2016).

"Awards presented by IAPT" . Archived from the original on 2016-12-20 . Retrieved 2016-12-14 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Index Nominum Genericorum Index Herbariorum v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Israel People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Association_for_Plant_Taxonomy&oldid=1276574465 " Categories : Botanical nomenclature Plant taxonomy Botanical societies International scientific organizations Organizations established in 1950 Hidden categories: Webarchive template other archives Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 17:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Association for Plant Taxonomy 14 languages Add topic

