Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents John Climacus 34 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Kiswahili Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 6th–7th-century Christian monk "Johannes Climacus" redirects here. For the philosopher who used this pseudonym, see Søren Kierkegaard .

Saint John Climacus 13th-century Russian icon of St. John Climacus; to either side are Saint George and Saint Blaise ( Novgorod school ) Born c.

579 AD Syria Died March 649 (aged 69–70) Mount Sinai Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Feast 30 March, Fourth Sunday of Great Lent Attributes Clothed as a monk , sometimes with an Abbot 's paterissa (crozier), sometimes holding a copy of his Ladder Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e John Climacus ( Ancient Greek : Ἰωάννης τῆς Κλίμακος ; Latin : Ioannes Climacus ; Arabic : يوحنا السلمي , romanized : Yuḥana al-Sêlmi ), also known as John of the Ladder , John Scholasticus and John Sinaites , was a 6th–7th century Christian monk at the monastery on Mount Sinai .

[ 1 ] He is revered as a saint by the Eastern Orthodox Church and Catholic Church .

History [ edit ] Many details on his life are unknown. There exists an ancient vita (life) of the saint by a monk named Daniel of the Raithu monastery, which is the principal source about the life of John.

[ 2 ] Daniel, though claiming to be a contemporary, admits to no knowledge of John's origins—any detail on John's birth is the result of much later speculation, and is confined to references in the Menologion .

[ 2 ] Daniel also does not provide any chronology and his knowledge of the life of John is both scanty and vague.

[ 2 ] If Daniel's Life is trustworthy (there is nothing against which to judge its accuracy), then John came to the Vatos Monastery at Mount Sinai , now Saint Catherine's Monastery , and became a novice when he was about 16 years old.

[ 2 ] He was taught about the spiritual life by the more senior monk, Martyrius. After the death of Martyrius, John, wishing to practice greater asceticism , withdrew to a hermitage at the foot of the mountain. In this isolation he lived for some twenty years, constantly studying the lives of the saints and thus becoming one of the most learned Church Fathers .

[ 3 ] In the meantime, the above tradition has been proven to be historically implausible.

[ 4 ] The artful rhetorical figures in his writings, as well as philosophical forms of thought indicate a solid academic education, as was customary for a profession in administration and law during his epoch. Such training could not have been acquired in Sinai.

[ 5 ] Furthermore, biographical observations indicate that he probably lived by the sea, probably in Gaza, and apparently practiced Law there. It was only after his wife's death, in his early forties, that he entered the Sinai Monastery. These findings also explain the horizon and the literary quality of his writings, which have a clear philosophical background. The legend of his renunciation of the world at the age of 16, found also in other biographies of saints, is to suggest his having been untouched by secular education. Blurred deliberately would have been any roots in theological and philosophical educational traditions.

When he was about 65 years of age, the monks of Sinai persuaded him to become their hegumen . He acquitted himself of his functions as abbot [ 6 ] with the greatest wisdom. John Climacus' reputation spread so far that, according to the Life of John, Pope Gregory the Great wrote to propose himself to his prayers, and sent him a sum of money for the hospital of Sinai, where pilgrims lodged.

[ citation needed ] Of John's literary output, we know only the Κλῖμαξ ( Latin : Scala Paradisi ) or The Ladder of Divine Ascent . This was composed in the early 7th century at the request of John, [ 7 ] Abbot of Raithu, a monastery situated on the shores of the Red Sea . Also surviving to the present day is a shorter work To the Pastor (Latin: Liber ad Pastorem ), most likely a sort of appendix to the Ladder . It is in the Ladder that we hear of the ascetic practice of carrying a small notebook to record the monk's thoughts during contemplation.

[ 8 ] The Ladder describes how to raise one's soul and body to God through the acquisition of ascetic virtues. Climacus uses the analogy of Jacob's Ladder as the framework for his spiritual teaching. Each chapter is referred to as a "step", and deals with a separate spiritual subject. There are thirty Steps of the ladder, which correspond to the age of Jesus at his baptism and the beginning of his earthly ministry. Within the general framework of a 'ladder', Climacus' book falls into three sections. The first seven Steps concern general virtues necessary for the ascetic life, while the next nineteen (Steps 8–26) give instruction on overcoming vices and building their corresponding virtues. The final four Steps concern the higher virtues toward which the ascetic life aims. The final rung of the ladder—beyond prayer (προσευχή), stillness ( ἡσυχία ), and even dispassion ( ἀπάθεια )—is love ( ἀγάπη ).

Originally written simply for the monks of a neighbouring monastery, the Ladder swiftly became one of the most widely read and much-beloved books of Byzantine spirituality. This book remains one of the most widely read among Orthodox Christians , especially during the season of Great Lent which immediately precedes Pascha (Easter). It is often read in the trapeza (refectory) in Orthodox monasteries , and in some places it is read in church as part of the Daily Office on Lenten weekdays, being prescribed in the Triodion .

An icon known by the same title, Ladder of Divine Ascent , depicts a ladder extending from earth to heaven.

[ 9 ] Several monks are depicted climbing a ladder; at the top is Jesus, prepared to receive them into Heaven . Also shown are angels helping the climbers, and demons attempting to drag down the climbers or shoot them with arrows, no matter how high up the ladder they may be. Most versions of the icon show at least one person falling. Often, in the lower right corner John Climacus himself is shown, gesturing towards the ladder, with rows of monks behind him.

Saint John's feast day is 30 March in both the East and West. The Eastern Orthodox Church and the Byzantine Catholic churches also commemorate him on the Fourth Sunday of Great Lent . Many churches are dedicated to him in Russia , including a church and belltower in the Moscow Kremlin . John Climacus was also known as "Scholasticus", but he is not to be confused with John Scholasticus , Patriarch of Constantinople .

Several translations into English have been made, including one by Holy Transfiguration Monastery (Boston, 1978). This volume contains the Life of St. John by Daniel, The Ladder of Divine Ascent , and To the Pastor , and provides footnotes explaining many of the concepts and terminology used from an Orthodox perspective, as well as a General Index.

[ 10 ] Ladder of Divine Ascent 1663 Emmanuel Tzanes John Climacus is shown at the top of the Ladder of Divine Ascent icon, with other monks following him, 12th-century icon ( Saint Catherine's Monastery , Mount Sinai , Egypt ) St. John of the Ladder (Climacus): illustration from a Klimax manuscript (early 12th century) See also [ edit ] Søren Kierkegaard , who published several works under the pseudonym "Johannes Climacus" and two under the pseudonym "Anti-Climacus" Saint John Climacus, patron saint archive The Uncondemning Monk ; also commemorated 30 March References [ edit ] ^ Zecher, Jonathan L. (2013), "The Angelic Life in Desert and Ladder: John Climacus's Re-Formulation of Ascetic Spirituality", Journal of Early Christian Studies , 21 (1): 111– 136, doi : 10.1353/earl.2013.0006 , ISSN 1086-3184 , S2CID 170616546 ^ a b c d Chryssavgis 2017 , p. 15.

^ "Clugnet, Léon. "St. John Climacus." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 26 March 2015" .

^ Johnsén,Henrik Rydell: Reading John Climacus: Rhetorical Argumentation, Literary Convention and the Tradition of Monastic Formation. Lund University Press, Lund 2007.

^ Duffy, John: Reading John Climacus: Rhetorical Argumentation, Literary Convention and the Tradition of Monastic Formation (review). In: Journal of Early Christian Studies. vol 18, no.1, 2010, pp. 145–146, doi:10.1353/earl.0.0303.

^ An abbot is the head of a monastery; the term is usually used in a Christian situation, but is used sometimes in a Buddhist context.

^ Duffy, John (2010), "Reading John Climacus: Rhetorical Argumentation, Literary Convention and the Tradition of Monastic Formation (review)", Journal of Early Christian Studies , 18 (1): 145– 146, doi : 10.1353/earl.0.0303 , ISSN 1086-3184 , S2CID 170969273 ^ Stroumsa, Guy (2008), "The Scriptural Movement of Late Antiquity and Christian Monasticism", Journal of Early Christian Studies , 16 (1), Johns Hopkins University Press: 61– 77, doi : 10.1353/earl.2008.0011 , ISSN 1086-3184 , S2CID 170261691 ^ cf.

Genesis 28:12 ^ Climacus, John (1 October 1991), The Ladder of Divine Ascent , Holy Transfiguration Monastery, ISBN 978-0-943405-03-2 , retrieved 13 March 2013 Sources [ edit ] Chryssavgis, John (2 March 2017).

John Climacus: From the Egyptian Desert to the Sinaite Mountain . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-92521-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Popova, Tatiana. "The Naming of Food and Drink in the Ladder of John Climacus." Studia Ceranea.

Journal of the Waldemar Ceran Research Centre for the History and Culture of the Mediterranean Area and South-East Europe 11 (2021): 371-386.

External links [ edit ] Media related to John Climacus at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to John Climacus at Wikiquote Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ἰωάννης τῆς Κλίμακος St John Climacus and the Ladder of Divine Ascent Sermon John Climacus: The Ladder of Divine Ascent by Colm Luibheid, John Henebry (Google Books) Excerpts from John Climacus St John Climacus (of the Ladder) Orthodox icon and synaxarion for Fourth Sunday of Great Lent Venerable John Climacus of Sinai, Author of "the Ladder" March 30 feast Pope Benedict XVI General Audience of Febr. 11, 2009 on John Climacus v t e Saints in the Coptic Church Patriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Prophets Moses Job Samuel David Hosea Amos Micah Joel Obadiah Jonah Nahum Noah Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Isaiah Jeremiah Baruch Ezekiel Daniel John the Baptist Theotokos Mary, Our Lady of Assiut Warraq Zeitoun Seven Archangels Michael Gabriel Raphael Suriel Zedekiel Sarathiel Ananiel Apostles Andrew Bartholomew James, son of Alphaeus James, son of Zebedee John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Disciples Apollos Barnabas Mary Magdalene Phoebe the Deaconess Philemon Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Martyrs 21 Martyrs of Libya Abāmūn Abāmūn Abanoub Abaskhiron Alexandrian Martyrs Arianus Apollonia Barbara Bashnouna Basilides and Potamiana Catherine Chrysanthus and Daria Chiaffredo Colluthus Cosmas and Damian Cyprian and Justina Cyrus and John Dasya Demiana Dismas the Good Thief Dorothea Elias and Companions Epimachus Faustus, Abibus and Dionysius Felix and Regula Gabriel Abdel El-Metgaly Gallicanus George George Bishop of Assiut George El Mozahem Gereon Hor, Besoy, and Daydara Holy Innocents Imbaba Martyrs Isaac of Dafra John of Senhout Kosheh Martyrs Malati Marina the Martyr Maspero Martyrs Maurice Memnon Menas Mohrael Moura Nag Hammadi Otimus Philomena Philotheos Rais Sarah Sidhom Bishay Theban Legion Thecla Theoclia Theodora and Didymus Theodore Stratelates Varus Veronica Wadamoun Wanas Church Fathers Clement of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Papias of Hierapolis Justin Martyr Irenaeus Clement of Alexandria Athanasius of Alexandria Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Nazianzus John Chrysostom Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers Ambrose Jerome Augustine of Hippo Aphrahat Ephrem the Syrian Isaac of Antioch Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Pachomius the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Syncletica of Alexandria John Cassian Alexander of Jerusalem Porphyrius of Gaza Alexander I of Alexandria Dionysius of Alexandria Epiphanius of Salamis Nichola of Myra Popes Mark I Anianus Avilius Kedron Justus Eumenes Markianos Celadion Agrippinus Julian Demetrius I Heraclas Dionysius Theonas Felix of Rome Peter I Alexander I Athanasius I Peter II Timothy I Theophilus I Cyril I Dioscorus I Timothy II Peter III Dioscorus II Timothy III Theodosius I Peter IV Damian Anastasius Andronicus Benjamin I Agathon Simeon I Alexander II Theodore I Michael I John IV Mark II James Simeon II Joseph I Michael II Cosmas II Michael III Gabriel I Cosmas III Abraham Zacharias Cyril II Macarius II Matthew I Gabriel VII John XIV Cyril V Macarius III Cyril VI Patriarchs and Bishops Abadiu of Antinoe Abraam of Faiyum Alexander of Jerusalem Amun of Scetis Basil of Caesarea Bar Hebraeus Cyril of Jerusalem Epiphanius of Cyprus Eusebius of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Neocaesarea Ignatius of Antioch Jacob of Nisibis James of Jerusalem John of Nikiû John of Jerusalem Karas of California Mikhaeil of Asyut Narcissus of Jerusalem Nicholas of Myra Paphnutius of Scetis Paphnutius of Thebes Polycarp of Smyrna Porphyrius of Gaza Psote of Ebsay Serapion of Thmuis Severus of Antioch Severian of Gabala Yousab el-Abah of Girga Monks and nuns Abdel Messih El-Makari Abib and Apollo Abraham of Farshut Abraham of Scetis Amun Anthony the Great Awgin Bashnouna Hilarion Horsiesius Hospitius Mother Irini Isaac of Nineveh Isidore of Pelusium John Climacus John the Dwarf Macarius of Alexandria Macarius of Egypt Marina the Monk Moses the Black Nilus of Sinai Pachomius the Great Pambo Parsoma Patapios Paul of Thebes Paul of Tammah Paul the Simple Petronius Pishoy Poemen Samuel the Confessor Sisoes the Great Tekle Haymanot Theodorus of Tabennese Theodora of Alexandria Anchorites Karas Mary Misael Onuphrius Paphnutius Paul Pijimi Shenouda Thomas Zosimas Missionaries Gregory the Illuminator Maurice Nino Frumentius Nine Saints Other saints Ambrose Clement of Alexandria Didymus the Blind Euphrosyne Habib Girgis Candidus Simon the Tanner Three Holy Children Maximus and Domatius Verena Christianity portal Saints portal Portals : Saints Biography Christianity Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Climacus&oldid=1300788110 " Categories : 579 births 649 deaths 6th-century Christian mystics 6th-century Christian saints 7th-century Byzantine writers 7th-century Byzantine monks 7th-century Christian mystics 7th-century Christian saints 7th-century Christian theologians 7th-century Christian abbots Church Fathers Roman Catholic monks Eastern Orthodox monks Hesychasts Patristic mystics Syrian Christian monks Syrian Christian mystics Eastern Orthodox saints Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 11:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Climacus 34 languages Add topic

