Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Modern use 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Masterpiece 45 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Shqip سنڌي کوردی Sunda Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Creation that has been given much critical praise Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Masterwork (disambiguation) , Magnum opus (disambiguation) , and Masterpiece (disambiguation) .

"Opus magnum" redirects here. For the video game, see Opus Magnum (video game) . For the album, see Opus Magnum (album) .

In painting, Leonardo da Vinci 's Mona Lisa ( c.

1503–06) is considered an archetypal masterpiece, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] although it was not produced for admission to a guild or academy.

A masterpiece , magnum opus ( Latin for 'great work'), or chef-d'œuvre ( French for 'master of work'; pl.

chefs-d'œuvre ; French: [ʃɛ.d‿œvʁ] ) is a creation that has been given much critical praise, especially one that is considered the greatest work of a person's career or a work of outstanding creativity , skill, profundity, or workmanship .

Historically, a "masterpiece" was a work of a very high standard produced by an apprentice to obtain full membership, as a "master", of a guild or academy in various areas of the visual arts and crafts.

Etymology [ edit ] The form masterstik is recorded in English or Scots in a set of Aberdeen guild regulations dated to 1579, whereas masterpiece is first found in 1605, already outside a guild context, in a Ben Jonson play.

[ 4 ] Masterprize was another early variant in English.

[ 5 ] Things Fall Apart by Igbo author Chinua Achebe is often considered a literary masterpiece, and one of the greatest works of Nigerian literature .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] In English, the term rapidly became used in a variety of contexts for an exceptionally good piece of creative work, and was "in early use, often applied to man as the 'masterpiece' of God or Nature".

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Masterpiece" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Federico Zuccari , Two Painter's Apprentices , 1609. They would have to produce a masterpiece to become masters at the end of their apprenticeships.

Originally, the term masterpiece referred to a piece of work produced by an apprentice or journeyman aspiring to become a master craftsman in the old European guild system. His fitness to qualify for guild membership was judged partly by the masterpiece, and if he was successful, the piece was retained by the guild. Great care was therefore taken to produce a fine piece in whatever the craft was, whether confectionery, painting, goldsmithing , knifemaking , leatherworking, or many other trades.

In London, in the 17th century, the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths , for instance, required an apprentice to produce a masterpiece under their supervision at a "workhouse" in Goldsmiths' Hall . The workhouse had been set up as part of a tightening of standards after the company became concerned that the level of skill of goldsmithing was being diluted. The wardens of the company had complained in 1607 that the "true practise of the Art & Mystery of Goldsmithry is not only grown into great decays but also dispersed into many parts, so as now very few workmen are able to finish & perfect a piece of plate singularly with all the garnishings & parts thereof without the help of many & several hands...". The same goldsmithing organization still requires the production of a masterpiece but it is no longer produced under supervision.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In Nuremberg , Germany, between 1531 and 1572, apprentices who wished to become master goldsmith were required to produce columbine cups , dies for a steel seal, and gold rings set with precious stones before they could be admitted to the goldsmiths' guild. If they failed to be admitted, then they could continue to work for other goldsmiths but not as a master themselves. In some guilds, apprentices were not allowed to marry until they had obtained full membership.

[ 12 ] In its original meaning, the term was generally restricted to tangible objects, but in some cases, where guilds covered the creators of intangible products, the same system was used. The best-known example today is Richard Wagner 's opera Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg (1868), where much of the plot is concerned with the hero's composition and performance of a "masterpiece" song, to allow him to become a meistersinger in the (non-commercial) Nuremberg guild.  This follows the surviving rulebook of the guild.

The practice of producing a masterpiece has continued in some modern academies of art, where the general term for such works is now reception piece . The Royal Academy in London uses the term " diploma work " and it has acquired a fine collection of diploma works received as a condition of membership.

Modern use [ edit ] In modern use, a masterpiece is a creation in any area of the arts that has been given much critical praise, especially one that is considered the greatest work of a person's career or a work of outstanding creativity, skill, profundity, or workmanship. For example, the novel David Copperfield by Charles Dickens is generally considered a literary masterpiece.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] The term is often used loosely, and some critics, such as Edward Douglas of The Tracking Board , feel it is overused in describing recent films.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Artistic merit Classic Great books Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity Painting the Century: 101 Portrait Masterpieces 1900–2000 Virtual Collection of Asian Masterpieces Western canon References [ edit ] ^ "The Theft That Made Mona Lisa a Masterpiece" .

NPR . July 30, 2011 . Retrieved February 15, 2019 .

^ "Why Mona Lisa Became An Icon" . 21 September 2001.

^ Lichfield, John (April 2, 2005).

"The Moving of the Mona Lisa" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 2022-05-12.

the best known, the most visited, the most written about, the most sung about, the most parodied work of art in the world ^ OED :"Masterpiece". See also: Encarta .

Archived 2009-11-01.

^ OED :"Masterprize" ^ "Things Fall Apart by Chinua Achebe: 9780385474542 | PenguinRandomHouse.com: Books" .

PenguinRandomhouse.com . Retrieved 2023-09-11 .

^ Obioma, Chigozie (2022-10-05).

"Top 10 books about Nigeria" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2023-09-11 .

^ Hardison, Erika (2022-04-25).

"15 Of The Best Nigerian Books By Nigerian Authors" .

BOOK RIOT . Retrieved 2023-09-11 .

^ OED , and examples ^ A History of the Goldsmiths' Company.

The Goldsmiths' Company. Retrieved 30 December 2014.

^ Goldsmiths' Company Apprenticeship Programme.

Archived 2014-12-30 at archive.today The Goldsmiths' Centre. Retrieved 30 December 2014.

^ Cup, Silver, room 69, case 25.

Victoria & Albert Museum. Retrieved 30 December 2014.

^ Forster, John (1976).

"VII" .

Life of Charles Dickens . London: Everyman's Library. p.

6 .

ISBN 0460007823 .

^ "John Forster, The Life of Charles Dickens" .

Classic Literature . Retrieved 26 June 2012 .

^ Monod, Sylvère (1968).

Dickens the Novelist . University of Oklahoma Press.

ISBN 978-0806107684 .

^ "Can We Please Stop Overusing the Word "Masterpiece"? (Opinion)" . February 17, 2018.

External links [ edit ] Look up masterpiece in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Masterpieces at the Louvre.

Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Masterpiece&oldid=1301471320 " Categories : Aesthetics Guilds Semiotics Visual arts Visual arts terminology Western art Works of art Hidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Pages with French IPA Articles needing additional references from September 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 01:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Masterpiece 45 languages Add topic

