Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Death 4 Chronology of the most important events of life and career 5 Major themes of research Toggle Major themes of research subsection 5.1 Cultural-historical theory 5.2 Cultural mediation and internalization 5.3 Zone of proximal development 5.3.1 Scaffolding 5.3.2 Importance of play 5.4 Thinking and Speech 6 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 6.1 Soviet Union 6.2 United States 7 Works 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Lev Vygotsky 71 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Piemontèis Tok Pisin Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Soviet psychologist (1896–1934) In this name that follows East Slavic naming customs , the patronymic is Semyonovich and the family name is Vygotsky .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lev Vygotsky" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lev Vygotsky Лев Выготский Born Lev Simkhovich  Vygotsky November 17 [ O.S.

November 5] 1896 Orsha , Mogilev Governorate , Russian Empire (now Belarus) Died June 11, 1934 (1934-06-11) (aged 37) Moscow, Russian SFSR , Soviet Union Alma mater Imperial Moscow University Shanyavsky Moscow City People's University Known for Cultural-historical psychology , zone of proximal development , inner speech Spouse Roza Smekhova ​ ( m.

1924) ​ Scientific career Fields Psychology Institutions Moscow State University Thesis The Psychology of Art (1925) Notable students Alexander Luria Lev Semyonovich Vygotsky ( Russian : Лев Семёнович Выготский , IPA: [vɨˈɡotskʲɪj] ; Belarusian : Леў Сямёнавіч Выгоцкі ; November 17 [ O.S.

November 5] 1896 – June 11, 1934) was a Russian and Soviet psychologist, best known for his work on psychological development in children and creating the framework known as cultural-historical activity theory . After his early death, his books and research were banned in the Soviet Union until Joseph Stalin 's death in 1953, with a first collection of major texts published in 1956.

His major ideas include: The social origin of mind : Vygotsky believed that human mental and cognitive abilities are not biologically determined, but instead created and shaped by use of language and tools in the process of interacting and constructing the cultural and social environment.

[ 1 ] The importance of mediation : He saw mediation as the key to human development, because it leads to the use of cultural tools and becomes a pathway for psychological development through the process of interiorization.

The zone of proximal development : Vygotsky introduced the concept, which refers to the gap between a child's current level of development and the level they are capable of reaching with tools provided by others with more knowledge.

The significance of play : Vygotsky viewed play as a crucial aspect of children's development, as he thought of it as the best sandbox to build and develop the practice of mediation.

Early life and education [ edit ] Lev Simkhovich Vygodsky (his patronymic was later changed to Semyonovich and his surname to Vygotsky for unclear reasons) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] was born on November 17, 1896, [ 4 ] in the town of Orsha in Mogilev Governorate of the Russian Empire (now Belarus ) into a non-religious middle-class Jewish family [ 5 ] of Simkha Leibovich (also known as Semyon Lvovich), a banker, and Tsetsilia Moiseevna.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Vygotsky was raised in the city of Gomel , [ 8 ] where he was home-schooled until 1911 and then obtained a formal degree with distinction in a private Jewish gymnasium, which allowed him entrance to a university. In 1913, Vygotsky was admitted to the Moscow University by mere ballot through a " Jewish Lottery "; at the time, a three percent Jewish student quota was administered for entry in Moscow and Saint Petersburg Universities. He had an interest in the humanities and social sciences, but at the insistence of his parents he applied to the medical school at Moscow University. During the first semester of study, he transferred to the law school. In parallel, he attended lectures at Shanyavsky Moscow City People's University .

[ 9 ] Vygotsky's early interests were in the arts and, primarily, in the topics of the history of the Jewish people, the tradition, culture and Jewish identity.

Career [ edit ] In January 1924, Vygotsky took part in the Second All-Russian Psychoneurological Congress in Petrograd (soon thereafter renamed Leningrad ). After the Congress, Vygotsky met with Alexander Luria and with his help received an invitation to become a research fellow at the Psychological Institute in Moscow which was under the direction of Konstantin Kornilov . Vygotsky moved to Moscow with his new wife, Roza Smekhova , with whom he would have two children.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] He began his career at the Psychological Institute as a "staff scientist, second class".

[ 12 ] He also became a secondary school teacher, covering a period marked by his interest in the processes of learning and the role of language in learning.

[ 13 ] By the end of 1925, Vygotsky completed his dissertation, "The Psychology of Art," which was not published until the 1960s, and a book, "Pedagogical Psychology," which apparently drew on lecture notes he prepared in Gomel while he was a psychology instructor at local educational establishments. In the summer of 1925, he made his first and only trip abroad to a London congress on the education of the deaf.

[ 14 ] Upon return to the Soviet Union, he was hospitalized due to tuberculosis and would remain an invalid and out of work until the end of 1926.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] His dissertation was accepted as the prerequisite of a scholarly degree, which was awarded to Vygotsky in autumn 1925 in absentia .

After his release from the hospital, Vygotsky did theoretical and methodological work on the crisis in psychology, but never finished the draft of the manuscript and interrupted his work on it around mid-1927. The manuscript was published later with notable editorial interventions and distortions in 1982 and was presented by the editors as one of the most important of Vygotsky's works.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] In this early manuscript, Vygotsky argued for the formation of a general psychology that could unite the naturalist objectivist strands of psychological science with the more philosophical approaches of Marxist orientation. However, he also harshly criticized those of his colleagues who attempted to build a " Marxist Psychology" as an alternative to the naturalist and philosophical schools. He argued that if one wanted to build a truly Marxist psychology, there were no shortcuts to be found by merely looking for applicable quotes in the writings of Marx . Rather, one should look for a methodology that was in accordance with the Marxian spirit.

[ 22 ] From 1926 to 1930, Vygotsky worked on a research program investigating the development of higher psychological functions, i.e. culturally-governed lower psychological functions such as voluntary attention, selective memory, object-oriented action, and decision making. During this period, he gathered a group of collaborators including Alexander Luria , Boris Varshava , Alexei Leontiev , Leonid Zankov , and several others. Vygotsky guided his students in researching this phenomenon from three different perspectives: The instrumental approach, which aimed to understand the ways humans use objects as mediation aids in memory and reasoning.

A developmental approach, focused on how children acquire higher cognitive functions during development A culture-historical approach, studying how social and cultural patterns of interaction shape forms of mediation and developmental trajectories [ 22 ] Death [ edit ] Vygotsky died of a relapse of tuberculosis on June 11, 1934, at the age of 37, in Moscow. One of Vygotsky's last private notebook entries was: This is the final thing I have done in psychology – and I will like Moses , die at the summit, having glimpsed the promised land but without setting foot on it. Farewell, dear creations. The rest is silence.

[ 23 ] Chronology of the most important events of life and career [ edit ] 1922–24 – worked in the psychological laboratory which he organized in Gomel Pedagogical College; January 1924 – meeting Luria at the II Psychoneurological Congress in Petrograd, moving from Gomel to Moscow, enrolling in graduate school and taking position at the State Institute of Experimental Psychology in Moscow; July 1924 – the beginning of work as the head of the sub-department of the education of physically and intellectually disabled children in the department of social and legal protection of minors (SPON); November 1924 – during II Congress of the Social and Legal Protection of Minors in Moscow, a turn of Soviet defectology to social education was officially announced and collection of articles and materials edited by Vygotsky "Issues of the upbringing of blind, deaf and mentally retarded children" was published; May 9, 1925 – the birth of the first child: the daughter Gita Summer of 1925 – the only trip abroad: went to London for a defectology conference; on the way passed through Germany, where he met with German psychologists November 5, 1925 – Vygotsky, in absence (due to illness), was awarded the title of senior researcher, equivalent to the modern degree of candidate of sciences for defense of the dissertation "Psychology of Art." The contract for the publication of The Psychology of Art was signed on November 9, 1925, but the text was published only in 1965; November 21, 1925 to May 22, 1926 – hospitalization in the Zakharyino sanatorium-type hospital due to tuberculosis; upon discharge qualified as a disabled person until the end of the year; 1926 – Vygotsky's first book, Pedagogical Psychology, was published; writes notes and essays that would be published years later under the title "The Historical Meaning of the Psychological Crisis"; 1927 – resumes work at the RANION Institute of Experimental Psychology and in a number of other institutions in Moscow and Leningrad; September 17, 1927 – approved as a professor by the scientific and pedagogical section of the State Academic Council (SUS); December 19, 1927 – appointed as the head of the Medical and Pedagogical Station of the Glavsotsvos of the People's Commissariat of Education of the RSFSR, remained in this position until October 1928 (dismissed on his own will); December 28, 1927 to January 4, 1928 – First All-Russian Pedological Congress, Moscow: Vygotsky works as co-editor of the section on difficult childhood, and also presents two reports: "The development of a difficult child and its study" and "Instrumental method in pedology"; these two articles together with Zankov's report "Principles for the construction of complex programs of an auxiliary school from a pedological point of view" and Luria "On the methodology of instrumental-psychological research" become the first public presentation of "Instrumental Psychology" as a research method associated with the names of Vygotsky and Luria; 1928 – Vygotsky's second book "Pedology of School Age" was published, along with a number of articles establishing "Instrumental Psychology" approach in Russian and English language journals; December 1928 – after a conflict with the director of the Institute of Experimental Psychology (GIEP) K. N. Kornilov, the research activities of the Vygotsky-Luria group were curtailed in this organization, and experimental research was transferred to the Academy of Communications.

1929 – freelance scientific consultant, head of psychological laboratories at the Experimental Defectological Institute (transformed Medical-pedagogical station) Major themes of research [ edit ] Vygotsky was a pioneering psychologist with interests in extremely diverse fields: his work covered topics such as the origin and the psychology of art , development of higher mental functions , philosophy of science and the methodology of psychological research , the relation between learning and human development , concept formation, interrelation between language and thought development, play as a psychological phenomenon, learning disabilities , and abnormal human development (or defectology ). His philosophical framework includes interpretations of the cognitive role of mediation tools, as well as the re-interpretation of well-known concepts in psychology such as internalization of knowledge. Vygotsky introduced the notion of zone of proximal development , a metaphor capable of describing the potential of human cognitive development.

His most important and widely-known contribution is his theory for the development of "higher psychological functions," which emerge through unification of interpersonal connections and actions taken within a given sociocultural environment (i.e. language, culture, society, and tool use). It was during this period that he identified the play of young children as their "leading activity," which he understood as the main source of preschoolers' psychological development and he viewed as an expression of an inseparable unity of emotional, volitional, and cognitive development.

Vygotsky never met Jean Piaget but had read a number of his works and agreed on some of his perspectives on learning.

[ 24 ] At some point (around 1929–1930), Vygotsky came to disagree with Piaget's understanding of learning and development and held a different theoretical position from Piaget on the topic of inner speech. Piaget thought that egocentric speech follows from inner speech and "dissolved away" as children matured, but Vygotsky showed that egocentric speech became inner speech, which was then called "thoughts." [ 25 ] Piaget read Vygotsky's work only after his death and openly praised him for his discovery of the social origin of children's thoughts, reasoning, and moral judgements.

[ citation needed ] Cultural-historical theory [ edit ] The hypothesis put forward by Vygotsky was a paradigm shift in psychology. He was the first to propose that all psychological functions that govern mental, cognitive, and physical actions of the individual are not immutable but have a history of cultural development (in human history and in everyone personally) through interiorization of cultural tools. Therefore, the process of transformation that is happening when current cultural tools are interiorized becomes the focus of psychological research: Formerly, it was assumed that the function exists in the individual in a ready, semi-ready, or rudimentary form and in the group it unfolds, becomes complex, advances, is enriched, or, conversely, is inhibited, suppressed, etc. At present, we have a basis for assuming that in relation to higher mental functions, the matter must be presented as being quite the opposite. Functions initially are formed in the group in the form of relations of the children, then they become mental functions of the individual. Specifically, formerly it was thought that every child was capable of reflection reaching conclusions, proving, finding bases for whatever position. From the collision of such reflections, argument was generated. But the matter is actually something else. Studies show that reflection is generated from argument. The study of all other mental functions brings us to the same conclusion.

[ 26 ] Vygotsky posited the existence of lower and higher mental functions. The latter have social origins and complex system structure, mediated by cultural tools and controlled by an individual. Vygotsky came to the conclusion that consciousness is possible because of the mediated nature of higher psychological functions. Between the stimulus and the reaction of a person (both behavioral and mental), an additional connection arises through a mediating link: a stimulus-means or a sign. Signs are tools that mediate higher psychological functions and control one's own behavior. A word could direct attention, create personal meaning, form a concept, and coordinate.

Vygotsky illustrated his idea of mediation via Buridan's ass paradox. A problematic situation of choosing between two equal possibilities interested Vygotsky primarily from the point of view of solving it through a coin flip, redelegating decision to the outside object, an example of using cultural tools to govern one's own psychological function of volition.

While developing a method for studying higher psychological functions, Vygotsky was guided by the principle of ex ungue leonem and additionally analyzed phenomena such as using a knot in the handkerchief for remembering and finger counting.

Cultural mediation and internalization [ edit ] Vygotsky studied child development and the significant roles of cultural mediation and interpersonal communication . He observed how higher mental functions developed through these interactions, and also represented the shared knowledge of a culture. This process is known as internalization .

Internalization may be understood in one respect as "knowing how". For example, the practices of riding a bicycle or pouring a cup of milk, initially, are outside and beyond the child. The mastery of the skills needed for performing these practices occurs through the activity of the child within society. A further aspect of internalization is appropriation , in which children take tools and adapt them to personal use, perhaps using them in unique ways. Internalizing the use of a pencil allows the child to use it very much for personal ends rather than drawing exactly what others in society have drawn previously: The child acts and speaks at the same time, both are intertwined in one continuous operation for him. In this way, a blend of speech and action arises, a peculiar mixture from an adult's point of view, but a completely natural state for the child, who from the very first days of life, due to his helplessness, finds himself in conditions where the path from him to things and from things to him goes through another person.

[ 27 ] Zone of proximal development [ edit ] The " zone of proximal development " (ZPD) is a term that Vygotsky used to characterize an individual's mental development. He originally defined the ZPD as "the distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers." He used the example of two children in school who originally could solve problems at an eight-year-old developmental level (that is, typical for children who were age 8). After each child received assistance from an adult, one was able to perform at a nine-year-old level and one was able to perform at a twelve-year-old level. He said, "This difference between twelve and eight, or between nine and eight, is what we call the zone of proximal development.

" He further said that the ZPD "defines those functions that have not yet matured but are in the process of maturation, functions that will mature tomorrow but are currently in an embryonic state." The zone is bracketed by the learner's current ability and the ability they can achieve with the aid of an instructor of some capacity.

[ 28 ] The ZPD multidimensional model states that the ideas of the zone of proximal development can be applied to development in other areas of life such as personality development.

[ 29 ] Scaffolding [ edit ] According to Vygotsky, through the assistance of a more knowledgeable other, a child is able to learn skills or aspects of a skill that go beyond their actual developmental or maturational level. This assistance is defined as 'scaffolding'. The lower limit of the ZPD is the level of skill reached by the child working independently (also referred to as the child's developmental level). The upper limit is the level of potential skill that the child is able to reach with the assistance of a more capable instructor. In this sense, the ZPD provides a prospective view of cognitive development, as opposed to a retrospective view that characterizes development in terms of a child's independent capabilities. The advancement through and the attainment of the upper limit of the ZPD are limited by the instructional and scaffolding-related capabilities of the more knowledgeable other (MKO). The MKO is typically assumed to be an older, more experienced teacher or parent but often can be a learner's peer or someone their junior. The MKO need not even be a person but can be a machine or book or other source of visual and/or audio input.

[ 30 ] Another significant property of the ZPD and scaffolding is reciprocal teaching during which the child and the instructor have an open dialogue with each other for the child to create new opportunities to acquire new information and ideas.

[ 1 ] Importance of play [ edit ] Play is crucial to the social cognitive development of children and, according to Vygotsky, causes the ZPD to be the most effective. He thought that if he could define the features of play he could gain insight into its role in development. Vygotsky focused on the symbolism of play to describe how play shapes development. There were two important aspects that Vygotsky focused on.

All representational play creates an imaginary situation that permits the child to grapple with unreasonable desires. This aspect helps the child develop a sense of delayed gratification.

All representational play also it contains rules for behavior that children must follow to successfully act out the play scene. This aspect of play helps children to develop their understanding of social rules, as even the simplest play is based in rules. This expresses the understanding of rules in children. Imaginary play, in particular, develops the ability in children to process external and internal stimuli. Imagination helps children to differentiate real and imaginary objects, a task that must be practiced.

Overall, play is important in children because of the social rules that they must follow.

[ 31 ] Thinking and Speech [ edit ] In the last years of his life, Vygotsky paid most of his attention to the study of the relationship between thought and word in the structure of consciousness. The problem was explored in Vygotsky's book, Thinking and Speech , which was published posthumously in 1934.

[ 32 ] The book was a collection of essays and scholarly papers that Vygotsky wrote during different periods of his thought development. It was edited by his closest associates: Kolbanovskii, Zankov, and Shif.

The book established the connection between speech and the development of mental concepts and awareness. Vygotsky described silent inner speech as being qualitatively different from verbal external speech but as both being equally important. Vygotsky believed inner speech developed from external speech via a gradual process of "internalization" (i.e., transition from the external to the internal), with younger children really able only to "think out loud." He claimed that in its mature form, inner speech would not resemble spoken language as we know it (in particular, being greatly compressed). Hence, thought itself developed socially.

Inner speech, according to Vygotsky, develops through the accumulation of long-term functional and structural changes. It branches off from the child's external speech along with the differentiation of the social and egocentric functions of speech, and, finally, the speech functions acquired by the child become the main functions of his thinking.

In this work, Vygotsky points out the genesis of the development of thinking and speech and that the relationship between them is not a constant value.

But since we wanted to express all this in one short formula, in one sentence, we might put it thus: if at the beginning of development there stands the act, independent of the word, then at the end of it there stands the word which becomes the act, the word which makes man's action free.

[ 33 ] Legacy [ edit ] Soviet Union [ edit ] After Vygotsky's early death, his books and research were banned [ why?

] until Joseph Stalin 's death in 1953, with a first collection of major texts published in 1956. A small group of his collaborators and students were able to continue his lines of thought in research.

[ 34 ] The members of the group laid a foundation for the systematic development of Vygotskian psychology in such diverse fields as the psychology of memory ( P. Zinchenko ), perception, sensation, and movement ( Zaporozhets , Asnin , A. N. Leont'ev ), personality ( Lidiya Bozhovich , Asnin , A. N. Leont'ev ), will and volition ( Zaporozhets , A. N. Leont'ev , P. Zinchenko , L. Bozhovich, Asnin ), psychology of play ( G. D. Lukov , Daniil El'konin ) and psychology of learning ( P. Zinchenko , L. Bozhovich, D. El'konin), as well as the theory of step-by-step formation of mental actions (Pyotr Gal'perin), general psychological activity theory ( A. N. Leont'ev ) and psychology of action ( Zaporozhets ).

[ 34 ] Andrey Puzyrey elaborated the ideas of Vygotsky in respect of psychotherapy and even in the broader context of deliberate psychological intervention (psychotechnique), in general.

[ 35 ] United States [ edit ] Only a couple of Vygotsky's texts were published in English before the translation of Thinking and Speech in 1962. Since then, the majority of his texts have been translated, and his ideas have become influential in some modern educational approaches.

[ 36 ] The first proponents of Vygotsky in the USA were Michael Cole [ 37 ] and James Wertsch . Today, an umbrella term for theoretical framework based on Vygotsky's ideas is " Cultural-historical activity theory " (aka CHAT) or " Activity theory ." Works [ edit ] Consciousness as a problem in the Psychology of Behavior , 1925 Educational Psychology , 1926 Historical meaning of the crisis in Psychology , unfinished and aborted in 1927 The Problem of the Cultural Development of the Child , 1929 The Fundamental Problems of Defectology , 1929 The Socialist alteration of Man , 1930 Ape, Primitive Man, and Child: Essays in the History of Behaviour , A. R. Luria and L. S. Vygotsky, 1930 Tool and symbol in child development , c.

1930 Paedology of the Adolescent , 1929–1931 Play and its role in the Mental development of the Child , oral presentation 1933 Thinking and Speech , 1934 The Psychology of Art , 1971 (English translation by MIT Press) Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological Processes , 1978 (Harvard University Press) The Collected Works of L. S. Vygotsky , 1987 See also [ edit ] Cognitivism (learning theory) Cultural-Historical Activity Theory (CHAT) Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition (LCHC) Leading Activity Organization Workshop PsyAnima, Dubna Psychological Journal Social constructivism Vygotsky Circle References [ edit ] ^ a b Pedapati, Kruthi (August 1, 2022).

"Piagetian and Vygotskian Concepts of Cognitive Development: A Review" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of Mental Health .

9 (3).

doi : 10.30877/IJMH.9.3.2022.227-239 .

^ Valsiner, Jaan (December 15, 2013).

The Oxford Handbook of Culture and Psychology . Oxford University Press. p. 67.

ISBN 978-0-19-936622-4 .

^ Pickren, Wade E.; Dewsbury, Donald A.; Wertheimer, Michael (2012).

Portraits of Pioneers in Developmental Psychology . Psychology Press. p. 114.

ISBN 978-1-84872-896-7 .

^ Rieber, Robert W.; Robinson, David K. (March 20, 2013).

The Essential Vygotsky . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-0-387-30600-1 .

^ Pound, L. (2019).

How Children Learn (New ed.). London: Andrews UK Limited. p. 51.

ISBN 978-1-909280-73-1 .

^ Thomas, Margaret (April 27, 2012).

Fifty Key Thinkers on Language and Linguistics . Routledge. p. 185.

ISBN 978-1-136-70750-6 .

^ Yasnitsky, Anton (June 14, 2018).

Vygotsky: An Intellectual Biography . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-61534-7 .

^ Smet, Brecht De (January 27, 2015).

A Dialectical Pedagogy of Revolt: Gramsci, Vygotsky, and the Egyptian Revolution . BRILL. p. 13.

ISBN 978-90-04-26266-9 .

^ Pass, Susan (November 1, 2004).

Parallel Paths to Constructivism: Jean Piaget and Lev Vygotsky . IAP. pp.

40– 41.

ISBN 978-1-60752-928-6 .

^ Gonzalez-DeHass, Alyssa R.; Willems, Patricia P. (2013).

Theories in Educational Psychology: Concise Guide to Meaning and Practice . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 64.

ISBN 978-1-4758-0231-3 .

^ Green, Michael G.; Piel, John A. (July 14, 2015).

Theories of Human Development: A Comparative Approach . Psychology Press. p. 258.

ISBN 978-1-317-34319-6 .

^ Van der Veer, R., & Valsiner, J. (1991).

Understanding Vygotsky. A quest for synthesis . Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

^ Nutbrown, Cathy; Clough, Peter; Selbie, Philip (2008).

Early Childhood Education: History, Philosophy and Experience . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. p. 57.

ISBN 978-1-4129-4497-7 .

^ van der Veer, R. & Zavershneva, E. (2011). To Moscow with Love: Partial Reconstruction of Vygotsky's Trip to London.

Integrative Psychological and Behavioral Science 45(4), 458–474: PDF , pdf ^ Завершнева Е.Ю. «Ключ к психологии человека»: комментарии к блокноту Л.С. Выготского из больницы «Захарьино» (1926 г.) // Вопр. психол. 2009. No.3. С. 123—141.

^ Zavershneva, E. "The Key to Human Psychology". Commentary on L.S. Vygotsky's Notebook from the Zakharino Hospital (1926).

Journal of Russian and East European Psychology 50(4), July–August 2012.

^ Zavershneva, E. 2009. Issledovanie rukopisi L.S. Vygotskogo "Istoricheskii smysl psikhologicheskogo krizisa" [Investigation of the original of Vygotsky's manuscript "Historical meaning of crisis in psychology"]. Voprosy psikhologii (6):119-137.

^ Завершнева Е.Ю. Исследование рукописи Л.С. Выготского "Исторический смысл психологического кризиса" // Вопросы психологии, 2009. No.6, с. 119 - 138.

^ Zavershneva, E. Investigating the Manuscript of L.S. Vygotsky's "The Historical Meaning of the Crisis in Psychology".

Journal of Russian and East European Psychology , 50(4), July–August 2012.

^ Завершнева Е.Ю., Осипов М.Е. Основные поправки к тексту «Исторический смысл психологического кризиса», опубликованному в 1982 г. в собрании сочинений Л.С. Выготского // Вопросы психологии, 2010. No.1. С. 92—103.

^ E. Iu. Zavershneva and M. E. Osipov. Primary Changes to the Version of "The Historical Meaning of the Crisis in Psychology" Published in the Collected Works of L. S. Vygotsky.

Journal of Russian and East European Psychology , vol. 50(4), July–August 2012.

^ a b Kozulin, Alex. 1986. "Vygotsky in Context" in Vygotsky L. "Thought and Language", MIT Press. pp. xi - lvii ^ Zavershneva E. Vygotsky's Notebooks, Springer 2018.

^ Hassard, Jack; Dias, Michael (2013).

The Art of Teaching Science: Inquiry and Innovation in Middle School and High School . Oxon: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-88999-9 .

^ Vygotsky, L. S. & Luria, A., (1930) Tool and symbol in child development marxists.org ^ Vygotsky L., Genesis of Higher Mental Functions ^ Vygotsky L. (1930) About connection between labor activity and child's intellectual development ^ Kurt, Dr Serhat (October 22, 2022).

"Vygotsky's Theories and How to Incorporate Vygotsky's Theories in The Classroom" .

Education Library . Retrieved October 23, 2022 .

^ Zaretsky, V. K. (2021).

"One More Time on the Zone of Proximal Development" .

Cultural-Historical Psychology .

17 (2): 37– 49.

doi : 10.17759/chp.2021170204 .

ISSN 1816-5435 .

^ McLeod, Saul (August 5, 2019).

"Vygotsky | Simply Psychology" . Archived from the original on August 5, 2019 . Retrieved September 1, 2020 .

^ Berk, Laura E. (1994).

"Vygotsky's Theory: The Importance of Make-Believe Play" .

Young Children .

50 (1): 30– 38.

ISSN 0044-0728 .

JSTOR 42728322 .

^ L. S. Vygotsky (1934).

"Thinking and Speech" (PDF) . marxists.org . Retrieved January 9, 2024 .

^ Vygotsky L., Luria A.

Tool and symbol in child development ^ a b Kozulin, A. (1986). "The concept of activity in Soviet psychology: Vygotsky, his disciples and critics".

American Psychologist .

41 (3): 264– 274.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.41.3.264 .

^ Vassilieva, J. (2010). "Russian psychology at the turn of the 21st century and post-Soviet reforms in the humanities disciplines".

History of Psychology .

13 (2): 138– 159.

doi : 10.1037/a0019270 .

PMID 20533768 .

^ Marginson S. and all Vygotsky's sociocultural theory in the context of globalization ^ Cole, M.

Reading Vygotsky Further reading [ edit ] Wertsch J. V. (1985).

Vygotsky and the social formation of mind . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Yaroshevsky M. (1989) Lev Vygotsky . Progress, Moscow Kozulin A. (1990).

Vygotsky's Psychology: A Biography of Ideas . Cambridge, Harvard University Press.

Van der Veer R. & Valsiner J. (1991).

Understanding Vygotsky. A quest for synthesis . Oxford, Basil Blackwell.

Holzman L. (1993) Lev Vygotsky: Revolutionary Scientist . Routledge Van der Veer, R. & Valsiner, J. eds (1994).

The Vygotsky Reader . Oxford, Blackwell.

Vygodskaya, G. L., & Lifanova, T. M. (1996). Lev Semyonovich Vygotsky: Zhizn', deyatel'nost', shtrikhi k portretu. Moscow: Smysl. Translated in Vygodskaya, G. L., & Lifanova, T. M. Lev Semenovich Vygotsky, Journal of Russian and East European Psychology, volume 37.

Van der Veer R. (2007).

Lev Vygotsky . Continuum Books.

Daniels, H., Wertsch, J. & Cole, M. (Eds.) (2007).

The Cambridge Companion to Vygotsky .

Dafermos, M. (2018).

Rethinking Cultural-Historical Theory . Singapore, Springer.

Zavershneva, E., & Van der Veer, R. (2018).

Vygotsky's notebooks: A selection . Singapore, Springer.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Lev Vygotsky Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Lev Vygotsky Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Media related to Lev Vygotsky at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Lev Vygotsky at Wikiquote Lev Vygotsky archive, marxists.org : all major works Annotated bibliography of scholarly histories on Vygotsky , Advances in the History of Psychology, York University Importance of Play [ 1 ] v t e Human psychological development Developmental psychology Antenatal Cognitive development of infants Child development Positive youth development Young adult Adult development Positive adult development Maturity Theorists and theories Freud (1856–1939) ( Psychosexual development ) Piaget (1896–1980) ( Theory of cognitive development ) Vygotsky (1896–1934) ( Cultural-historical psychology ) Erikson (1902–1994) ( Psychosocial development ) Bowlby (1907–1990) ( Attachment theory ) Bronfenbrenner (1917–2005) ( Ecological systems theory ) Kohlberg (1927–1987) ( Stages of moral development ) Commons (b. 1939), Fischer (1943–2020), Kegan (b. 1946), Demetriou (b. 1950), and others ( Neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development ) Evolutionary developmental psychology v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of education Philosophers Dewey Freire Fröbel Herbart Humboldt Locke Montessori Pestalozzi Piaget Rousseau Steiner Vygotsky more...

Concepts Active learning Student-centred learning What to teach Classicism Contemplative education Critical pedagogy Critical theory Critical thinking Democratic education Educational essentialism Educational existentialism Educational perennialism Idealism Popular education Pragmatism Progressive education Realism Social reconstructionism Theism How and whom to teach Behaviorism Cognitivism Compulsory education Constructivism Criticism of schooling Humanism Montessori education Unschooling Waldorf education Related Cognitive science Psychology Category Discussion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX ^ Cite error: The named reference auto was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fvbq7
Cached time: 20250817044526
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.748 seconds
Real time usage: 0.950 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6028/1000000
Revision size: 41418/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 131360/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10599/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 118865/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.473/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21971725/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  866.164      1 -total
 22.91%  198.400      1 Template:Reflist
 18.09%  156.687      1 Template:Infobox_scientist
 10.95%   94.826      5 Template:Cite_journal
  9.56%   82.824      3 Template:Navbox
  9.18%   79.498      2 Template:Langx
  7.83%   67.826      1 Template:Human_psychological_development
  7.40%   64.087     12 Template:Cite_book
  6.55%   56.748      1 Template:Short_description
  5.82%   50.437      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:95176:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044526 and revision id 1300338826. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lev_Vygotsky&oldid=1300338826 " Categories : 1896 births 1934 deaths People from Orsha People from Orshansky Uyezd Belarusian Jews Soviet Jews 20th-century Belarusian scientists Cognitive scientists Cognitive psychologists Communication theorists Constructivism (psychological school) Developmental psychologists Educational psychologists Literacy and society theorists Philosophers of education Soviet psychologists Soviet scientists Spinoza scholars Spinozists Jewish Russian scientists Jewish philosophers Systems psychologists Moscow State University alumni 20th-century deaths from tuberculosis Academic staff of Moscow State University Imperial Moscow University alumni Tuberculosis deaths in the Soviet Union Tuberculosis deaths in Russia Russian scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from November 2022 Articles with hCards Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA Articles containing Belarusian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages with reference errors Pages with broken reference names This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 19:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lev Vygotsky 71 languages Add topic

