Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 By region Toggle By region subsection 2.1 Australia 2.2 Asia and Middle East 2.2.1 Iran 2.2.2 Pakistan 2.2.3 Tajikistan 2.2.4 Turkey 2.2.5 South Korea 2.3 European countries 2.3.1 Austria 2.3.2 Finland 2.3.3 Germany 2.3.4 Greece 2.3.5 Italy 2.3.6 United Kingdom 2.4 North America 2.4.1 United States of America 3 Cultural criticism 4 Ethnic sentiments 5 Anti-afghan slurs 6 Anti-Afghan slogans Toggle Anti-Afghan slogans subsection 6.1 Go Afghani go!

7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Afghan sentiment Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prejudice towards the country of Afghanistan or Afghan people Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Afghan sentiment is the dislike, hatred, fear, prejudice, resentment, discrimination against and/or any other form of negative sentiment towards Afghan people and/or negative sentiments towards the country of Afghanistan or anything associated with it.

The sentiment dates back at least two centuries and has seen a rise in the past few decades across the world with the increase of Afghan migrants, refugees and issues relating to unlawful acts, ranging from minor offenses to more severe ones such as terrorism, sexual violations, drug trafficking, kidnappings and other forms of international crime that have connections to Afghanistan or Afghan people.

Such issues have only fueled these bad cultural/national stereotypes.

History [ edit ] This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( April 2023 ) By region [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] See also: Afghan cameleers in Australia This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2023 ) Prejudice towards Afghan people in Australia was first known to be recorded in the 1800s when Afghan migrants first arrived as camel riders in Australia.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] An anti-Afghan league was even formed in 1886.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Asia and Middle East [ edit ] Iran [ edit ] See also: Drowning of Afghan refugees in the Hari River Afghan refugees and migrants have lived for decades in Iran. However, the crimes associated with Afghans have led to an increase in anti-Afghan sentiment amongst local Iranian citizens and authorities alike.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Further information: Afghanistan–Pakistan relations , Durand Line , Afghanistan–Pakistan border skirmishes , and Afghans in Pakistan See also: Deportation of undocumented Afghans from Pakistan Anti-Afghan sentiment has been reported amongst locals in Pakistan, including public demonstrations with anti-Afghan slogans, resulting from the crime associated with Afghan residents in Pakistan.

[ 9 ] The past few decades have only seen a rise in this sentiment from Pakistanis.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] American scholars, Gortenstien and Vessafi argued in their paper that Afghan enmity towards Pakistan goes back to the country's independence in 1947 which was met by repeated hostility from the Afghan side, including cross border attacks and attempting to fuel internal strife in Pakistan. This included supporting and encouraging anti-state elements within Pakistan's borders. After a period of approximately thirty years of Afghan hostility, the Pakistani intelligence under Zulfikar Ali Bhutto 's authorization began supporting violent Islamist uprisings in Afghanistan in retaliation to three decades of Afghan interference in Pakistan. The Islamist Jihadists groups appeared prior to Pakistan's support and were devoted to destroying communist rule in Afghanistan. These jihadist uprisings, later backed by Pakistan and even later by America and its allies, resulted in a full-scale civil war erupting in Afghanistan. This all stems from Afghanistan's refusal to accept the Durrand Line.

[ 12 ] In 2011 in the Pakistani province of KhyberPakhtunkhwa (KP), a local Pashtun father led a demonstration against Afghan residents, alleging they had attacked his sons with steel rods, and later even stalked them to hospital where they went to be treated for injuries. Reacting to one of such incidents, local KP resident, Muhammed Akber, stated "We are Pashtun, but we are Pakistani, not Afghan. The Afghans should go back!" [ 13 ] By late 2023, the Pakistani government began a massive campaign to deport Afghans living in the country; especially the ones with no legal status. The Pakistani government claimed they pose a security threat to the country, alleging them to be the cause of several major terror attacks and narcotics trafficking [ 14 ] as well as are a burden on the country's diminishing resources.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] In 2024, a mob of Afghans attacked the Pakistani consulate in Frankfurt, Germany. They entered the consulate's premise and hurled stones at the building and took down the Pakistani flag, attempting to burn it. The incident drew strong condemnation from the Pakistani government, including blaming German authorities to prevent these acts from happening and reminding the German government that the Vienna conventions of 1963 required the host country to ensure the security of a foreign diplomatic mission. Meanwhile, also in reaction to the Frankfurt consulate attack, Pakistani defense minister Khaja Asif questioned why Afghans should be allowed to live in Pakistan.

[ 18 ] He pointed to various incidents of Afghans abusing Pakistan and challenging its sovereignty. He stated "there's a limit to our hospitality" and that Afghans are "thankless people." [ 18 ] Pakistani columnist Dr Shazia Answer Cheema has advocated the mass deportations of Afghans from Pakistan starting in 2023. She also cited the trend of Afghans traveling abroad on Pakistani documents (usually forged) and committing crimes which she argued poses a threat to overseas Pakistanis as it would further damage their reputation in the host countries. She argues this has been ignored for decades by Pakistani institutions because of the "Ummah" or "Islamic brotherhood" mentality that is commonly ingrained into Pakistani society, which has allowed Pakistan and its people to be exploited in such a manner.

[ 19 ] Tajikistan [ edit ] The presence of Afghan refugees in Tajikistan incited prejudice amongst local Tajiks, also making it hard for Afghan traders to do business there.

[ 20 ] Turkey [ edit ] See also: Turkish migrant crisis Turkey is currently claimed to be hosting the largest refugee population in the world. With the increase of Afghan refugees and crimes associated with them, public sentiment in Turkey quickly began to turn against Afghans.

[ 21 ] The result was a further stepping effort by Turkey's government to further secure its border with Iran to stop a further influx of Afghans.

[ 21 ] However, with the increase in crime and social disruption, anti-Afghan sentiment continued to rise in Turkey.

[ 22 ] Social media in Turkey has seen an increase in hate speech against Afghans, even before more refugees arrived.

[ 23 ] A video surfaced online showing Turkish ultra-nationalists beating an Afghan man and was circulated on social media.

[ 24 ] South Korea [ edit ] See also: Immigration to South Korea The immigration of over 300 Afghan evacuees because of the end of the Afghan evacuation in 2021, resulted in a petition and protests from local Koreans to prevent the Afghans from coming. Parents of local school children expressed concerns of the presence of Afghan refugees in a building near their children's schools, citing child safety issues. Parents also cited issues of cultural shocks between Afghan refugee children and their own local children. A senior Korean humanitarian worker warned against the generalizations of immigrants and crime and argued parents should learn about other cultures rather than hold onto xenophobic beliefs.

[ 25 ] European countries [ edit ] See also: European refugee crisis This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2023 ) The issue of crime involving Afghan refugees and immigrants has stoked anti-Afghan public sentiment amongst locals across Europe. The worsening situation resulted in European politicians openly stating that Afghans will no longer be welcomed in their individual countries.

[ 26 ] Another Afghan refugee was quoted stating the sentiment against Afghans was so bad that they were better off going back to Afghanistan rather than "facing humiliation" in Europe.

[ 27 ] Austria [ edit ] See also: Crime in Austria The Austrian press reported the influx of Afghan refugees. At the time of arrival of Afghan refugees and migrants, the local authorities and citizens welcomed them. But soon after overstaying their welcome by increasing the crime problems in the country, public sentiment towards Afghans began to deteriorate badly and stir up anti-Afghan prejudice. An American social worker alleged that Afghans exceed other migrants/refugees by crime in Europe.

[ 28 ] Some Afghan refugees accused of sex crimes against minors had previous deportation orders issued against them because of these unlawful acts.

[ 29 ] Finland [ edit ] See also: Afghans in Finland , Sexual violence in Finland , and Oulu child sexual exploitation scandal A number of sexual crimes committed by Afghan migrants/refugees in Finland has been reported, stirring racist reactions amongst many locals. One of these cases involved the rape of a local fourteen-year-old girl in the town of Kempele by an Afghan national. The reported incident sparked public outcry against refugees and even sparked riots, with human shields of local Finnish citizens blocking the borders to prevent refugees from entering. Some Finnish parliament members even called on refugees not to come to the country.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Two days later another Afghan migrant, Ramin Azimi, knocked unconscious a Finnish girl he was in a previous relationship with and burned her to death with gasoline. The incident triggered angry vigilant nationalist mobs, including the Finnish Ku Klux Klan whom took to the streets and engaged in threatening behavior towards refugees. The culprit, Azimi was given a prison sentence with no chance of parole.

[ 32 ] A 2018 research report argued that ever since the incidents in Kempele, a surge in affiliating rape crimes with refugees has become a new trend based on stereotypical prejudices.

[ 33 ] Germany [ edit ] See also: Crime in Germany and Immigration and crime in Germany A 23 year old Afghan migrant in Germany was arrested for raping an eleven-year-old girl. About twelve days after being released from prison, he raped a thirteen year old. He was re-arrested shortly. His previous release and actions triggered public outcry. German politicians called for any migrant or refugee convicted of such offenses to be deported back to their country. The acting vice chancellor urged German people not to scapegoat migrants and warned right-wing groups not to exploit the incidents for propaganda purposes.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Greece [ edit ] See also: 2020 Greek–Turkish border crisis The rise of crime affiliated with Afghan refugees in Greece has amplified anti-Afghan sentiments in the country. Several incidents involving hate attacks on Afghan residents in Greece have been reported.

[ 36 ] In one example an Afghan refugee family were beaten in Greece and set adrift into the sea.

[ 37 ] Italy [ edit ] Italy has grown more and more resistant towards Afghan refugees; especially following public sentiment against the Roma people which was amplified by the European refugee crisis . The recent increase of Afghan refugees has strengthened right-wing sentiments in the country against accepting them. There has been a common sentiment in the country with affiliating refugees with crime.

[ 38 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] The United Kingdom (UK) has witnessed increasing incidents relating to Afghan refugees causing backlash from locals. In one of these incidents a local teenage girl was forcefully held and raped by Afghan nationals. The incident went viral amongst local British residents on social media and resulted in violent public protests in which a police vehicle was damaged.

[ 39 ] On January 31, 2024, Afghan asylum seeker Abdul Shakoor Ezedi targeted a mother and her two children in an acid attack in Clapham , a district in South London , being previously convicted of sexual assault and exposure in 2018 and claiming to have converted to Christianity . This incident has contributed to a higher anti-Afghan sentiment in the UK.

[ 40 ] North America [ edit ] United States of America [ edit ] See also: Deportation of Afghan immigrants from the United States Following the 9/11 incidents in 2001, a wave of violent anti-Muslim attacks and other sentiments were directed at Muslim residents. Amongst the slogans were hate speech directed towards Afghans.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Separately, anti-Afghan opinions also arose in the US for the country's involvement in the global drug trade.

[ 43 ] More recently, following the 2020–2021 US troop withdrawal from Afghanistan , American politician Scott Perry , argued against allowing in Afghan refugees without proper investigation; claiming it could lead to a crime hike, including rape crimes against underage minors. He was amongst 16 other American politicians voting against allowing Afghan refugees in without having proper background checks done. His comments drew some criticism. Former president Donald Trump made similar concerns, claiming terrorists could be airlifted out of Afghanistan.

[ 44 ] Cultural criticism [ edit ] See also: Culture of Afghanistan Bacha Bazi , a practice found in rural Afghanistan, has been gaining critical attention over the decades by foreigners.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Ethnic sentiments [ edit ] Main articles: Anti-Hazara sentiment , Anti-Pashtun sentiment , and Anti-Tajik sentiment See also: Hazara genocide (19th century) and List of massacres against Hazaras Sentiments against specific Afghan ethnic groups, including towards one another along ethnic lines is also widely documented.

[ citation needed ] Anti-afghan slurs [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( March 2025 ) The term "namak haram" (horrid traitor) has become popular amongst Pakistani people over the decades due to Afghans abusing them on the Internet and in foreign countries. This comes in light according to Pakistanis because of hosting millions of Afghan refugees and problems associated with them.

[ 47 ] Anti-Afghan slogans [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2025 ) Go Afghani go!

[ edit ] The English phrase "Go Afghani go!" has been coined and popularized by Pakistanis and flooded on social media, calling for the mass expulsion of Afghan people from Pakistan. This phrase goes back over ten years following the 2014 Peshawar school attack by Afghan terrorists.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] In the Pakistani city of Khairpur the "Go Afghani go" slogan was widespread, calling for the removal of Afghans from the city. Protesters threatened to keep up their campaign until the Pakistani government agreed to heed to their demands and deport Afghan residents.

[ 50 ] A song of the same title was developed but in the Sindhi language .

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Kabir, Nahid Afrose. "The culture of mobile lifestyle: Reflection on the past–the Afghan camel drivers, 1860–1930." Continuum 23.6 (2009): 791-802.

^ Stubbs, Ben. "Islam in the outback: The legacy of the Afghan cameleers." Griffith REVIEW 61 (2018): 257-265.

^ Kabir, Nahid. "Muslims in Western Australia 1870-1970." Early Days: Journal of the Royal Western Australian Historical Society 12.5 (2005): 550-565.

^ Kabir, Nahid A. "The Economic Plight of the Afghans in Australia, 1860—2000." Islamic studies 44.2 (2005): 229-250.

^ Ganter, Regina. "Muslim Australians: The deep histories of contact." Journal of Australian Studies 32.4 (2008): 481-492.

^ Molloy, Jan. "Teaching and learning history in the twenty-first century: Museums and the national curriculum." Agora 45.2 (2010): 62-67.

^ Yarbakhsh, Elisabeth. "Iranian hospitality and Afghan refugees in the city of Shiraz." Anthropology of the Middle East 10.2 (2015): 101-118.

^ Naqvi, Syed Fraz Hussain, and Ammara Zaheer. "Iran’s Policy towards Taliban 2.0: A Circumspect Approach for Maximum Gain." Focus (2023).

^ Rogers, Tom. "Afghan refugees and the stability of Pakistan." Survival 29.5 (1987): 416-429.

^ Downman, Scott, et al. "Human Rights Reporting, War Crimes and Refugee Migration." Journalism for Social Change in Asia: Reporting Human Rights (2017): 119-141.

^ Jehangir, Ayesha. "Finding Peace Journalism: An analysis of media discourse on Afghan refugees and their forced repatriation from Pakistan." (2021).

^ Gartenstein-Ross, Daveed, and Tara Vassefi. "The forgotten history of Afghanistan-Pakistan relations." Yale J. Int'l Aff. 7 (2012): 38.

^ https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/spotlight-on-afghan-refugees-in-pakistan/2011/11/15/gIQAfB1BYN_story.html ^ https://www.dawn.com/news/1905879/fleeing-pakistan-afghans-rebuild-from-nothing ^ "Millions of Afghans made Pakistan home to escape war. Now many are hiding to escape deportation" .

Associated Press News . 29 April 2024.

^ "Why is Pakistan planning to deport undocumented Afghans?" .

^ "Why Pakistan is Deporting Afghan Migrants | Council on Foreign Relations" .

^ a b "FO condemns attack on Pakistani consulate in Frankfurt by 'gang of extremists' " . 21 July 2024.

^ "Fake Pakistani passports and implications for national security" .

Dr Shazia Anwer Cheema .

Express Tribune . 8 November 2023.

^ Werbner, Pnina. "Trading Worlds: Afghan Merchants Across Modern Frontiers By Magnus Marsden." (2018): 123-124.

^ a b Wilks, Andrew (July 29, 2021).

"Afghans fleeing the Taliban face renewed anti-migrant sentiment in Turkey" .

The National .

^ Cookman, Liz (August 5, 2021).

"Fleeing the Taliban: Afghans met with rising anti-refugee hostility in Turkey" .

The Guardian .

^ Minute, Turkish (July 23, 2021).

"Hate speech against refugees increases on Turkish social media as a new wave of Afghan migrants arrive" .

^ "Turkish far-right group beat Afghan man and shared video on social media – Turkish Minute" . 30 December 2021 . Retrieved 2022-07-17 .

^ " 'Afghan students not welcome here' " . 24 February 2022.

^ Bennhold, Katrin; Erlanger, Steven (August 18, 2021).

"Why Europe's Leaders Say They Won't Welcome More Afghan Refugees" .

The New York Times – via NYTimes.com.

^ " 'The greener side of the same hell': Afghans on a year in EU" .

openDemocracy .

^ Benard, Cheryl (July 11, 2017).

"I've Worked with Refugees for Decades. Europe's Afghan Crime Wave Is Mind-Boggling" .

The National Interest .

^ "Rape, killing of 13-year-old shocks Austria, 3 Afghans held" .

AP NEWS . 2021-07-01 . Retrieved 2023-06-21 .

^ "Reports of suspected rape stir up fear and resentment in Kempele" . 25 November 2015.

^ "PM Sipilä calls crisis meeting over Kempele rape case" . 24 November 2015.

^ https://www.satakunnankansa.fi/satakunta/art-2000007156403.html ^ Saresma, Tuija. "Politics of fear and racialized rape: Intersectional reading of the Kempele rape case." Racialization, racism, and anti-racism in the Nordic countries. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018. 63-91.

^ "Freiburg murder: Germans urged not to scapegoat migrants" .

BBC News . 5 December 2016.

^ https://nationalpost.com/news/world/afghan-migrants-arrest-in-murder-rape-case-must-not-lead-to-rabble-rousing-german-politician-says ^ Sunderland, Judith (July 10, 2012).

"Hate on the Streets" .

Human Rights Watch .

^ "Afghan asylum family beaten in Greece, set adrift at sea" .

EUobserver . February 25, 2021.

^ Fernández, Belén.

"Afghans are the next victims of Italy's war on refugees" .

www.aljazeera.com . Retrieved 2023-06-21 .

^ Bolton, Will (13 February 2023).

"Four teenage asylum seekers arrested in connection with alleged rape of schoolgirl in Kent" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 2023-05-17.

^ https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-68167793 ^ Perry, Barbara. "Anti-Muslim retaliatory violence following the 9/11 terrorist attacks." Hate and Bias Crime. Routledge, 2012. 201-220.

^ Muñoz, Arturo G. "Bent by history in Afghanistan." The Global Obama. Routledge, 2013. 235-252.

^ Collins, John, and Ian Tennant. "Evaluating Afghanistan’s Past, Present, and Future Engagement with Multilateral Drug Control." (2022).

^ "A GOP rep. Claimed that allowing 'poorly-vetted' Afghan refugees to come to the US could lead to 'little girls raped and killed in the streets' " .

Insider.com .

^ Verma, Sreyasi. "Why the issue of Bacha Bazi deserves international attention." (2019).

^ Schut, Michelle, and Eva van Baarle. "3 Dancing Boys and the Moral." ^ Hajizada, Ajmal. "Profiling of Afghan Refugees in Pakistan: a qualitative study conducted in Refugee Camps in Pakistan." Journal of Politics and International Studies 10.1 (2024): 79-90.

^ "Social media swarmed by 'Go Afghani Go' slogan" . 26 December 2014.

^ "Go Afghani Go messages shared on social media" . 25 December 2014.

^ "Extreme measures: 'Go Afghani Go' campaign launched in Haripur" . 23 July 2016.

Further reading [ edit ] "Iran: Anti-Afghan sentiment is on the rise" . Middle East Eye.

"Anti-Afghan sentiment undercuts Iran-Taliban ties" .

Kourosh Ziabari . Asia Times. 29 April 2022.

External links [ edit ] "Anti-Afghan rioting in Iran" .

Ray Wilkinson . The UN Refugee Agency.

v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Afghan_sentiment&oldid=1306240431 " Categories : Anti-national sentiment Foreign relations of Afghanistan Anti–South Asian sentiment Afghan people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles to be expanded from April 2023 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from April 2023 All articles with empty sections Articles with hatnote templates targeting a nonexistent page All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles to be expanded from March 2025 Articles to be expanded from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 18:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Afghan sentiment Add languages Add topic

