Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Features Toggle Features subsection 2.1 Original sin 2.2 Filioque clause 2.3 Date of Easter 2.4 Lack of essence–energies distinction 3 Western denominations 4 Major figures Toggle Major figures subsection 4.1 Bishop of Rome or the pope 4.2 The Reformers 4.3 Archbishop of Canterbury and primate of all England 4.4 Archbishop of Lyon and primate of the Gauls 4.5 Patriarch of Aquileia 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Western Christianity 54 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 پنجابی Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Religious category of the Latin Church, Protestantism, and their derivatives Not to be confused with Latin Church .

Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e Jesus represented as the Lamb of God ( Agnus Dei ), a common practice in Western Christianity [ 1 ] St. Peter's Basilica in Vatican City , the largest church building in the world today [ 2 ] Timeline of the evolution of the church, beginning with early Christianity Western Christianity is one of two subdivisions of Christianity ( Eastern Christianity being the other). Western Christianity is composed of the Latin Church and Western Protestantism , together with their offshoots such as the Old Catholic Church , Independent Catholicism and Restorationism .

The large majority of the world's 2.3 billion Christians are Western Christians (about 2 billion: 1.3 billion Latin Catholic and 1.17 billion Protestant).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] One major component, the Latin Church, developed under the bishop of Rome . Out of the Latin Church emerged a wide variety of independent Protestant denominations , including Lutheranism and Anglicanism , starting from the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century, as did Independent Catholicism in the 19th century. Thus, the term "Western Christianity" does not describe a single communion or religious denomination but is applied to distinguish all these denominations collectively from Eastern Christianity.

The establishment of the distinct Latin Church, a particular church sui iuris of the Catholic Church , coincided with the consolidation of the Holy See in Rome , which claimed primacy since Antiquity. The Latin Church is distinct from the Eastern Catholic Churches , also in full communion with the Pope in Rome , and from the Eastern Orthodox Church and Oriental Orthodox Churches , which are not in communion with Rome. These other churches are part of Eastern Christianity . The terms "Western" and "Eastern" in this regard originated with geographical divisions mirroring the cultural divide between the Hellenistic East and Latin West and the political divide between the Western and Eastern Roman empires . During the Middle Ages , adherents of the Latin Church, irrespective of ethnicity, commonly referred to themselves as "Latins" to distinguish themselves from Eastern Christians ("Greeks").

[ 5 ] Western Christianity has played a prominent role in the shaping of Western civilization .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] With the expansion of European colonialism from the Early Modern era , the Latin Church, in time along with its Protestant secessions, spread throughout the Americas , much of the Philippines , Southern Africa , pockets of West Africa , and throughout Australia and New Zealand . Thus, when used for historical periods after the 16th century, the term "Western Christianity" does not refer to a particular geographical area but is used as a collective term for all these.

Today, the geographical distinction between Western and Eastern Christianity is not nearly as absolute as in Antiquity or the Middle Ages, due to the spread of Christian missionaries , migrations , and globalisation . As such, the adjectives "Western Christianity" and "Eastern Christianity" are typically used to refer to historical origins and differences in theology and liturgy rather than present geographical locations.

[ citation needed ] While the Latin Church maintains the use of the Latin liturgical rites , Protestant denominations and Independent Catholicism use various liturgical practices.

The earliest concept of Europe as a cultural sphere (instead of simply a geographic term) appeared during the Carolingian Renaissance of the 9th century, which included territories that practiced Western Christianity at the time.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of Western Christianity Title page of the Lutheran Swedish Gustav Vasa Bible , translated by the Petri brothers, along with Laurentius Andreae Jesuit scholars in China . Top: Matteo Ricci , Adam Schaal and Ferdinand Verbiest (1623–88); Bottom: Paul Siu (Xu Guangqi) , Colao or Prime Minister of State, and his granddaughter Candide Hiu For much of its history, the Christian church has been culturally divided between the Latin-speaking West, whose centre was Rome , and the Greek-speaking East, whose centre was Constantinople . Cultural differences and political rivalry created tensions between the two churches, leading to disagreement over doctrine and ecclesiology and ultimately to schism .

[ 11 ] Like Eastern Christianity , Western Christianity traces its roots directly to the apostles and other early preachers of the religion. In Western Christianity's original area, Latin was the principal language. Christian writers in Latin had more influence there than those who wrote in Greek , Syriac , or other languages. Although the first Christians in the West used Greek (such as Clement of Rome ), by the fourth century Latin had superseded it even in the cosmopolitan city of Rome , as well as in southern Gaul and the Roman province of Africa .

[ 12 ] There is evidence of a Latin translation of the Bible as early as the 2nd century (see also Vetus Latina ).

With the decline of the Roman Empire , distinctions appeared also in organization, since the bishops in the West were not dependent on the Emperor in Constantinople and did not come under the influence of the Caesaropapism in the Eastern Church . While the see of Constantinople became dominant throughout the Emperor's lands, the West looked exclusively to the see of Rome , which in the East was seen as that of one of the five patriarchs of the Pentarchy , "the proposed government of universal Christendom by five patriarchal sees under the auspices of a single universal empire. Formulated in the legislation of the emperor Justinian I (527–565), especially in his Novella 131, the theory received formal ecclesiastical sanction at the Council in Trullo (692), which ranked the five sees as Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem." [ 13 ] Over the centuries, disagreements separated Western Christianity from the various forms of Eastern Christianity: first from East Syriac Christianity after the Council of Ephesus (431) , then from that of Oriental Orthodoxy after the Council of Chalcedon (451), and then from Eastern Orthodoxy with the East-West Schism of 1054. With the last-named form of Eastern Christianity, reunion agreements were signed at the Second Council of Lyon (1274) and the Council of Florence (1439), but these proved ineffective.

Historian Paul Legutko of Stanford University said the Catholic Church is "at the center of the development of the values, ideas, science, laws, and institutions which constitute what we call Western civilization ".

[ 14 ] The rise of Protestantism led to major divisions within Western Christianity, which still persist, and wars—for example, the Anglo-Spanish War of 1585–1604 had religious as well as economic causes.

In and after the Age of Discovery , Europeans spread Western Christianity to the New World and elsewhere. Roman Catholicism came to the Americas (especially South America), Africa, Asia, Australia and the Pacific. Protestantism, including Anglicanism, came to North America, Australia-Pacific and some African locales.

Today, the geographical distinction between Western and Eastern Christianity is much less absolute, due to the great migrations of Europeans across the globe, as well as the work of missionaries worldwide over the past five centuries.

Part of a series on Christian culture Christian culture Christian tradition Eastern Christianity Western Christianity Byzantine culture Protestant culture Holidays Mormon culture Cultural Christian Art Christian symbolism Early art Catholic art Lutheran art Church architecture Icons Media Film industry Radio formats Video games Literature American Catholic literature Bible fiction Christian drama Christian poetry Christian novel Christian science fiction Spiritual autobiography Music CCM Christmas music Church music Gospel music Liturgical music Science List of Christian scientists Merton thesis List of Christian Nobel laureates Catholic Church and science Parson-naturalist Quakers in science History Christianity in civilization Christian history Catholic history Eastern Orthodox history Christian influences in Islam Christianity portal v t e Features [ edit ] Map of Europe showing the largest religions by region. Eastern Christianity is represented in blue, Islam in green, and the other colors represent branches of Western Christianity.

Saint Thomas Aquinas was one of the great Western scholars of the Medieval period.

Original sin [ edit ] Original sin , also called ancestral sin , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] is a Christian belief in a state of sin in which humanity has existed since the fall of man , stemming from Adam and Eve 's rebellion in the Garden of Eden , namely the sin of disobedience in consuming the forbidden fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil .

[ 19 ] Theologians have characterized this condition in many ways, seeing it as ranging from something as insignificant as a slight deficiency, or a tendency toward sin yet without collective guilt , referred to as a "sin nature", to something as drastic as total depravity or automatic guilt of all humans through collective guilt.

[ 20 ] Filioque clause [ edit ] See also: Filioque Most Western Christians use a version of the Nicene Creed that states that the Holy Spirit " proceeds from the Father and the Son ", where the original text as adopted by the First Council of Constantinople had "proceeds from the Father" without the addition of either "and the Son" or "alone". This Western version also has the additional phrase "God from God" ( Latin : Deum de Deo ), which was in the Creed as adopted by the First Council of Nicaea , but which was dropped by the First Council of Constantinople.

Date of Easter [ edit ] Main article: Easter controversy The date of Easter usually differs between Eastern and Western Christianity, because the calculations are based on the Julian calendar and Gregorian calendar respectively. However, before the Council of Nicea, various dates including Jewish Passover were observed. Nicea "Romanized" the date for Easter and anathematized a "Judaized" (i.e. Passover date for) Easter. The date of observance of Easter has only differed in modern times since the promulgation of the Gregorian calendar in 1582; and further, the Western Church did not universally adopt the Gregorian calendar at once, so that for some time the dates of Easter differed between the Eastern Church and the Roman Catholic Church, but not necessarily as between the Eastern Church and the Western Protestant churches. For example, the Church of England continued to observe Easter on the same date as the Eastern Church until 1753.

Even the dates of other Christian holidays often differ between Eastern and Western Christianity.

Lack of essence–energies distinction [ edit ] Further information: Essence–energies distinction Eastern Christianity, and particularly the Eastern Orthodox Church, has traditionally held a distinction between God's essence, or that which He is, with God's energies, or that which He does. They hold that while God is unknowable in His essence, He can be known (i.e. experienced) in His energies. This is an extension of Eastern Christianity's apophatic theology , while Western Christians tend to prefer a view of divine simplicity , and claim that God's essence can be known by its attributes.

Western denominations [ edit ] See also: Western Rite Orthodoxy Today, Western Christianity makes up close to 90% of Christians worldwide with the Catholic Church accounting for over half and various Protestant denominations making up another 40%.

Hussite movements of 15th century Bohemia preceded the main Protestant uprising by 100 years and evolved into several small Protestant churches, such as the Moravian Church .

Waldensians survived also, but blended into the Reformed tradition .

Major branches and movements within Protestantism Major figures [ edit ] Bishop of Rome or the pope [ edit ] Further information: Pope Relevant figures: Clement of Rome (fl.

c.

96 ), one of the apostolic fathers of the church.

Pope Leo I Gregory the Great The Reformers [ edit ] Further information: Protestant Reformers Relevant figures: Jan Hus ( c.

1369 –1415), one of the most relevant theologians in the 14th century.

Martin Luther (1483–1546), the most famous reformer and theologian in the Reformation and in the 15th century.

Jan Łaski (1499-1560), known also as John à Lasco, leading Polish Calvinist reformer and a secretary of Polish King Sigismund II Hans Tausen , Bishop of Ribe (1494–1561), leading theologian of the Reformation in Denmark and Holstein .

Laurentius Petri , Archbishop of Uppsala and all Sweden (1499–1573), along with his brother Olaus Petri were regarded as the main Lutheran reformers of Sweden, together with the king Gustav I of Sweden .

Primož Trubar (1508–1586), mostly known as the author of the first Slovene language printed book, [ 21 ] the founder and the first superintendent of the Protestant Church of the Duchy of Carniola , and for consolidating the Slovenian language .

John Calvin (1509–1564) John Knox (1514–1572) Ferenc Dávid (1520–1579) founder of the Unitarian Church of Transylvania who laid the foundation for what would become the nontrinitarian movement.

Mikael Agricola , bishop of Turku (1554–1557), he became the de facto founder of literary Finnish and a prominent proponent of the Protestant Reformation in Sweden, including Finland, which was a Swedish territory at the time. He is often called the "father of literary Finnish".

Archbishop of Canterbury and primate of all England [ edit ] Further information: Primacy of Canterbury Relevant figures: Augustine of Canterbury (597–604) Thomas Cranmer (1533–1555), one of the major reformers in England Matthew Parker (1504–1575),(Parker was one of the primary architects of the Thirty-nine Articles) Archbishop of Lyon and primate of the Gauls [ edit ] Further information: Primate of the Gauls Relevant figures: Irenaeus of Lyon (died c.

202 ) Patriarch of Aquileia [ edit ] Further information: Patriarch of Aquileia Relevant figures: Chromatius of Aquilea See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Europe portal Aristotelianism Augustinianism Bohemian Reformation Calvinism Latin Church Fathers Ecclesiastical differences between the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church Holy Roman Empire List of Christian denominations Neoplatonism Radical Reformation Scholasticism Swiss Reformation Theological differences between the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church Thomism Western culture Western religions References [ edit ] ^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Agnus Dei (In Liturgy)" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 2 January 2024 .

^ Centre, UNESCO World Heritage.

"Vatican City" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 2 January 2024 .

^ "Status of Global Christianity, 2024, in the Context of 1900–2050" (PDF) . Center for the Study of Global Christianity, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

Protestants: 625,606,000; Independents: 421,689,000; Unaffiliated Christians: 123,508,000 ^ "Global Christianity - A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population" .

Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project .

Pew Research Center . 19 December 2011 . Retrieved 1 February 2024 .

^ "Distinguishing the terms: Latins and Romans" .

Orbis Latinus .

^ Perry, Marvin; Chase, Myrna; Jacob, James; Jacob, Margaret; Von Laue, Theodore H. (1 January 2012).

Western Civilization: Since 1400 .

Cengage Learning . p. XXIX.

ISBN 978-1-111-83169-1 – via Google Books .

^ "Roman Catholicism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 11 August 2023.

Roman Catholicism, Christian church that has been the decisive spiritual force in the history of Western civilization.

^ Hayas, Caltron J.H. (1953).

Christianity and Western Civilization .

Stanford University Press . p. 2.

That certain distinctive features of our Western civilization—the civilization of western Europe and America—have been shaped chiefly by Judaeo – Graeco – Christianity, Catholic, and Protestant.

^ Orlandis, José (1993).

A Short History of the Catholic Church . Four Courts Press.

^ Kumar, Dr. Sanjay (2021).

A Handbook of Political Geography . K.K. Publications. p. 127.

^ "General Essay on Western Christianity" , Overview Of World Religions . Division of Religion and Philosophy, University of Cumbria. © 1998/9 ELMAR Project. Accessed 1 April 2012.

^ "Latin".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church .

Oxford University Press . 2005.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ "Pentarchy | Byzantine Empire, Justinian I & Justinian Code | Britannica" .

Britannica . Retrieved 2 January 2024 .

^ Woods, Jr., Thomas.

"Review of How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization " .

National Review Book Service . Archived from the original on 22 August 2006 . Retrieved 16 September 2006 .

^ Golitzin, Alexander (1995).

On the Mystical Life: The Ethical Discourses . St Vladimir's Seminary Press. pp. 119–.

ISBN 978-0-88141-144-7 – via Google Books .

^ Tate, Adam L. (2005).

Conservatism and Southern Intellectuals, 1789–1861: Liberty, Tradition, and the Good Society .

University of Missouri Press . p. 190.

ISBN 978-0-8262-1567-3 .

^ Bartolo-Abela, Marcelle (2011).

God's Gift to Humanity: The Relationship Between Phinehas and Consecration to God the Father . Apostolate-The Divine Heart. pp. 32–.

ISBN 978-0-9833480-1-6 – via Google Books .

^ Hassan, Ann (2012).

Annotations to Geoffrey Hill's Speech! Speech!

. punctum. pp. 62–.

ISBN 978-1-4681-2984-7 – via Google Books .

^ Cross, Frank Leslie (1966).

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 994.

OL 5382229M .

^ Brodd, Jeffrey (2003).

World Religions . Winona, MN: Saint Mary's Press .

ISBN 978-0-88489-725-5 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Trubar Primož" .

Slovenian Biographical Lexicon .

Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts . Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 25 April 2013 .

v t e Western Christianity Cultural sphere of Christian traditions that developed in the Latin Church in the Western Roman Empire , further diversified starting from the Protestant Reformation in the 16th century Main divisions Catholic Church * Latin Church Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Baptists Calvinism Lutheranism Methodism Pentecostalism more Anglicanism Anglican Communion Anglo-Catholicism Old Catholic Church Union of Utrecht Union of Scranton Independent Catholicism List of Independent Catholic denominations Others Western Rite Orthodoxy History Early Christianity State church of the Roman Empire Latin Church East–West Schism (1054) Western Schism (1378-1417) Bohemian Reformation (15th century) Protestant Reformation (16th century) Independent Catholicism History of Protestantism Theology Catholic theology Protestant theology Anglican theology *The Catholic Church also comprises the Eastern Catholic Churches Christianity portal v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Christian liturgical chant Eastern Armenian Byzantine Coptic Ethiopian Galician Obikhod Kievan Prostopinije Syriac Znamenny Western ( Plainsong ) Ambrosian Anglican Beneventan Celtic Gallican Gelineau Gregorian Mozarabic Old Roman Ravenna v t e Latin Church Patriarchates (by order of precedence ) Current Rome (' Patriarch of the West '): Pope Leo XIV (with cathedra in Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ) Jerusalem : Pierbattista Pizzaballa East Indies : Filipe Neri Ferrão Lisbon : Rui Valério Venice : Francesco Moraglia Defunct Carthage (?−1964) Alexandria (1276–1964) Antioch (1098–1964) Constantinople (1204–1964) West Indies (1524–1963) Aquileia (560–1751) Ethiopia (1555–1663) Grado (560–1451) History Apostolic succession History of the papacy Papal primacy Historical development First Martyrs Great Church Early African church Vulgate East–West Schism Scholasticism Crusades Western Schism Age of Discovery Humanism Protestant Reformation Council of Trent Counter-Reformation Vatican I Vatican II 1983 Code of Canon Law Apostolic sees Rome Peter Paul Syracuse Peter Malta Paul Milan Barnabas Santiago de Compostela James Church Fathers Tertullian Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers * Ambrose * Pope Damasus I Jerome * Augustine of Hippo * Pope Gregory I * Isidore of Seville * Language Ecclesiastical Latin Liturgical use of Latin Liturgical rites Liturgical days Current Ambrosian Rite Rite of Braga Mozarabic Rite Rite of Lyon Roman Rite Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary form) Tridentine Mass Extraordinary form Anglican Use Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Defunct African Rite Aquileian Rite British Celtic Rite Durham Rite Hereford Use Sarum Use York Use Gallican Rite Missa Nautica Missa sicca Missa Venatoria Pre-Tridentine Mass See also Latin cross Latin Church in the Middle East Latins Turkey Titular sees Eastern Catholic Churches Conference of the Latin Bishops of the Arab Regions Western Rite Orthodoxy * also Doctors of the Church Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Western_Christianity&oldid=1299246464 " Categories : Western Christianity Christian terminology Filioque Western culture Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Use dmy dates from October 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 08:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Western Christianity 54 languages Add topic

