Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Anomalous monism 2.2 Third dogma of empiricism 2.3 Swampman 3 Personal life and death 4 Awards 5 Bibliography 6 Filmography 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Donald Davidson (philosopher) 33 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kurdî മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1917–2003) Donald Davidson Portrait by photographer Steve Pyke in 1990 Born Donald Herbert Davidson ( 1917-03-06 ) 6 March 1917 Springfield, Massachusetts , U.S.

Died 30 August 2003 (2003-08-30) (aged 86) Oakland, California , U.S.

Education Education Harvard University ( BA , MA , PhD ) Thesis Plato's 'Philebus' (1949) Doctoral advisor Raphael Demos Donald Cary Williams Other advisors Alfred North Whitehead Willard Van Orman Quine Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Neopragmatism [ 1 ] Doctoral students Akeel Bilgrami Michael Bratman Kirk Ludwig Claudine Verheggen Stephen Yablo Main interests Philosophy of language , philosophy of action , philosophy of mind , epistemology , ontology Notable ideas Radical interpretation , anomalous monism , truth-conditional semantics , principle of charity , slingshot argument , reasons as causes, understanding as translation, swampman , events , Davidson's translation argument against alternative conceptual schemes (the third dogma of empiricism) [ a ] Donald Herbert Davidson (March 6, 1917 – August 30, 2003) was an American philosopher. He served as Slusser Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Berkeley , from 1981 to 2003 after having also held teaching appointments at Stanford University , Rockefeller University , Princeton University , and the University of Chicago . Davidson was known for his charismatic personality and difficult writing style, as well as the systematic nature of his philosophy.

[ 2 ] His work exerted considerable influence in many areas of philosophy from the 1960s onward, particularly in philosophy of mind , philosophy of language , and action theory . While Davidson was an analytic philosopher , with most of his influence lying in that tradition, his work has attracted attention in continental philosophy as well, particularly in literary theory and related areas.

[ 3 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Donald Herbert Davidson was born on March 6, 1917 in Springfield, Massachusetts to Grace Cordelia (née Anthony) and Clarence "Davie" Herbert Davidson.

[ 4 ] His family moved around frequently during his childhood; they lived in the Philippines until he was four, and then in various cities in the Northeastern United States before finally settling in Staten Island when he was nine. He briefly attended a public school in Staten Island before receiving a scholarship to study at Staten Island Academy .

[ 4 ] He first became interested in philosophy while in high school, where he read works by Nietzsche as well as Plato 's Parmenides and Kant 's Critique of Pure Reason .

[ 4 ] After graduating from high school in 1935, he enrolled at Harvard on an English major before switching to classics and earning his BA in 1939. It was at Harvard that he came to know many important philosophers of the time, including C. I. Lewis , Alfred North Whitehead , Raphael Demos , and especially W. V. O. Quine , who went on to become a lifelong friend and major philosophical influence. He also befriended the future conductor Leonard Bernstein while at Harvard.

[ 4 ] Soon after earning his BA, he was awarded a Teschemacher Scholarship to pursue graduate studies in classical philosophy at Harvard. As a graduate student, he took courses on logic taught by Quine and was classmates with Roderick Chisholm and Roderick Firth . Quine's seminars on logical positivism greatly influenced his view of philosophy, as they made him realize that "it was possible to be serious about getting things right in philosophy, or at least not getting things wrong." He graduated with an MA in classical philosophy in 1941.

[ 4 ] While pursuing a PhD at Harvard, he concurrently enrolled at Harvard Business School , but he ended up leaving a few weeks before graduating in 1942 so that he could volunteer for the U.S. Navy . During World War II , he taught spotters how to distinguish enemy planes from allied planes and also participated in the ground invasions of Sicily , Salerno , and Anzio .

[ 4 ] After returning from the war in 1945, he completed his PhD dissertation on Plato's Philebus under the supervision of Raphael Demos and D. C. Williams , and it was eventually accepted in 1949, earning him his PhD in philosophy.

[ 4 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Anomalous monism [ edit ] Main article: Anomalous monism Anomalous monism is a philosophical thesis about the mind–body relationship first proposed by Davidson in his 1970 paper "Mental Events".

[ 5 ] The theory is twofold and states that mental events are identical with physical events, and that the mental is anomalous, i.e. under their mental descriptions, causal relations between these mental events are not describable by strict physical laws . Hence, Davidson proposes an identity theory of mind without the reductive bridge laws associated with the type-identity theory .

Since in this theory every mental event is some physical event or other, the idea is that someone's thinking at a certain time, for example, that snow is white, is a certain pattern of neural firing in their brain at that time, an event which can be characterized as both a thinking that snow is white (a type of mental event) and a pattern of neural firing (a type of physical event). There is just one event that can be characterized both in mental terms and in physical terms. If mental events are physical events, they can at least in principle be explained and predicted, like all physical events, on the basis of laws of physical science. However, according to anomalous monism, events cannot be so explained or predicted as described in mental terms (such as "thinking", "desiring", etc.), but only as described in physical terms: this is the distinctive feature of the thesis as a brand of physicalism .

Davidson's argument for anomalous monism relies on the following three principles: The principle of causal interaction : there exist both mental-to-physical as well as physical-to-mental causal interactions.

The principle of the nomological character of causality : all events are causally related through strict laws.

The principle of the anomalism of the mental : there are no strict psychophysical or psychological laws that can causally relate mental events with physical events or mental events with other mental events.

See the main article for an explanation of his argument as well as objections.

Third dogma of empiricism [ edit ] In his 1974 essay On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme , [ 6 ] Davidson critiques what he calls the "third dogma of empiricism". The term is a reference to the famous 1951 essay Two Dogmas of Empiricism by his graduate teacher, W. V. O. Quine , in which he critiques two central tenets, or "dogmas", of logical positivism (and empiricism more generally): the analytic–synthetic distinction and reductionism . Davidson identifies an additional third dogma present in logical positivism and even in Quine's own work, as well as the work of Thomas Kuhn , Benjamin Lee Whorf , and others, and he argues that it is as untenable as the first two dogmas.

Davidson's third dogma refers to scheme–content dualism , which is the idea that all knowledge is the result of one's scheme of concepts being imposed upon empirical content from the world. The content is objective because it simply exists in the world or is simply given in experience, while the scheme is subjective because it is a person or community's way of making sense of that content according to some set of criteria. One consequence of scheme–content dualism is conceptual relativism, which is the idea that two different people or communities could have radically different, incommensurable (Kuhn's term for untranslatable) ways of making sense of the world. On this view, truth is relative to a conceptual scheme rather than objective.

[ 6 ] The general argumentative structure of the essay is as follows: [ 6 ] The idea of a conceptual scheme is only intelligible if there can be many different conceptual schemes, as the existence of one implies that there could be others, otherwise the term does not refer to anything in particular.

There can only be many different conceptual schemes if they are incommensurable, whether completely or partially, otherwise they would simply be different ways of speaking.

We can only recognize a conceptual scheme as a conceptual scheme if it is commensurable with our own (this premise is what Davidson attempts to prove in his essay).

Thus, the criterion for distinguishing alternative conceptual schemes, and thus the criterion for their identity, seems to be both incommensurability and commensurability.

Thus, the very idea of a conceptual scheme is incoherent.

If we lack criteria for identifying conceptual schemes, then we lack criteria for distinguishing scheme from content, and thus criteria for identifying empirical content.

Thus, scheme–content dualism is incoherent.

The upshot of Davidson's argument is that there is no strict boundary between subjective and objective knowledge. Knowledge of one's own scheme of concepts is necessarily inseparable from one's knowledge of the world, which undermines the longstanding idea in philosophy that one's own subjective knowledge is fundamentally different than what objectively exists in reality. This also undermines conceptual relativism, as the above argument demonstrates that two different conceptual schemes must be commensurable if they are to even be recognized as different conceptual schemes, and so truth is not relative to a conceptual scheme, but is rather objective insofar as we all have unmediated access to the world.

[ 6 ] For Davidson, in order for one's own point of view to be intelligible as a point of view, one must acknowledge the existence of other points of view, and they all must pertain to the same objective reality, which means they must be translatable (he further develops this idea in his 1991 essay Three Varieties of Knowledge ).

[ 7 ] In Davidson's own words, "Different points of view make sense, but only if there is a common coordinate system on which to plot them." [ 6 ] Unlike the first two dogmas, which can be rejected by empiricists, Davidson claims that the third dogma of empiricism is "perhaps the last, for if we give it up it is not clear that there is anything distinctive left to call empiricism." [ 6 ] Richard Rorty and Michael Williams have even said that the third dogma is necessary for any study of epistemology (Rorty in particular uses Davidson's critique to advance his own neopragmatist critique of philosophy-as-epistemology).

[ 8 ] Swampman [ edit ] Swampman is the subject of a thought experiment introduced by Davidson in his 1987 paper Knowing One's Own Mind . In the experiment, Davidson is struck by lightning in a swamp and disintegrated, but at the same exact moment, an identical copy of Davidson, the Swampman, is made from a nearby tree and proceeds through life exactly as Davidson would have, indistinguishable from him. The experiment is used by Davidson to claim that thought and meaning cannot exist in a vacuum; they are dependent on their interconnections to the world. Therefore, despite being physically identical to himself, Davidson states that the Swampman does not have thoughts nor meaningful language, as it has no causal history to base them on.

The experiment runs as follows: [ 9 ] Suppose lightning strikes a dead tree in a swamp; I am standing nearby. My body is reduced to its elements, while entirely by coincidence (and out of different molecules) the tree is turned into my physical replica. My replica, The Swampman, moves exactly as I did; according to its nature it departs the swamp, encounters and seems to recognize my friends, and appears to return their greetings in English. It moves into my house and seems to write articles on radical interpretation. No one can tell the difference.
But there is a difference. My replica can't recognize my friends; it can't re cognize anything, since it never cognized anything in the first place. It can't know my friends' names (though of course it seems to), it can't remember my house. It can't mean what I do by the word 'house', for example, since the sound 'house' it makes was not learned in a context that would give it the right meaning—or any meaning at all. Indeed, I don't see how my replica can be said to mean anything by the sounds it makes, nor to have any thoughts.

— Donald Davidson, Knowing One's Own Mind Personal life and death [ edit ] Davidson was married three times. He married his first wife, artist Virginia Bolton, in 1941 and had his only child with her, Elizabeth Boyer (née Davidson).

[ 10 ] Following his divorce from Bolton, he married for the second time to Nancy Hirschberg, Professor of Psychology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and later at Chicago Circle. She died in 1979.

[ 11 ] In 1984, Davidson married for the third and last time to philosopher and psychoanalyst Marcia Cavell.

[ 12 ] He corresponded with Catholic nun, literary critic and poet M. Bernetta Quinn .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Davidson was a lifelong atheist; he believed that many of the claims made by religions are not even truth-apt .

[ 16 ] On August 27, 2003, Davidson underwent knee replacement surgery at Alta Bates Summit Medical Center in Oakland, California , but he went into cardiac arrest shortly after the operation. He died three days later on August 30, 2003 at the age of 86.

[ 17 ] Awards [ edit ] Hegel Prize (1991) [ 18 ] Jean Nicod Prize (1995) Bibliography [ edit ] Decision-Making: An Experimental Approach , co-authored with Patrick Suppes and Sidney Siegel . Stanford: Stanford University Press . 1957.

Semantics of Natural Language , co-edited with Gilbert Harman , 2nd ed. New York: Springer Nature . 1973.

Plato's ‘Philebus’ . New York: Garland Publishing . 1990.

Essays on Actions and Events , 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press . 2001a.

Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation , 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2001b.

Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2001c.

Problems of Rationality . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2004.

Truth, Language, and History: Philosophical Essays . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2005.

Truth and Predication .  Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press . 2005.

The Essential Davidson . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2006.

The Structure of Truth: The 1970 John Locke Lectures . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2020.

Filmography [ edit ] Rudolf Fara (host), In conversation: Donald Davidson (19 video cassettes), Philosophy International, Centre for Philosophy of the Natural and Social Sciences, London School of Economics , 1997.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] List of Jean Nicod Prize laureates List of American philosophers Swamp Thing Notes [ edit ] ^ W. V. O. Quine elaborated the first two dogmas in his paper Two Dogmas of Empiricism .

References [ edit ] ^ Pragmatism – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ McGinn, Colin. " Cooling it ".

London Review of Books . 19 August 1993. Accessed 28 October 2010.

^ Dasenbrock, Reed Way, ed.

Literary Theory After Davidson . Penn State Press, 1989.

^ a b c d e f g Lepore, Ernie.

"An Interview with Donald Davidson" (PDF) . Retrieved 2025-05-17 .

^ Davidson, D. (2001), "Mental Events" , Essays on Actions and Events , Oxford University Press, pp.

207– 228, doi : 10.1093/0199246270.003.0011 , ISBN 978-0-19-924627-4 ^ a b c d e f Davidson, D. (1974).

"On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme" .

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association .

47 : 5– 20.

doi : 10.2307/3129898 .

ISSN 0065-972X .

JSTOR 3129898 .

^ Davidson, D. (1991).

"Three Varieties of Knowledge" .

Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement .

30 : 153– 166.

doi : 10.1017/S1358246100007748 .

ISSN 1358-2461 .

^ McGinn, M. (1981).

"The Third Dogma of Empiricism" .

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society .

82 : 89– 101.

ISSN 0066-7374 .

JSTOR 4544981 .

^ Davidson, D. (1987).

"Knowing One's Own Mind" .

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association .

60 (3): 441– 458.

doi : 10.2307/3131782 .

ISSN 0065-972X .

JSTOR 3131782 .

^ Baghramian, Maria, ed.

Donald Davidson: Life and Words . Routledge, 2013.

^ " Nancy Ann Hirschberg, In Memoriam, 1937 - 1979 " ^ " In Memoriam: Donald Davidson Archived 2015-02-26 at the Wayback Machine " ^ Ripatrazone, Nick (2023). "Sister Mary Bernetta Quinn: Woman of Letters".

The Habit of Poetry: The Literary Lives of Nuns in Mid-century America . 1517 Media.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv2xkjp9p.7 .

ISBN 978-1-5064-7112-9 .

^ "Mary Bernetta Quinn Papers, 1937-1998" .

Wilson Special Collections Library of UNC-Chapel Hill .

^ "Sister Mary Bernetta Quinn papers" .

Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library of Yale University .

^ "Donald Davidson | Issue 32 | Philosophy Now" .

philosophynow.org . Retrieved 2025-06-08 .

^ Russell, Sabin (2003-09-05).

"Donald Davidson -- UC professor of philosophy" .

SFGate . Retrieved 2025-05-17 .

^ "Hegel-Preis der Landeshauptstadt Stuttgart" .

Landeshauptstadt Stuttgart (in German) . Retrieved 2025-04-22 .

^ Crane, Tim; Davidson, Donald; Fara, Rudolf (1997).

"In conversation Donald Davidson" .

Further reading [ edit ] Dasenbrock, Reed Way (ed.).

Literary Theory After Davidson . University Park: Pennsylvania University Press. 1993.

Hahn, Lewis Edwin (ed.).

The Philosophy of Donald Davidson, Library of Living Philosophers XXVII. Chicago: Open Court. 1999.

Kotatko, Petr, Peter Pagin and Gabriel Segal (eds.).

Interpreting Davidson . Stanford: CSLI Publications. 2001.

Evnine, Simon.

Donald Davidson . Stanford: Stanford University Press. 1991.

Kalugin, Vladimir. "Donald Davidson (1917–2003)," Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2006. ( link ) Lepore, Ernest and Brian McLaughlin (eds.).

Actions and Events: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson . Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 1985.

Lepore, Ernest (ed.).

Truth and Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson . Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 1986.

Lepore, Ernest and Kirk Ludwig. "Donald Davidson," Midwest Studies in Philosophy , September 2004, vol. 28, pp. 309–333.

Lepore, Ernest and Kirk Ludwig.

Donald Davidson: Meaning, Truth, Language and Reality . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2005.

Lepore, Ernest and Kirk Ludwig.

Donald Davidson's Truth-Theoretic Semantics . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2007.

Ludwig, Kirk (ed.).

Donald Davidson . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2003.

Ludwig, Kirk. "Donald Davidson: Essays on Actions and Events ." In Classics of Western Philosophy: The Twentieth Century: Quine and After , vol. 5., John Shand (ed.), Acumen Press, 2006, pp. 146–165.

Malpas, Jeffrey.

Donald Davidson and the Mirror of Meaning: Holism, Truth, Interpretation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1992.

Mou, Bo (ed.).

Davidson's Philosophy and Chinese Philosophy: Constructive Engagement . Leiden & Boston: Brill. 2006.

Preyer, Gerhard, Frank Siebelt, and Alexander Ulfig (eds.).

Language, Mind and Epistemology: On Donald Davidson's Philosophy . Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 1994.

Ramberg, Bjorn.

Donald Davidson's Philosophy of Language: An Introduction . Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 1989.

Romaneczko, Marta E.

The Role of Metalanguage in  Radical Interpretation . Journal of Consciousness Studies. 2007.

Stoecker, Ralf (ed.).

Reflecting Davidson . Berlin: W. de Gruyter. 1993.

Uzunova, Boryana.

The ‘World’ of Donald Davidson: Some Remarks on the Concept [ usurped ] . In: Philosophia: E-Journal of Philosophy and Culture – 1/2012.

Vermazen, B., and Hintikka, M.

Essays on Davidson: Actions and Events . Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1985.

Zeglen, Ursula M. (ed.).

Donald Davidson: Truth, Meaning and Knowledge . London: Routledge. 1991.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Donald Davidson (philosopher) .

"Davidson's Philosophy of Language" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Donald Davidson" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Donald Davidson" – by Jeff Malpas, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2005.

"Donald Davidson (1917–2003)" by Vladimir Kalugin, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2006.

Guide to the Donald Davidson Papers at The Bancroft Library Links to related articles v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐v9t7k
Cached time: 20250817045257
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.686 seconds
Real time usage: 0.849 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5404/1000000
Revision size: 25526/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 245640/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 70820/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 103921/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.416/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8691610/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  680.894      1 -total
 28.12%  191.470      2 Template:Reflist
 24.23%  164.967      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 19.45%  132.436      1 Template:Navboxes
 18.46%  125.719      8 Template:Navbox
 15.76%  107.318      7 Template:Cite_web
 10.65%   72.485      1 Template:Analytic_philosophy
  9.89%   67.364      1 Template:Short_description
  6.46%   43.970      1 Template:Birth_date
  5.90%   40.151      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:295750:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045257 and revision id 1299144570. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Donald_Davidson_(philosopher)&oldid=1299144570 " Categories : 1917 births 2003 deaths 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Action theorists American male essayists American male non-fiction writers American philosophy academics Analytic philosophers Pragmatists Harvard University alumni Jean Nicod Prize laureates People from Springfield, Massachusetts People from Staten Island American philosophers of language Princeton University faculty Rockefeller University faculty Stanford University Department of Philosophy faculty Staten Island Academy alumni University of California, Berkeley College of Letters and Science faculty University of Chicago faculty 20th-century American male writers 21st-century American male writers Commentators on Plato Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 20:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Donald Davidson (philosopher) 33 languages Add topic

