Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Positions held 2.2 Research 3 Awards and recognitions 4 Selected works 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Linda Martín Alcoff 16 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Galego Hausa עברית Kiswahili മലയാളം مصرى ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher Linda Martín Alcoff Born 1955-07-25 Panama Nationality American Other names Linda Alcoff Education Education Georgia State University (BA, MA) Brown University (PhD) Doctoral advisor Ernest Sosa Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy feminist philosophy Institutions Hunter College CUNY Graduate Center Main interests Social epistemology feminist philosophy philosophy of gender and race Foucault Linda Martín Alcoff is a Panamanian American philosopher and professor of philosophy at Hunter College , City University of New York . Alcoff specializes in social epistemology , feminist philosophy , philosophy of race , decolonial theory and continental philosophy , especially the work of Michel Foucault .

[ 1 ] She has authored or edited more than a dozen books, including Visible Identities: Race, Gender, and the Self (2006), The Future of Whiteness (2015), and Rape and Resistance (2018). Her public philosophy writing has been published in The Guardian and The New York Times .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Alcoff has called for greater inclusion of historically underrepresented groups in philosophy. She notes that philosophers from these groups have created new fields of inquiry, including feminist philosophy , critical race theory , Latino philosophy , and LGBTQ philosophy.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] From 2012 to 2013, she served as president of the American Philosophical Association , Eastern Division.

[ 6 ] In February 2018 she was appointed president of the board of directors of Hypatia, Inc., the non-profit corporation that owns the feminist philosophy journal Hypatia .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Alcoff was born in Panama, [ 9 ] the younger of two daughters to an Irish mother, Laura, and Panamanian father, Miguel Angel Martín, who met while studying at Florida State University .

[ 10 ] Her father became a professor of history at the Universidad de Panama .

[ 11 ] When her parents separated, Alcoff moved with her mother and sister to Florida when she was three.

[ 9 ] In 1980 she earned a BA with honors in philosophy from Georgia State University and in 1983 an MA, also in philosophy. She did her doctoral work at Brown University , completing her dissertation under the direction of Ernest Sosa , Martha Nussbaum , and Richard Schmitt and receiving her PhD in 1987.

[ 12 ] Career [ edit ] Positions held [ edit ] After spending a year as assistant professor of philosophy at Kalamazoo College , Alcoff moved to Syracuse University , where she taught for the next ten years. She was tenured and promoted to associate professor in 1995 and full professor in 1999. She held visiting positions at Cornell University (1994–1995), Aarhus University (November 1999), Florida Atlantic University (Fall 2000), and Brown University (Spring 2001). She took a position as professor of philosophy and women's studies at Stony Brook University in 2002. In 2009 she became professor of philosophy at Hunter College and the City University of New York Graduate Center .

[ 12 ] Alcoff has long advocated for diversifying the discipline of philosophy. To help address these issues, with Paul Taylor and William Wilkerson, she started the "Pluralist's Guide to Philosophy".

[ 13 ] From 2010 to 2013 Alcoff was joint editor-in-chief, with Ann Cudd , of the feminist philosophy journal Hypatia .

[ 14 ] She served on its board of associate editors during the Hypatia transracialism controversy in 2017.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The journal's management subsequently established a task force to resolve the journal's governance issues; Alcoff became president of the board of directors of Hypatia, Inc., in February 2018.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Research [ edit ] Alcoff has written widely on subjects including Foucault, sexual violence, the politics of epistemology, gender and race identity, and Latino issues.

[ 12 ] She has authored four books: Real Knowing: New Versions of Coherence Theory (1996), Visible Identities: Race, Gender and the Self (2006), The Future of Whiteness (2015), and Rape and Resistance (2018).

[ 12 ] She has also edited ten volumes, written scores of peer-reviewed articles, and contributed a large number of book and encyclopedia chapters and entries.

[ 12 ] According to Google Scholar , her most widely read article, "The Problem of Speaking for Others" (1991) in Cultural Critique , has been cited nearly 3000 times.

[ 17 ] Visible Identities: Race, Gender and the Self attempted to offer a unified account of social identity by bridging her previous work in epistemology, metaphysics, and the politics of ethnicity, race, and gender.

[ 18 ] In it, Alcoff suggested that geographic location has significant implications for social identity above and beyond those conveyed by other contributors to identity (although she does not view such implications as deterministic).

[ 18 ] In "The Problem of Speaking for Others", Alcoff analyzes problems of representation that accompany the practice of speaking for others, using social epistemological concepts such as social location and social identity. She suggests "four sets of interrogatory practices" to guide acts of speaking for others across social positions: First, one's own impetus to speak should be interrogated to ensure it is not motivated by a "desire for mastery and domination". Second, one ought to recognize the significance of location and context, especially the connections between our locations and our words and how transporting words to another social location will shift their meaning. Third, she emphasizes accountability and responsibility to those whose views are to be represented; one ought to remain open to criticism. Fourth, it is crucial to recognize the possible and real effects of words on the discursive and material context of those represented.

[ 19 ] Awards and recognitions [ edit ] Alcoff has received several honors and awards, including an honorary doctorate from the University of Oslo in September 2011, and the Caribbean Philosophical Association's Frantz Fanon Prize for 2009 for her book Visible Identities: Race, Gender and the Self . She was recognized as a Distinguished Woman in Philosophy by the Society for Women in Philosophy in 2005, and she held the Meredith Professorship for Excellence in Teaching at Syracuse University from 1995 to 1998.

[ 12 ] In 2023, she was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences for her work in philosophy.

[ 20 ] Selected works [ edit ] Alcoff, Linda Martín (1996).

Real Knowing: New Versions of the Coherence Theory . New York: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9780801430473 .

Alcoff, Linda (1997). "Cultural feminism versus post-structuralism: the identity crisis in feminist theory". In Nicholson, Linda (ed.).

The Second Wave: A Reader in Feminist Theory . New York: Routledge. pp.

330– 355.

ISBN 9780415917612 .

Alcoff, Linda Martín (2006).

Visible Identities: Race, Gender and the Self . Oxford University Press.

Alcoff, Linda; Kittay, Eva (2007).

The Blackwell Guide to Feminist Philosophy . Malden, MA, and Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 9780631224273 .

Alcoff, Linda Martín (2015).

The Future of Whiteness . Cambridge and Malden, MA: Polity Press.

Alcoff, Linda Martín (2018).

Rape and Resistance . Polity Press.

ISBN 9780745691916 .

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ "CUNY Graduate Center Faculty Bio" . City University of New York . Retrieved June 21, 2020 .

^ "The Guardian Author Page" .

The Guardian . Retrieved June 22, 2020 .

^ "NYTimes Opinionator Author Page" .

The New York Times . February 4, 2015 . Retrieved June 22, 2020 .

^ Mann, Bonnie (2013). "Three White Men Walk into a Bar".

Radical Philosophy Review .

16 (3): 733– 746.

doi : 10.5840/radphilrev201316354 .

^ Wilson, Robin (January 18, 2013).

"Women Challenge Male Philosophers to Make Room in Unfriendly Field" .

Chronicle of Higher Education .

59 (19): A1 – A6 .

^ "APA Divisional Presidents & Addresses" . American Philosophical Association . Retrieved February 22, 2014 .

^ a b "Announcement from Hypatia's Board of Directors and Task Force Co-Chairs" . Hypatia. February 23, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 1, 2018.

^ a b Weinberg, Justin (July 24, 2017).

"Hypatia's Associate Editors Resign" .

Daily Nous .

^ a b Yancy, George; Alcoff, Linda Martín (February 4, 2015).

"Philosophy's Lost Body and Soul" .

The New York Times .

^ Alcoff, Linda Martin (2015).

The Future of Whiteness . Cambridge and Malden: Polity Press. pp.

30– 31, 34.

^ Alcoff, Linda Martín (2006).

Visible Identities: Race, Gender and the Self . Oxford University Press. pp. vii, 8.

^ a b c d e f Alcoff, Linda Martín.

"Curriculum Vitae" . alcoff.com. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018 . Retrieved February 23, 2014 .

^ "Pluralist Guide to Philosophy Home" . Retrieved June 21, 2020 .

^ "Editorial board" . Hypatia. March 1, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 1, 2018.

^ Brubaker, Roger (May 18, 2017).

"The Uproar Over 'Transracialism'" .

The New York Times .

^ Alcoff, Linda Martin (May 4, 2017).

"Here's my take" .

Archived from the original on May 15, 2017 – via Facebook.

^ "Google Scholar" . Retrieved June 21, 2020 .

^ a b Sundstrom, Ronald (June 22, 2006).

"Visible Identities: Race, Gender and the Self (Review)" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

^ Alcoff, Linda (Winter 1991–1992).

"The Problem of Speaking for Others" .

Cultural Critique .

20 (20): 5– 32.

doi : 10.2307/1354221 .

JSTOR 1354221 . Retrieved June 14, 2021 .

^ "New Members" .

American Academy of Arts & Sciences . Retrieved April 23, 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Linda Martín Alcoff's webpage Linda Martin Alcoff's Hunter College page Linda Marin Alcoff's CUNY Graduate Center page Linda Martín Alcoff Papers – Pembroke Center Archives v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii PhilPeople People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Linda_Martín_Alcoff&oldid=1291993695 " Categories : American women philosophers Syracuse University faculty Brown University faculty Hunter College faculty Feminist studies scholars Living people American feminists Philosophers from New York (state) Philosophers from Rhode Island Presidents of the American Philosophical Association Panamanian emigrants to the United States 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers 20th-century American women 21st-century American women writers Social epistemologists 21st-century American women educators 21st-century American educators 1955 births Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2022 Articles with hCards All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2022 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 16:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Linda Martín Alcoff 16 languages Add topic

