Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Chinese intellectual tradition 1.1.1 Iconoclastic revolution and anti-Confucianism 1.1.2 Nationalism and the appeal of Marxism 1.2 Yan'an period between November 1935 and March 1947 1.3 Mao Zedong's intellectual development 1.3.1 Initial Marxist period (1920–1926) 1.3.2 Formative Maoist period (1927–1935) 1.3.3 Mature Maoist period (1935–1940) 1.3.4 Civil War period (1940–1949) 1.3.5 Post-Civil War period (1949–1976) 1.4 Differences from Marxism 1.5 After Mao Zedong's death 2 Components Toggle Components subsection 2.1 New Democracy 2.2 People's war 2.3 Mass line 2.4 Cultural Revolution 2.5 Contradiction 2.6 Three Worlds Theory 2.7 Agrarian socialism 3 International influence Toggle International influence subsection 3.1 Afghanistan 3.2 Australia 3.3 Bangladesh 3.4 Belgium 3.5 Ecuador 3.6 France 3.7 India 3.8 Iran 3.9 Israel 3.10 Italy 3.11 Mao-Spontex 3.12 Palestine 3.13 Peru 3.14 Philippines 3.15 Portugal 3.16 Spain 3.17 Sweden 3.18 Tanzania 3.19 Turkey 3.20 United States 4 Criticism and implementation Toggle Criticism and implementation subsection 4.1 Populism 4.2 Nationalism 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Maoism 74 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша ລາວ Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Variant of Marxism–Leninism "Maoist" redirects here. For the novel by Roopesh, see Maoist (novel) .

Not to be confused with Marxism–Leninism–Maoism .

Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e This article is part of a series about Mao Zedong Personal Early life Former Residence Death and state funeral Memorial Hall Ideology Maoism Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Leadership Tenure Revolution Land Reform Movement Proclamation Korean War Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Bandung Conference Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Canton Fair Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Two Bombs, One Satellite Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Third Front Cultural Revolution Abolition of the presidency UN representation Richard Nixon visit Works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship On the Ten Major Relationships Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Legacy Cult of personality Chairman Mao en route to Anyuan Portraits overlooking Tiananmen 1989 vandalism incident Statues Young Fuzhou Chengdu Long Live the Victory North Park Commune inspection v t e Maoism , officially Mao Zedong Thought , [ a ] is a variety of Marxism–Leninism that Mao Zedong developed while trying to realize a socialist revolution in the agricultural, pre-industrial society of the Republic of China and later the People's Republic of China . A difference between Maoism and traditional Marxism–Leninism is that a united front of progressive forces in class society would lead the revolutionary vanguard in pre-industrial societies [ 3 ] rather than communist revolutionaries alone. This theory, in which revolutionary praxis is primary and ideological orthodoxy is secondary, represents urban Marxism–Leninism adapted to pre-industrial China. Later theoreticians expanded on the idea that Mao had adapted Marxism–Leninism to Chinese conditions, arguing that he had in fact updated it fundamentally and that Maoism could be applied universally throughout the world. This ideology is often referred to as Marxism–Leninism–Maoism to distinguish it from the original ideas of Mao.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ non-primary source needed ] [ 6 ] [ page needed ] From the 1950s until the Chinese economic reforms of Deng Xiaoping in the late 1970s, Maoism was the political and military ideology of the Chinese Communist Party and Maoist revolutionary movements worldwide.

[ 7 ] After the Sino-Soviet split of the 1960s, the Chinese Communist Party and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union each claimed to be the sole heir and successor to Joseph Stalin concerning the correct interpretation of Marxism–Leninism and the ideological leader of world communism .

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Politics of China Leadership Leadership generations Succession of power Hu–Wen Administration (2002–2012) Xi–Li Administration (2012–2017) Xi's general secretaryship (since 2012) 4th Leadership Core : Xi Jinping 20th Party Politburo : Xi Jinping 14th State Council : Li Qiang Current state leaders Current provincial leaders Party and state leaders Orders of precedence Paramount leader : Xi Jinping First lady : Peng Liyuan Communist Party leader : Xi Jinping State representative : Xi Jinping Head of government : Li Qiang Congress Chairman : Zhao Leji Conference Chairman : Wang Huning Commander-in-chief : Xi Jinping Politburo Standing Committee longest-serving members Related systems Unified power Democratic centralism Collective leadership Organization Department Elections Civil service Constitution Law Constitution Previous constitutions 1954 1975 1978 "People's democratic dictatorship" (Article 1) Democratic centralism (Article 3) Constitutional oath of office (Article 27) Protection of human rights (Article 33) Freedom of religion (Article 36) Highest state organ of power (Article 57) Chinese legal system Civil law tradition Socialist law tradition Laws Legislation Law List of statutes General Principles of the Civil Law (to 2020) Civil Code (from 2021) Marriage Law Labour law Labour Law Labour Contract Law Property law Property Law Intellectual property law Patent law Administrative law Administrative Procedure Law Criminal law Capital punishment Capital offences Death sentence with reprieve Communist Party History Principal leaders Constitution and ideology Admission Oath (Article 6) Socialism with Chinese characteristics Communism Marxism–Leninism Mao Zedong Thought Deng Xiaoping Theory Primary stage of socialism Four Cardinal Principles Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Harmonious Socialist Society Xi Jinping Thought Chinese Dream Democracy Whole-process people's democracy Organization National Party Congress ( 20th ) Central Committee ( 20th ) General Secretary ( list ) Xi Jinping Central Politburo ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Central Secretariat ( 20th ) First-ranked secretary: Cai Qi Central Military Commission Chairman : Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia , He Weidong National Security Commission Chairman: Xi Jinping Vice-Chairman: Li Qiang , Zhao Leji , Cai Qi Office Chief: Cai Qi Comprehensively Deepening Reforms Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Directors: Li Qiang , Wang Huning , Cai Qi Secretary-General: Wang Huning Financial & Economic Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Office Chief: He Lifeng General Office Director : Cai Qi Office of the General Secretary Director: Han Shiming Central Guard Bureau Central Guard Unit Office of the Central Secrecy Commission Organization Department Head : Shi Taifeng Central Commission for Discipline Inspection ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Secretary : Li Xi Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Central Leading Group for Inspection Work Leader: Li Xi Provincial committee Standing committee Secretary Deputy secretaries Party group National People's Congress ( 14th ) Elections Democracy System of people's congress Standing Committee ( 14th ) Council of Chairpersons Chairman : Zhao Leji Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Li Hongzhong Secretary-General : Liu Qi Special Committees Ethnic Affairs Constitution and Law Supervisory and Judicial Affairs Financial and Economic Affairs Education, Science, Culture and Public Health Foreign Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Environmental Protection and Resources Conservation Agriculture and Rural Affairs Social Development Affairs Presidium State representative President ( list ): Xi Jinping Presidential Office Chief: Han Shiming Vice President : Han Zheng Executive organ State Council (Central People's Government) Li Qiang Cabinet Premier ( list ): Li Qiang Vice-Premiers ( list ) Ding Xuexiang He Lifeng Zhang Guoqing Liu Guozhong State Councilors Wang Xiaohong Wu Zhenglong Shen Yiqin Secretary-General : Wu Zhenglong Cabinet-level departments National Development & Reform Commission Central bank National Audit Office General Office Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General State-owned Assets Supervision & Administration Commission most Central Enterprises Military organ Central Military Commission (CMC) Chairman ( supreme commander ): Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia He Weidong Members: Liu Zhenli Miao Hua Zhang Shengmin Departments: General Office Director: Zhong Shaojun Joint Staff Dept.

Chief : Liu Zhenli Political Work Dept.

Director: Miao Hua Logistic Support Dept.

Director: Zhang Lin Equipment Development Dept.

Director: Xu Xueqiang Training and Administration Dept.

Director: Wang Peng National Defense Mobilization Dept.

Director: Liu Faqing Discipline Inspection Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Politics and Legal Affairs Commission Science and Technology Commission Strategic Planning Office Reform & Organizational Structure Office Int'l Military Cooperation Office Audit Office Offices Administration Agency National armed forces: People's Liberation Army Theater commands People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Militia State Council National Defense Mobilization Commission Chairman : Li Qiang Ministry of National Defense Minister : Dong Jun Ministry of Veterans Affairs State Administration for Sci., Tech. & Industry for National Defense Military history Armed conflicts Military modernization Military reform since 2015 CMC Leading Group for Military Reform Leader: Xi Jinping Supervisory organ National Supervisory Commission Director : Liu Jinguo Corruption in China Anti-corruption campaign since 2012 Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) Commission Against Corruption (Macau) Judicial organs Supreme People's Court President : Zhang Jun People's Courts Judicial Police Supreme People's Procuratorate Procurator-General : Ying Yong People's Procuratorates Judicial Police Judiciary of Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Department of Justice Prosecutions Division Law enforcement in Hong Kong Disciplined Services Security Bureau Hong Kong Police Force Judiciary of Macau Court of Final Appeal Public Prosecutions Office Secretariat for Security Macau Security Force Unitary Police Services [ zh ] Public Security Police Judiciary Police [ zh ] United front System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Political Consultative Conference National Committee ( 14th ) Chairman : Wang Huning Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Shi Taifeng Secretary-General : Wang Dongfeng Political parties : CCP (ruling) United Front Work Department Head : Li Ganjie Democratic parties RCCK CDL CNDCA CAPD CPWDP CZGP JS TDSL Historical parties: KMT CDSP YCP Federation of Industry and Commerce People's organizations Law enforcement CCP Central Politics and Law Commission Secretary : Chen Wenqing Enforced disappearance Ministry of Public Security Minister : Wang Xiaohong Public Security Organs People's Police State Immigration Administration Local public security bureaus Ministry of State Security Minister : Chen Yixin State Security Organs People's Police Ministry of Justice Minister : He Rong Judicial Administrative Organs People's Police People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Bureau of Prison Administration [ zh ] Office for Safeguarding National Security Urban Management (chengguan) Propaganda Central Leading Group for Propaganda, Ideology and Culture Leader: Cai Qi Deputy Leaders: Li Shulei , Shen Yiqin Central Guidance Commission on Building Spiritual Civilization Director: Cai Qi Deputy Director: Li Shulei Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party Head : Li Shulei General Administration of Press and Publication China Film Administration State Council Information Office China Daily Ministry of Culture and Tourism National Radio and Television Administration China Media Group China Central Television China Global Television Network China National Radio China Radio International Xinhua News Agency Reference News China News Service People's Daily Global Times China Today Censorship in China Great Cannon Great Firewall Overseas censorship Radio jamming Media of China Internal media International communication centers Publishing industry in China Internet in China Internet censorship Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission Director: Cai Qi Cyberspace Administration of China Director: Zhuang Rongwen Hong Kong Macau Central Leading Group on Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Leader: Ding Xuexiang HK & Macau Affairs Office Director: Xia Baolong Hong Kong Liaison Office Macau Liaison Office One country, two systems Special administrative regions Hong Kong Basic Law Chief Executive : John Lee Ka-chiu Hong Kong SAR Government Politics of Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Pro-democracy camp Independence movement Mainland & HK CEPA Macao Basic Law Chief Executive : Ho Iat-seng Macau SAR Government Politics of Macau Mainland & Macau CEPA Cross-strait relations Cross-strait relations Chinese Civil War One China Political status of Taiwan Republic of China on Taiwan Taiwan Area "Taiwan Province", PRC Taiwan independence movement Anti-Secession Law Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Chinese unification Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs Leader: Xi Jinping Deputy Leader: Wang Huning Taiwan Affairs Office Director: Song Tao Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Foreign relations Central Foreign Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Secretary-General: Wang Yi Ministry of Foreign Affairs Minister : Wang Yi Spokespersons Diplomatic missions Diplomatic missions of China / in China Foreign aid from China / to China International Development Cooperation Agency Ministry of Commerce Exim Bank of China China Development Bank Belt and Road Initiative Silk Road Fund Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank BRICS New Development Bank Ministry of National Defense International Military Cooperation Office NPC Foreign Affairs Committee CCP International Department State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Office Chinese nationality law Chinese passports ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) Visa requirements for Chinese citizens ( Hong Kong , Macau ) Visa policy of China ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) National Immigration Administration Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Panda diplomacy Beijing Consensus Community of Common Destiny China and the United Nations China and the World Trade Organization Shanghai Cooperation Organisation China–Africa relations China–Arab relations China–Caribbean relations China–European Union relations China–Latin America relations China–Pacific relations China–Russia relations China–United States relations Related topics Administrative divisions Chinese information operations Ethnic minorities Family planning Hukou system Human rights in China Chinese intelligence activity abroad China portal Other countries v t e Further information: Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Chinese intellectual tradition [ edit ] At the turn of the 19th century, the contemporary Chinese intellectual tradition was defined by two central concepts: iconoclasm and nationalism .

[ 8 ] : 12–16 Iconoclastic revolution and anti-Confucianism [ edit ] By the turn of the 20th century, a proportionately small yet socially significant cross-section of China's traditional elite (i.e., landlords and bureaucrats) found themselves increasingly sceptical of the efficacy and even the moral validity of Confucianism .

[ 8 ] : 10 These skeptical iconoclasts formed a new segment of Chinese society, a modern intelligentsia whose arrival—or as the historian of China Maurice Meisner would label it, their defection—heralded the beginning of the destruction of the gentry as a social class in China.

[ 8 ] : 11 The fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911 marked the final failure of the Confucian moral order, and it did much to make Confucianism synonymous with political and social conservatism in the minds of Chinese intellectuals. This association of conservatism and Confucianism lent to the iconoclastic nature of Chinese intellectual thought during the first decades of the 20th century.

[ 8 ] : 14 Chinese iconoclasm was expressed most clearly and vociferously by Chen Duxiu during the New Culture Movement , which occurred between 1915 and 1919.

[ 8 ] : 14 Proposing the "total destruction of the traditions and values of the past", the New Culture Movement, spearheaded by the New Youth , a periodical published by Chen Duxiu, profoundly influenced the young Mao Zedong, whose first published work appeared in the magazine's pages.

[ 8 ] : 14 Nationalism and the appeal of Marxism [ edit ] Along with iconoclasm, radical anti-imperialism dominated the Chinese intellectual tradition and slowly evolved into a fierce nationalist fervor which influenced Mao's philosophy immensely and was crucial in adapting Marxism to the Chinese model.

[ 8 ] : 44 Vital to understanding Chinese nationalist sentiments of the time is the Treaty of Versailles , which was signed in 1919. The Treaty aroused a wave of bitter nationalist resentment in Chinese intellectuals as lands formerly ceded to Germany in Shandong were—without consultation with the Chinese—transferred to Japanese control rather than returned to Chinese sovereignty.

[ 8 ] : 17 The adverse reaction culminated in the May Fourth Movement in 1919, during which a protest began with 3,000 students in Beijing displaying their anger at the announcement of the Versailles Treaty's concessions to Japan. The protest turned violent as protesters began attacking the homes and offices of ministers who were seen as cooperating with or being in the direct pay of the Japanese.

[ 8 ] : 17 The popular movement which followed "catalyzed the political awakening of a society which had long seemed inert and dormant." [ 8 ] : 17 Another international event would have a significant impact not only on Mao but also on the Chinese intelligentsia. The Russian Revolution elicited great interest among Chinese intellectuals, although the socialist revolution in China was not considered a viable option until after the 4 May Incident.

[ 8 ] : 18 Afterward, "[t]o become a Marxist was one way for a Chinese intellectual to reject both the traditions of the Chinese past and Western domination of the Chinese present." [ 8 ] : 18 Yan'an period between November 1935 and March 1947 [ edit ] Immediately following the Long March , Mao and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) were headquartered in the Yan'an Soviet in Shaanxi . During this period, Mao established himself as a Marxist theoretician and produced most of the works that would later be canonised as the "Thought of Mao Zedong".

[ 8 ] : 45 The rudimentary philosophical base of Chinese Communist ideology is laid down in Mao's numerous dialectical treatises and was conveyed to newly recruited party members. This period established ideological independence from Moscow for Mao and the CCP.

[ 8 ] : 45 Although the Yan'an period did answer some of the ideological and theoretical questions raised by the Chinese Communist Revolution , it left many crucial questions unresolved, including how the Chinese Communist Party was supposed to launch a socialist revolution while wholly separated from the urban sphere.

[ 8 ] : 45 Mao Zedong's intellectual development [ edit ] Strategic Issues of Anti-Japanese Guerrilla War (1938) Mao's intellectual development can be divided into five significant periods, namely: the initial Marxist period from 1920 to 1926 the formative Maoist period from 1927 to 1935 the mature Maoist period from 1935 to 1940 the Civil-War period from 1940 to 1949 the post-1949 period following the revolutionary victory Initial Marxist period (1920–1926) [ edit ] Marxist thinking employs immanent socioeconomic explanations, whereas Mao's reasons were declarations of his enthusiasm. Mao did not believe education alone would transition from capitalism to communism for three main reasons. (1) the capitalists would not repent and turn towards communism on their own; (2) the rulers must be overthrown by the people; (3) "the proletarians are discontented, and a demand for communism has arisen and had already become a fact." [ 9 ] : 109 Formative Maoist period (1927–1935) [ edit ] In this period, Mao avoided all theoretical implications in his literature and employed a minimum of Marxist category thought. His writings in this period failed to elaborate on what he meant by the "Marxist method of political and class analysis".

[ 9 ] : 111 Mature Maoist period (1935–1940) [ edit ] Intellectually, this was Mao's most fruitful time. The orientation shift was apparent in his pamphlet Strategic Problems of China's Revolutionary War (December 1936). This pamphlet tried to provide a theoretical veneer for his concern with revolutionary practice.

[ 9 ] : 113 Mao started to separate from the Soviet model since it was not automatically applicable to China. China's unique set of historical circumstances demanded a correspondingly unique application of Marxist theory, an application that would have to diverge from the Soviet approach.

In the late 1930s, writings and speeches by Mao and other leaders close to Mao began to emerge as the Communist Party's developing ideology.

[ 10 ] : 27 This was described as the Sinicization of Marxism.

[ 10 ] : 27 Mao's view was that these concepts were not a complete system of thought but were still developing.

[ 10 ] : 27 As a result, he decided not to use the term "Maoism" and instead favored characterizing these ideological contributions as Mao Zedong Thought ( Mao Zedong sixiang ).

[ 10 ] : 27 Beginning in the Yan'an period, Mao Zedong Thought became the ideological guide for developing revolutionary culture and a long-term social movement.

[ 11 ] : 53 Strategic Issues in the Chinese Revolutionary War (1947) Civil War period (1940–1949) [ edit ] Unlike the Mature period, this period was intellectually barren. Mao focused more on revolutionary practice and paid less attention to Marxist theory. He continued to emphasise theory as practice-oriented knowledge.

[ 9 ] : 117 The most crucial topic of the theory he delved into was in connection with the Cheng Feng movement of 1942. Here, Mao summarised the correlation between Marxist theory and Chinese practice: "The target is the Chinese revolution, the arrow is Marxism–Leninism. We Chinese communists seek this arrow for no other purpose than to hit the target of the Chinese revolution and the revolution of the east." [ 9 ] : 117 The only new emphasis was Mao's concern with two types of subjectivist deviation: (1) dogmatism , the excessive reliance upon abstract theory; (2) empiricism , excessive dependence on experience.

In 1945, the party's first historical resolution put forward Mao Zedong Thought as the party's unified ideology.

[ 12 ] : 6 It was also incorporated into the party's constitution .

[ 13 ] : 23 Post-Civil War period (1949–1976) [ edit ] To Mao, the victory of 1949 was a confirmation of theory and practice. "Optimism is the keynote to Mao's intellectual orientation in the post-1949 period." [ 9 ] : 118 Mao assertively revised the theory to relate it to the new practice of socialist construction. These revisions are apparent in the 1951 version of On Contradiction . "In the 1930s, when Mao talked about contradiction, he meant the contradiction between subjective thought and objective reality. In Dialectal Materialism of 1940, he saw idealism and materialism as two possible correlations between subjective thought and objective reality. In the 1940s, he introduced no new elements into his understanding of the subject-object contradiction. In the 1951 version of On Contradiction , he saw contradiction as a universal principle underlying all processes of development, yet with each contradiction possessed of its own particularity." [ 9 ] : 119 In 1956, Mao first fully theorized his view of continual revolution.

[ 14 ] : 92 Differences from Marxism [ edit ] Beijing, 1978. The billboard reads, "Long Live Marxism, Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought!" Maoism and Marxism differ in how the proletariat is defined and in which political and economic conditions would start a communist revolution .

For Marx, the proletariat was the urban working class , which was determined in the revolution by which the bourgeoisie overthrew feudalism .

[ 15 ] For Mao Zedong, the revolutionary class was the millions of peasants he referred to as the popular masses . Mao based his revolution upon the peasantry. They possessed, according to him, two qualities: (i) they were poor and (ii) they were a political blank slate; in Mao's words, "[a] clean sheet of paper has no blotches, and so the newest and most beautiful words can be written on it." [ 16 ] For Marx, the proletarian revolution was internally fuelled by the capitalist mode of production; as capitalism developed, "a tension arises between the productive forces and the mode of production ." [ 17 ] The political tension between the productive forces (the workers) and the owners of the means of production (the capitalists) would be an inevitable incentive for the proletarian revolution, resulting in a communist society . Mao did not subscribe to Marx's theory of inevitable cyclicality in the economic system. His goal was to unify the Chinese nation and so realise progressive change for China in the form of communism; hence, a revolution was needed at once. In The Great Union of the Popular Masses (1919), Mao wrote that "[t]he decadence of the state, the sufferings of humanity, and the darkness of society have all reached an extreme." [ 18 ] After Mao Zedong's death [ edit ] Deng Xiaoping The CCP's ideological framework distinguishes between political ideas described as "Thought" (as in Mao Zedong Thought) or as "Theory" (as in Deng Xiaoping Theory ).

[ 19 ] : 2 Thought carries more weight than Theory and conveys the greater relative importance of a leader's ideological and historical influence.

[ 19 ] : 2 The process of formalizing a leader's political thinking in the Marxist tradition is important in establishing a leader's ideological legitimacy.

[ 19 ] : 3 Mao Zedong Thought is frequently described as the result of collaboration between the first-generation leaders of the Party and is principally based on Mao's analysis of Marxism and Chinese history.

[ 11 ] : 53 It is often also described as the adaptation of Marxism to the Chinese context.

[ 11 ] : 53 Observing that concepts of both Marxism and Chinese culture were and are contested, academic Rebecca Karl writes that the development of Mao Zedong Thought is best viewed as the result of Mao's mutual interpretation of these concepts producing Mao's view of theory and revolutionary practice.

[ 11 ] : 53 Mao Zedong Thought asserts that class struggle continues even if the proletariat has already overthrown the bourgeoisie and there are capitalist restorationist elements within the CCP itself. Maoism provided the CCP's first comprehensive theoretical guideline regarding how to continue the socialist revolution, the creation of a socialist society, and socialist military construction and highlights various contradictions in society to be addressed by what is termed "socialist construction". While it continues to be lauded to be the major force that defeated "imperialism and feudalism" and created a "New China" by the Chinese Communist Party, the ideology survives only in name on the Communist Party's Constitution as Deng Xiaoping abolished most Maoist practices in 1978, advancing a guiding ideology called " socialism with Chinese characteristics ".

[ 20 ] [ need quotation to verify ] Shortly after Mao died in 1976, Deng Xiaoping initiated socialist market reforms in 1978, thereby beginning the radical change in Mao's ideology in the People's Republic of China (PRC).

[ 21 ] Although Mao Zedong Thought nominally remains the state ideology, Deng's admonition to " seek truth from facts " means that state policies are judged on their practical consequences, and in many areas, the role of ideology in determining policy has thus been considerably reduced. Deng also separated Mao from Maoism, making it clear that Mao was fallible, and hence the truth of Maoism comes from observing social consequences rather than by using Mao's quotations dogmatically.

[ 22 ] On June 27, 1981, the Communist Party's Central Committee adopted the Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People's Republic of China .

[ 11 ] : 166 The Resolution assesses the legacy of the Mao era, describing Mao as first among equals in the development of Mao Zedong Thought before 1949 and deeming Mao Zedong Thought as successful in establishing national independence, transforming China's social classes, the development of economic self-sufficiency, the expansion of education and health care, and China's leadership role in the Third World.

[ 11 ] : 166–167 The Resolution describes setbacks during the period 1957 to 1964 (although it generally affirms this period) and major mistakes beginning in 1965.

[ 11 ] : 167 The Resolution describes upholding the guidance of Mao Zedong Thought and Marxism-Leninism as among the Communist Party's cardinal principles.

[ 11 ] : 168 Contemporary Maoists in China criticise the social inequalities created by the revisionist Communist Party. Some Maoists say that Deng's Reform and Opening economic policies that introduced market principles spelled the end of Maoism in China. However, Deng asserted that his reforms were upholding Mao Zedong Thought in accelerating the output of the country's productive forces. A recent example of a Chinese politician regarded as neo-Maoist in terms of political strategies and mass mobilisation via red songs was Bo Xilai in Chongqing .

[ 23 ] Although Mao Zedong Thought is still listed as one of the Four Cardinal Principles of the People's Republic of China, its historical role has been re-assessed. The Communist Party now says that Maoism was necessary to break China free from its feudal past, but it also says that the actions of Mao led to excesses during the Cultural Revolution.

[ 24 ] The official view is that China has now reached an economic and political stage, known as the primary stage of socialism , in which China faces new and different problems completely unforeseen by Mao, and as such, the solutions that Mao advocated are no longer relevant to China's current conditions. The 1981 Resolution reads: Chief responsibility for the grave 'Left' error of the 'cultural revolution,' an error comprehensive in magnitude and protracted in duration, does indeed lie with Comrade Mao Zedong [...] [and] far from making a correct analysis of many problems, he confused right and wrong and the people with the enemy [...] herein lies his tragedy.

[ 25 ] Scholars outside China see this re-working of the definition of Maoism as providing an ideological justification for what they see as the restoration of the essentials of capitalism in China by Deng and his successors, who sought to "eradicate all ideological and physiological obstacles to economic reform".

[ 26 ] In 1978, this led to the Sino-Albanian split when Albanian leader Enver Hoxha denounced Deng as a revisionist, stating "The events and facts are demonstrating ever more clearly that China is sinking deeper and deeper into revisionism, capitalism and imperialism" [ 27 ] and formed Hoxhaism as an anti-revisionist form of Marxism.

" Long live Chairman Mao ! Long live Chairman Gonzalo ! Long live the theory of protracted people's war !" (毛主席万岁！贡萨罗主席万岁！持久人民战争理论万岁！) New Leftist graffiti on a wall at Qinghua South Road, Beijing, 6 December 2021.

The CCP officially regards Mao himself as a "great revolutionary leader" for his role in fighting against the Japanese fascist invasion during the Second World War and creating the People's Republic of China, but Maoism, as implemented between 1959 and 1976, is regarded by today's CCP as an economic and political disaster. In Deng's day, support of radical Maoism was regarded as a form of "left deviationism" and based on a cult of personality , although these "errors" are officially attributed to the Gang of Four rather than Mao himself.

[ 28 ] Thousands of Maoists were arrested in the Hua Guofeng period after 1976. The prominent Maoists Zhang Chunqiao and Jiang Qing were sentenced to death with a two-year-reprieve, while others were sentenced to life imprisonment or imprisonment for 15 years.

[ citation needed ] After the Tiananmen Square protests and massacre , Mao's influence continued to be weaker. Although not very influential, some radical Maoists, disgruntled by the injustices suffered by migrant workers, organized a number of protests and strikes, including the Jasic incident . In the 2020s, influenced by the growing wealth gap and the 996 working hour system , Mao's thoughts are being revived in China's generation Z , as they question authority of the CCP. The Chinese government has censored some Maoist posts.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] The 2021 The Resolution on the Major Achievements and Historical Experience of the Party over the Past Century describes Mao Zedong Thought as "a summation of theories, principles, and experience on China's revolution and construction that has been proven correct through practice, and [having] put forward a series of important theories for socialist construction." [ 31 ] : 91 Components [ edit ] New Democracy [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The theory of the New Democracy was known to the Chinese revolutionaries from the late 1940s. This thesis held that for most people, the "long road to socialism " could only be opened by a "national, popular, democratic, anti-feudal and anti-imperialist revolution, run by the communists".

[ 32 ] People's war [ edit ] See also: People's war Holding that " political power grows out of the barrel of a gun ", [ 33 ] Maoism emphasises the "revolutionary struggle of the vast majority of people against the exploiting classes and their state structures", which Mao termed a people's war . Mobilizing large parts of rural populations to revolt against established institutions by engaging in guerrilla warfare , Maoist Thought focuses on "surrounding the cities from the countryside".

Maoism views the industrial-rural divide as a major division exploited by capitalism, identifying capitalism as involving industrial urban developed First World societies ruling over rural developing Third World societies.

[ 34 ] Maoism identifies peasant insurgencies in particular national contexts as part of a context of world revolution, in which Maoism views the global countryside as overwhelming the global cities.

[ 35 ] Due to this imperialism by the capitalist urban First World toward the rural Third World, Maoism has endorsed national liberation movements in the Third World.

[ 35 ] Mass line [ edit ] Main article: Mass line Building on the theory of the vanguard party [ 36 ] by Vladimir Lenin , the theory of the mass line outlines a strategy for the revolutionary leadership of the masses, consolidation of the dictatorship of the proletariat , and strengthening of the party and the building of socialism . The mass line can be summarised as "from the masses, to the masses". It has three components or stages: [ 37 ] Gathering the diverse ideas of the masses.

Processing or concentrating these ideas from the perspective of revolutionary Marxism, in light of the long-term, ultimate interests of the masses (which the masses may sometimes only dimly perceive) and in light of a scientific analysis of the objective situation.

Returning these concentrated ideas to the masses in the form of a political line which will advance the mass struggle toward revolution.

These three steps should be applied repeatedly, reiteratively uplifting practice and knowledge to higher and higher stages.

Cultural Revolution [ edit ] The theory of cultural revolution - rooted in Marxism-Leninism thought [ 7 ] - states that the proletarian revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat do not wipe out bourgeois ideology; the class struggle continues and even intensifies during socialism. Therefore, a constant struggle against bourgeois ideology, traditional cultural values, and the social roots that encourage both of them must be conducted in order to create and maintain a society in which socialism can succeed.

Practical examples of this theory's application can be seen in the rapid social changes undergone by post-revolution Soviet Union in the late 1920s -1930s [ 38 ] as well as pre-revolution China in the New Culture and May Fourth movements of the 1910s-1920s.

[ 39 ] Both of these sociocultural movements can be seen as shaping Maoist theory on the need for and goals of Cultural Revolution, and subsequently the mass cultural movements enacted by the CCP under Mao, which include the Great Leap Forward, the Anti-rightist movement of the 1950s, and the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution of the 1960s-1970s .

[ 40 ] The social upheavals that occurred from the New Culture Movement - as well as the May Fourth Movement that followed it [ 41 ] - largely focused around the dismantling of traditional Han Chinese cultural norms in which the majority of the populace were illiterate and largely uneducated.

[ 39 ] [ 42 ] This consequence of this social dynamic was that political and economic power largely resided in the hands of a small group of educated elites, and Han Chinese culture formed around principles of respect and reverence for these educated and powerful authority figures. The aforementioned movements sought to combat these social norms through grassroots educational campaigns which were focused primarily around giving educational opportunities towards to people from traditionally uneducated families and normalising all people to be comfortable making challenges towards traditional figures of authority in Confucian society.

[ 43 ] The cultural revolution experienced by the Soviet Union was similar to the New Culture and May Fourth movements experienced by China in that it also placed a great importance on mass education and the normalisation of challenging of traditional cultural norms in the realising of a socialist society. However, the movements occurring in the Soviet Union had a far more adversarial mindset towards proponents of traditional values, with leadership in the party taking action to censor and exile these "enemies of change" on over 200 occasions, [ 44 ] rather than exclusively putting pressure on these forces by enacting additive social changes such as education campaigns.

The most prominent example of a Maoist application of cultural revolution can be seen in the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution of the 1960s and 1970s wherein Mao claimed that "Revisionist" forces had entered society and infiltrated the government, with the goal of reinstating traditionalism and capitalism in China.

[ 45 ] Leaning more on the example of the Soviet Union, which involved the silencing and subjugation of adversarial political forces to help bring about a cultural change, Mao called for his followers to speak openly and critically about revisionist forces that they were observing in society and to expel them, assuring them that their actions would be endorsed by the party and that their efforts would in no way be interfered with.

[ 46 ] [ page needed ] This warrant granted to the public ultimately lead to roughly ten years in which those seen as "Revisionist" forces - largely understood to mean landlords, rich peasants, and the so-called "bourgeoise academic" [ 47 ] - were publicly criticised and denounced in places of gathering, and in more extreme examples had physical violence inflicted on them, including being beaten, tortured, and/or killed for their perceived crimes.

[ 48 ] Beginning in 1967, Mao and the PLA sought to restrain the mass organizations that had developed during the early phase of the Cultural Revolution, and began reframing the movement as one to study Mao Zedong Thought rather than using it as a guide to immediate action.

[ 11 ] : 133 Contradiction [ edit ] Mao drew from the writings of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels , and Vladimir Lenin in elaborating his theory. Philosophically, his most important reflections emerge on the concept of "contradiction" ( maodun ). In two major essays, On Contradiction and On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People , he adopts the idea that contradiction is present in matter itself and thus also in the ideas of the brain. Matter always develops through a dialectical contradiction: "The interdependence of the contradictory aspects present in all things and the struggle between these aspects determine the life of things and push their development forward. There is nothing that does not contain contradiction; without contradiction nothing would exist".

[ 49 ] Mao held that contradictions were the essential feature of society, and a wide range of contradictions dominates society, this calls for various strategies. Revolution is necessary to resolve the fully antagonistic contradictions between labour and capital. Contradictions within the revolutionary movement call for an ideological correction to prevent them from becoming antagonistic. Furthermore, each contradiction (including class struggle , the contradiction holding between relations of production and the concrete development of forces of production) expresses itself in a series of other contradictions, some dominant, others not. "There are many contradictions in the process of development of a complex thing, and one of them is necessarily the principal contradiction whose existence and development determine or influence the existence and development of the other contradictions".

[ 50 ] The principal contradiction should be tackled with priority when trying to make the fundamental contradiction "solidify". Mao elaborates on this theme in the essay On Practice , "on the relation between knowledge and practice, between knowing and doing". Here, Practice connects "contradiction" with "class struggle" in the following way, claiming that inside a mode of production, there are three realms where practice functions: economic production, scientific experimentation (which also takes place in economic production and should not be radically disconnected from the former) and finally class struggle. These are the proper objects of economy, scientific knowledge, and politics.

[ 51 ] These three spheres deal with matter in its various forms, socially mediated. As a result, they are the only realms where knowledge may arise (since truth and knowledge only make sense in relation to matter, according to Marxist epistemology). Mao emphasises—like Marx in trying to confront the "bourgeois idealism" of his time—that knowledge must be based on empirical evidence. Knowledge results from hypotheses verified in the contrast with a real object; this real object, despite being mediated by the subject's theoretical frame, retains its materiality and will offer resistance to those ideas that do not conform to its truth. Thus, in each of these realms (economic, scientific, and political practice), contradictions (principle and secondary) must be identified, explored, and put to function to achieve the communist goal. This involves the need to know "scientifically" how the masses produce (how they live, think and work), to obtain knowledge of how class struggle (the central contradiction that articulates a mode of production in its various realms) expresses itself.

Mao Zedong Thought is described as being Marxism–Leninism adapted to Chinese conditions, whereas its variant Marxism–Leninism–Maoism is considered universally applicable Three Worlds Theory [ edit ] In 1974, China announced its Three Worlds Theory at the UN.

[ 14 ] : 74 Three Worlds Theory states that during the Cold War , two imperialist states formed the "first world"—the United States and the Soviet Union. The second world consisted of the other imperialist states in their spheres of influence. The third world consisted of non-imperialist countries. Both the first and the second world exploit the third world, but the first world is the most aggressive party. The first- and second-world workers are "bought up" by imperialism, preventing socialist revolution. On the other hand, the people of the third world have not even a short-sighted interest in the prevailing circumstances. Hence revolution is most likely to appear in third-world countries, which again will weaken imperialism, opening up for revolutions in other countries too.

[ 44 ] Agrarian socialism [ edit ] Maoism departs from conventional European-inspired Marxism in that it focuses on the agrarian countryside rather than the urban industrial forces—this is known as agrarian socialism . Notably, Maoist parties in Peru, Nepal, and the Philippines have adopted equal stresses on urban and rural areas, depending on the country's focus on economic activity. Maoism broke with the framework of the Soviet Union under Nikita Khrushchev , dismissing it as state capitalist and Marxist revisionism , a pejorative term among communists referring to those who fight for capitalism in the name of socialism and who depart from historical and dialectical materialism .

Although Maoism is critical of urban industrial capitalist powers, it views urban industrialisation as a prerequisite to expanding economic development and the socialist reorganisation of the countryside, with the goal being the achievement of rural industrialisation that would abolish the distinction between town and countryside.

[ 52 ] International influence [ edit ] The Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) in February 2013 From 1962 onwards, the challenge to the Soviet hegemony in the world communist movement made by the CCP resulted in various divisions in communist parties around the world. At an early stage, the Albanian Party of Labour sided with the CCP.

[ 53 ] So did many of the mainstream (non-splinter group) Communist parties in South-East Asia, like the Communist Party of Burma , the Communist Party of Thailand , and the Communist Party of Indonesia . Some Asian parties, like the Communist Party of Vietnam and the Workers' Party of Korea , attempted to take a middle-ground position.

Cambodia's Khmer Rouge could have been considered a replica of the Maoist regime under the leadership of Angkar , however Maoists and Marxists generally contend that the CPK strongly deviated from Marxist doctrine and the few references to Maoist China in CPK propaganda were critical of the Chinese.

[ 54 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Various efforts have sought to regroup the international communist movement under Maoism since Mao's death in 1976. Many parties and organisations were formed in the West and Third World that upheld links to the CCP. Often, they took names such as Communist Party (Marxist–Leninist) or Revolutionary Communist Party to distinguish themselves from the traditional pro-Soviet communist parties. The pro-CCP movements were, in many cases, based on the wave of student radicalism that engulfed the world in the 1960s and 1970s.

Only one Western classic communist party sided with the CCP, the Communist Party of New Zealand . Under the leadership of the CCP and Mao Zedong, a parallel international communist movement emerged to rival that of the Soviets , although it was never as formalised and homogeneous as the pro-Soviet tendency.

Maoist leader Prachanda speaking at a rally in Pokhara , Nepal After the death of Mao in 1976 and the resulting power struggles in China that followed, the international Maoist movement was divided into three camps. One group, composed of various ideologically nonaligned groups, gave weak support to the new Chinese leadership under Deng Xiaoping. Another camp denounced the new leadership as traitors to the cause of Marxism–Leninism–Mao Zedong Thought. The third camp sided with the Albanians in denouncing the Three Worlds Theory of the CCP (see the Sino-Albanian split ).

[ citation needed ] The pro-Albanian camp would start to function as an international group as well [ 55 ] (led by Enver Hoxha and the APL ) and was also able to amalgamate many of the communist groups in Latin America , including the Communist Party of Brazil .

[ 56 ] Later, Latin American Communists, such as Peru's Shining Path , also embraced the tenets of Maoism.

[ 57 ] The new Chinese leadership showed little interest in the foreign groups supporting Mao's China. Many of the foreign parties that were fraternal parties aligned with the Chinese government before 1975 either disbanded, abandoned the new Chinese government entirely, or even renounced Marxism–Leninism and developed into non-communist, social democratic parties. What is today called the international Maoist movement evolved out of the second camp—the parties that opposed Deng and said they upheld the true legacy of Mao.

[ citation needed ] Afghanistan [ edit ] The Progressive Youth Organization was a Maoist organisation in Afghanistan. It was founded in 1965 with Akram Yari as its first leader, advocating the overthrow of the then-current order through people's war.

The Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan was founded in 2004 through the merger of five MLM parties.

[ 58 ] Australia [ edit ] The Communist Party of Australia (Marxist-Leninist) is a Maoist organisation in Australia. It was founded in 1964 as a pro-Mao split from the Australian Communist Party .

[ 59 ] Bangladesh [ edit ] The Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party is a Maoist party in Bangladesh. It was founded in 1968 with Siraj Sikder as its first leader. The party played a role in the Bangladesh Liberation War .

Belgium [ edit ] The Sino-Soviet split had a significant influence on communism in Belgium. The pro-Soviet Communist Party of Belgium experienced a split of a Maoist wing under Jacques Grippa . The latter was a lower-ranking CPB member before the split, but Grippa rose in prominence as he formed a worthy internal Maoist opponent to the CPB leadership. His followers were sometimes referred to as Grippisten or Grippistes. When it became clear that the differences between the pro-Moscow leadership and the pro-Beijing wing were too significant, Grippa and his entourage decided to split from the CPB and formed the Communist Party of Belgium – Marxist–Leninist (PCBML). The PCBML had some influence, mainly in the heavily industrialised Borinage region of Wallonia , but never managed to gather more support than the CPB. The latter held most of its leadership and base within the pro-Soviet camp. However, the PCBML was the first European Maoist party and was recognised at its foundation as the largest and most important Maoist organisation in Europe outside of Albania .

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Although the PCBML never really gained a foothold in Flanders , there was a reasonably successful Maoist movement in this region. Out of the student unions that formed in the wake of the May 1968 protests, Alle Macht Aan De Arbeiders (AMADA), or All Power To The Workers, was formed as a vanguard party under construction. This Maoist group originated primarily from students from the universities of Leuven and Ghent but did manage to gain some influence among the striking miners during the shutdowns of the Belgian stone coal mines in the late 1960s and early 1970s. This group became the Workers' Party of Belgium (PVDA-PTB) in 1979 and still exists today, although its power base has shifted somewhat from Flanders towards Wallonia. The WPB stayed loyal to the teachings of Mao for a long time, but after a general congress held in 2008, the party formally broke with its Maoist/Stalinist past.

[ 62 ] Ecuador [ edit ] The Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun , also known as Puka Inti , is a small Maoist guerrilla organisation in Ecuador .

France [ edit ] See also: Communism in France In 1964, a Maoist circle formed at École Normale among students who studied with Louis Althusser .

[ 63 ] : 226–227 The group initially sought to develop leadership over the French Communist Party 's (PCF) student organization, but in December 1966 their own organization, the Union of Marxist-Leninist Communist Youth.

[ 63 ] : 227 In 1966, PCF members dissatisfied with the party's direction formed their own movement and in 1967 they founded the Maoist-oriented French Marxist–Leninist Communist Party.

[ 63 ] : 226 French Maoism grew after the Sino-Soviet split and particularly from 1966 to 1976.

[ 63 ] : 225 After May 68 , the cultural influence of French Maoists increased.

[ 64 ] : 122 Maoists became the first group of French intellectuals to emphasize gay and lesbian rights in their publications and contributed to the nascent feminist movement in France .

[ 64 ] : 122 The École Normale Maoists merged with leaders of May 68 to form Proletarian Left.

[ 63 ] : 227 For six years, it was the most visible Maoist organization in France.

[ 63 ] : 227 Proletarian Left worked in cities, working class suburbs, rural areas, and immigrant communities.

[ 63 ] : 227 Its areas of focus included abortion rights, international leftism, and organizing in universities and among factory workers.

[ 63 ] : 227 Proletarian Left included developed supporters among intellectuals, such as Jean-Paul Sartre (who nominally filled the position of editor at a Proletarian Left newspaper after its editor was arrested) and Michel Foucault (who was influential in Proletarian Left's Prison Information Group, which investigated the conditions of prisoners, including political prisoners).

[ 63 ] : 227–228 Proletarian Left was radically anti-hierarchical, and ultimately failed to maintain its organization, dissolving in 1974.

[ 63 ] : 228 Alain Badiou is one of the central intellectual figures in the analysis of French Maoism and its legacies.

[ 63 ] : 241 India [ edit ] Mao's ideology developed adherents among Indian communists during the 1946-1951 Telangana uprising in Andhra Pradesh and the Tebhaga Movement in Bengal (1946–1950).

[ 65 ] : 118 Quotations from Chairman Mao Zedong gained popularity following the 1967 Naxalbari uprising and the beginning of the Naxalite Movement .

[ 65 ] : 117 The leader of the first phase of the Naxalite Movement, Charu Majumdar , placed major emphasis on the text, requiring it to be studied and to be read aloud to illiterate peasants.

[ 65 ] : 117 During this phase of the Naxalite Movement, Quotations was popular among both movement participants and those who sympathized with it.

[ 65 ] : 118 Contending that China's approach to revolution provided the path for revolution in India, Majumdar and others split from the Communist Party of India (Marxist) to form the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) .

[ 65 ] : 120 The Communist Party of India (Maoist) is the leading Maoist organisation in India. The CPI (Maoist) is designated as a terrorist organization in India under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act .

[ 66 ] Since 1967, there has been an ongoing conflict in India between the Indian government and Maoist insurgents.

[ 67 ] As of 2018, there have been a total of 13,834 deaths across insurgents, security forces, and civilians.

[ 68 ] Iran [ edit ] Main article: 1982 Amol uprising The Union of Iranian Communists (Sarbedaran) was an Iranian Maoist organisation. The UIC (S) was formed in 1976 after the alliance of Maoist groups carrying out military actions within Iran. In 1982, the UIC (S) mobilised forces in forests around Amol and launched an insurgency against the Islamist Government. The uprising was eventually a failure, and many UIC (S) leaders were shot. The party dissolved in 1982.

[ 69 ] Following the dissolution of the Union of Iranian Communists, the Communist Party of Iran (Marxist–Leninist–Maoist) was formed in 2001. The party is a continuation of the Sarbedaran Movement and the Union of Iranian Communists (Sarbedaran). CPI (MLM) believes Iran is a 'semifeudal- semicolonial ' country and is trying to launch a 'People's war' in Iran.

Israel [ edit ] The 1970s group Ma'avak (an offshoot of Matzpen ) was influenced by Maoism.

[ 70 ] After a further split, some of its former members (including Ehud Adiv and Daud Turki ) were charged with treason for meeting with Syrian intelligence officials, in a highly publicized trial.

[ 71 ] Italy [ edit ] In Italy, the 1963 book Le Divergenze tra il compagno Togliatti e noi (Divergences between Comrade Togliatti and us) increased interest in the Chinese communist approach.

[ 72 ] : 187 The text, written in China, responded to Palmiro Togliatti 's criticisms of Mao for Mao's opposition to de-Stalinization .

[ 72 ] : 187 Months after the publication of Le Divergenze , the first Italian party inspired by Mao's ideology was founded.

[ 72 ] : 190 Shortly after, former partisan Giuseppe Regis founded the publisher Edizioni Oriente (Eastern Editions), which translated and published Maoist texts, including Quotations from Chairman Mao Zedong .

[ 72 ] : 190 In early 1964, Mao-oriented activists founded the newspaper Nuova Unità (New Unity), which called for Italian communists break with the stance of the Italian Communist Party and align with the socialist countries against American imperialism .

[ 72 ] : 190 Numerous political factions and groupings took inspiration from Mao's theories and practice.

[ 72 ] : 191–192 Among the most visible Mao-inspired group was Servire il Popolo (Serve the People), which modeled itself on the Red Guards of China.

[ 72 ] : 192 Servire il Popolo practiced self-criticism and "serving and teaching the peasants" in rural Italy.

[ 72 ] : 192 Violent groups which cited Mao included The Brigatte Rosse ( Red Brigades ) and Lotta Continua (Continuous Fight).

[ 72 ] : 192 Mao-Spontex [ edit ] Mao-Spontex refers to a Maoist interpretation in western Europe that stresses the importance of the cultural revolution and overthrowing hierarchy.

[ 73 ] A political movement in the Marxist and libertarian movements in Western Europe from 1968 to 1971, [ 74 ] [ 73 ] Mao-Spontex came to represent an ideology promoting the ideas of Maoism with some influence from Marxism and Leninism , but rejecting the total idea of Marxism–Leninism .

[ 73 ] Palestine [ edit ] The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine was initially influenced by Maoism but shifted towards the Soviet Union after 1970.

[ 75 ] Peru [ edit ] As a result of factors including the Sino-Soviet split in the early 1960s and the later development of Shining Path , Peru became the Latin American country with the largest Maoist tendency among its communist movements.

[ 76 ] : 132 The Maoist-inspired group Shining Path and its leader Abimael Guzmán viewed revolution as requiring prolonged people's war.

[ 77 ] : 39 According to academic Carlos Iván Degregori , Shining Path's view of violence exceeded the typical Maoist confines, with Shining Path viewing violence as a value in itself instead of a means.

[ 77 ] : 141–142 In the 1980s and 1990s, it waged an insurgency against the Peruvian state that resulted in tens of thousands of deaths.

[ 78 ] Philippines [ edit ] Main article: Communist Party of the Philippines The Communist Party of the Philippines is the largest communist party in the Philippines, active since December 26, 1968 (Mao's birthday). It was formed due to the First Great Rectification Movement and a split between the old Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930 , which the founders saw as revisionist. The CPP was formed on Maoist lines in stark contrast with the old PKP, which focused primarily on the parliamentary struggle. The CPP was founded by Jose Maria Sison and other cadres from the old party.

[ 79 ] The CPP also has an armed wing that it exercises absolute control over, namely the New People's Army . It currently wages a guerrilla war against the government of the Republic of the Philippines in the countryside and is still currently active. The CPP and the NPA are part of the National Democratic Front of the Philippines , a consolidation of Maoist sectoral organisations such as Kabataang Makabayan as part of the united front strategy. The NDFP also represents the people's democratic government in peace talks.

[ 80 ] Portugal [ edit ] The flag of FP-25 Maoist movements in Portugal were very active during the 1970s, especially during the Carnation Revolution that led to the fall of the nationalist government (the Estado Novo ) in 1974.

Portugal's most significant Maoist movement was the Portuguese Workers' Communist Party . The party was among the most active resistance movements before the Portuguese democratic revolution of 1974, especially among the Marxist–Leninist Students' Federation in Lisbon. After the revolution, the MRPP achieved fame for its large and highly artistic mural paintings.

Intensely active between 1974 and 1975, during that time, the party had members that later came to be significant in national politics. For example, a future Prime Minister of Portugal, José Manuel Durão Barroso , was active in Maoist movements in Portugal and identified as a Maoist. In the 1980s, the Forças Populares 25 de Abril was another far-left Maoist armed organisation operating in Portugal between 1980 and 1987, aiming to create socialism in post-revolutionary Portugal.

Spain [ edit ] The Communist Party of Spain (Reconstituted) was a Spanish clandestine Maoist party. The party's armed wing was the First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Groups .

Sweden [ edit ] In 1968, a small extremist Maoist sect called Rebels ( Swedish : Rebellerna ) was established in Stockholm. Led by Francisco Sarrión , the group unsuccessfully demanded that the Chinese embassy admit them into the Chinese Communist Party. The organisation only lasted a few months.

[ 81 ] Tanzania [ edit ] The Tanzanian socialist approach of ujamaa promoted by President Julius Nyerere drew on Maoist themes including self-reliance, mass politics, the political centrality of the peasantry.

[ 82 ] : 96–97 Ujamaa also adopted Chinese historic milestones as part of its symbolism, including the Cultural Revolution and the Long March .

[ 82 ] : 96 Turkey [ edit ] See also: Maoist insurgency in Turkey The Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist (TKP/ML) is a Maoist organisation in Turkey currently waging a people's war against the Turkish government . It was founded in 1972 as a split from another illegal Maoist party, the Revolutionary Workers' and Peasants' Party of Turkey (TİİKP), which Doğu Perinçek founded in 1969, led by İbrahim Kaypakkaya . The party's armed wing is named the Workers' and Peasants' Liberation Army in Turkey (TİKKO). TİİKP is succeeded by the Patriotic Party , headed by Perinçek. Though Perinçek was significantly influenced by Mao, the Patriotic Party says he's not a Maoist, instead saying that he embraced "Mao's contributions to the literature of the world revolution and scientific socialism" and "adapted them to Turkey's conditions".

[ 83 ] United States [ edit ] After the tumultuous 1960s (particularly the events of 1968, such as the launch of the Tet Offensive , the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.

, nationwide university protests , and the election of Richard Nixon), proponents of Maoist ideology constituted the "largest and most dynamic" branch of American socialism .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] From this branch came a collection of "newspapers, journals, books, and pamphlets," each of which spoke on the unreasonability of the American system and proclaimed the need for a concerted social revolution.

[ 84 ] Among the many Maoist principles, the group of aspiring American revolutionaries sympathized with the idea of a protracted people's war, which would allow citizens to address the oppressive nature of global capitalism martially.

[ 86 ] Maoism was a major influence on the New Communist movement .

Mounting discontent with racial oppression and socioeconomic exploitation birthed the two largest, officially-organized Maoist groups: the Revolutionary Communist Party and the October League .

[ 87 ] However, these were not the only groups: a slew of organizations and movements emerged across the globe as well, including I Wor Kuen , the Black Workers Congress , the Puerto Rican Revolutionary Workers Organization , the August Twenty-Ninth Movement , the Workers Viewpoint Organization, and many others—all of which overtly supported Maoist doctrine.

[ 84 ] Orchestrated by The Guardian , in the spring of 1973, an attempt to conflate the strands of American Maoism was made with a series of sponsored forums titled "What Road to Building a New Communist Party?" The forums drew 1,200 attendees to a New York City auditorium that spring.

[ 88 ] The central message of the event revolved around "building an anti-revisionist, non-Trotskyist, non-anarchist party".

[ 89 ] From this, other forums were held worldwide, covering topics such as "The Role of the Anti-Imperialist Forces in the Antiwar Movement" and "The Question of the Black Nation"—each forum rallying, on average, an audience of 500 activists, and serving as a "barometer of the movement's strength." [ 88 ] The Americans' burgeoning Maoist and Marxist–Leninist movements proved optimistic for a potential revolution, but "a lack of political development and rampant rightist and ultra-leftist opportunism" thwarted the advancement of the greater communist initiative.

[ 88 ] In 1972, Richard Nixon made a landmark visit to the People's Republic of China to shake hands with Chairman Mao Zedong; this simple handshake marked the gradual pacification of east–west hostility and the re-formation of relations between "the most powerful and most populous" global powers: the United States and China.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Nearly a decade after the Sino-Soviet split, this newfound amiability between the two nations quieted American-based counter-capitalist rumblings and marked the steady decline of American Maoism until its unofficial cessation in the early-1980s.

[ 92 ] The Black Panther Party (BPP) was another American-based, left-wing revolutionary party to oppose American global imperialism; it was a self-described Black militant organization with metropolitan chapters in Oakland, California , New York, Chicago, Seattle, and Los Angeles, and an overt sympathizer with global anti-imperialistic movements (e.g., Vietnam's resistance of American neo-colonial efforts).

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] In 1971, a year before Nixon's monumental visit, BPP leader Huey P. Newton landed in China, whereafter he was enthralled with the East and the achievements of the Chinese Communist Revolution.

[ 97 ] After his return to the United States, Newton said that "[e]verything I saw in China demonstrated that the People's Republic is a free and liberated territory with a socialist government" and "[t]o see a classless society in operation is unforgettable".

[ 98 ] He extolled the Chinese police force as one that "[served] the people" and considered the Chinese antithetical to American law enforcement, which, according to Newton, represented "one huge armed group that was opposed to the will of the people".

[ 98 ] In general, Newton's first encounter with anti-capitalist society commenced a psychological liberation and embedded within him the desire to subvert the American system in favor of what the BPP called "revolutionary intercommunalism ".

[ 99 ] Furthermore, the BPP was founded on a similar politico-philosophical framework as that of Mao's CCP, that is, "the philosophical system of dialectical materialism" coupled with traditional Marxist theory.

[ 97 ] The words of Mao, quoted liberally in BPP speeches and writings, served as a guiding light for the party's analysis and theoretical application of Marxist ideology.

[ 100 ] 1978 Revolutionary Communist Party USA poster commemorating Mao's legacy.

In his autobiography Revolutionary Suicide , published in 1973, Newton wrote: Chairman Mao says that death comes to all of us, but it varies in its significance: to die for the reactionary is lighter than a feather; to die for the revolution is heavier than Mount Tai. [...] When I presented my solutions to the problems of Black people, or when I expressed my philosophy, people said, "Well, isn't that socialism?" Some of them were using the socialist label to put me down, but I figured that if this was socialism, then socialism must be a correct view. So I read more of the works of the socialists and began to see a strong similarity between my beliefs and theirs. My conversion was complete when I read the four volumes of Mao Tse-tung to learn more about the Chinese Revolution.

[ 98 ] Criticism and implementation [ edit ] Despite falling out of favor within the Chinese Communist Party by 1978, Mao is still revered, with Deng's famous "70% right, 30% wrong" line Maoism has fallen out of favor within the Chinese Communist Party, beginning with Deng Xiaoping 's reforms in 1978. Deng believed that Maoism showed the dangers of "ultra-leftism", manifested in the harm perpetrated by the various mass movements that characterized the Maoist era. In Chinese communism, the term "left" can be considered a euphemism for Maoist policies. However, Deng stated that the revolutionary side of Maoism should be considered separate from the governance side, leading to his famous epithet that Mao was "70% right, 30% wrong".

[ 101 ] Chinese scholars generally agree that Deng's interpretation of Maoism preserves the legitimacy of Communist rule in China but simultaneously criticizes Mao's brand of economic and political governance.

Critic Graham Young says that Maoists see Joseph Stalin as the last true socialist leader of the Soviet Union but allows the Maoist assessments of Stalin to vary between the extremely positive and the more ambivalent.

[ 102 ] Some political philosophers, such as Martin Cohen, have seen in Maoism an attempt to combine Confucianism and socialism —what one such called "a third way between communism and capitalism".

[ 103 ] Enver Hoxha critiqued Maoism from a Marxist–Leninist perspective, arguing that New Democracy halts class struggle [ 104 ] and allows unrestricted capitalist exploitation, [ 104 ] that the theory of the three worlds is "counter-revolutionary", [ 105 ] and questioned Mao's guerilla warfare methods.

[ 106 ] Some say Mao departed from Leninism not only in his near-total lack of interest in the urban working class but also in his concept of the nature and role of the party. On the other hand, for Mao, this question would always be virtually impossible to answer.

[ 8 ] : 44 Jung Chang and Jon Halliday contend that implementation of Maoist thought in China was responsible for as many as 70 million deaths during peacetime, [ 107 ] with the Cultural Revolution , the Anti-Rightist Campaign of 1957–1958, [ 108 ] and the Great Leap Forward . Some historians have argued that because of Mao's land reforms during the Great Leap Forward which resulted in famines , thirty million perished between 1958 and 1961. By the end of 1961, the birth rate was nearly cut in half because of malnutrition.

[ 109 ] Critiquing discourses on deaths under Maoism, academics Christian Sorace, Ivan Franeschini, and Nicholas Loubere observe that these discourses attribute responsibility for deaths in manner not typical of discourses on other ideologies, such as liberalism.

[ 110 ] Active campaigns, including party purges and "reeducation", resulted in imprisonment or the execution of those deemed contrary to the implementation of Maoist ideals.

[ 111 ] The incidents of destruction of cultural heritage, religion, and art remain controversial. Some Western scholars saw Maoism as specifically engaged in a battle to dominate and subdue nature and was a catastrophe for the environment.

[ 112 ] Populism [ edit ] Mao also believed strongly in the concept of a unified people. These notions prompted him to investigate the peasant uprisings in Hunan while the rest of China's communists were in the cities and focused on the orthodox Marxist proletariat.

[ 8 ] : 43 Many of the pillars of Maoism, such as the distrust of intellectuals and the abhorrence of occupational speciality, are typical populist ideas.

[ 8 ] : 44 The concept of "people's war", central to Maoist thought, is directly populist in its origins. Mao believed that intellectuals and party cadres would first become students of the masses and teachers of the masses later. This concept was vital to the aforementioned "people's war" strategy.

[ 8 ] : 44 Nationalism [ edit ] Mao's nationalist impulses also played a crucially important role in adapting Marxism to the Chinese model and in the formation of Maoism.

[ 8 ] : 42 Mao believed that China was to play a crucial preliminary role in the socialist revolution internationally. This belief, or the fervor with which Mao held it, separated Mao from the other Chinese communists and led Mao onto the path of what Leon Trotsky called "Messianic Revolutionary Nationalism", which was central to his philosophy.

[ 8 ] : 43 Notes [ edit ] ^ The term "Maoism" is a creation of Mao's supporters; Mao himself always rejected it and preferred the use of the term "Mao Zedong Thought".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Wittfogel, Karl A. (1960). "The Legend of 'Maoism' ".

The China Quarterly (1): 72– 86.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000022712 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

JSTOR 763346 .

S2CID 153676792 .

^ Chen, Jin (1 July 2016).

毛泽东眼里的"毛泽东" .

People's Daily (in Chinese) . Retrieved 25 March 2023 .

毛泽东不同意叫"主义"，而接受"思想"的说法，按他的意思，他是马克思、列宁的学生，不敢和他们并列，再说那时他认为自己的思想作为一种"体系"还没有成熟。 [Mao Zedong disagreed with the term 'Maoism' and preferred the term 'Mao Zedong thought' as he thought of himself as a student of Marx and Lenin hesitated to place himself alongside them. Moreover, at that time, he believed that his thoughts had not matured into a complete system.] ^ Mao, Zedong.

"On Guerilla Warfare" . Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung. Retrieved 11 April 2023.

^ a b Lenman, B.P.; Anderson, T., eds. (2000).

Chambers Dictionary of World History . p. 769.

^ Moufawad-Paul, J.

(2016).

Continuity and Rupture: Philosophy in the Maoist Terrain . New York City: Zero Books.

ISBN 978-1785354762 .

^ Lovell, Julia (2019).

Maoism: A Global History . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-525-65605-0 .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-05 . Retrieved 2020-05-02 .

^ a b Meisner, Maurice (Jan–Mar 1971). "Leninism and Maoism: Some Populist Perspectives on Marxism-Leninism in China".

The China Quarterly .

45 (45): 2– 36.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000010407 .

JSTOR 651881 .

S2CID 154407265 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Meisner, Maurice (1999).

Mao's China and After .

Simon and Schuster .

ISBN 978-0-684-85635-3 .

^ a b c d e f g Lowe, Donald M. (1966).

The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-00771-0 .

^ a b c d Leese, Daniel (2013). "A Single Spark: Origins and Spread of the Little Red Book in China". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Karl, Rebecca E. (2010).

Mao Zedong and China in the Twentieth-Century World: A Concise History . Asia-pacific. Durham, NC: Duke University Press .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv11hpp6w .

ISBN 978-0-8223-4780-4 .

JSTOR j.ctv11hpp6w .

^ Doyon, Jérôme; Froissart, Chloé (2024). "Introduction". In Doyon, Jérôme; Froissart, Chloé (eds.).

The Chinese Communist Party: A 100-Year Trajectory . Canberra: ANU Press.

ISBN 9781760466244 .

^ Li, Hongshan (2024).

Fighting on the Cultural Front: U.S.-China Relations in the Cold War . New York, NY: Columbia University Press .

doi : 10.7312/li--20704 .

ISBN 9780231207058 .

JSTOR 10.7312/li--20704 .

^ a b Laikwan, Pang (2024).

One and All: The Logic of Chinese Sovereignty . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press .

doi : 10.1515/9781503638822 .

ISBN 9781503638815 .

^ Sandmo, Agnar.

Economics Evolving: A History of Economic Thought , Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2011.

^ Gregor, A. James; Chang, Maria Hsia (1978). "Maoism and Marxism in Comparative Perspective".

The Review of Politics .

40 (3): 307– 327.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500028527 .

ISSN 0034-6705 .

JSTOR 1407255 .

^ Sandmo, Agnar (2011).

Economics Evolving: A History of Economic Thought , Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

^ Mao, Zedong.

"The Great Union of the Popular Masses" .

Archived 2021-01-24 at the Wayback Machine . Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung. Retrieved 25 April 2019.

^ a b c Hu, Richard (2023).

Reinventing the Chinese City . New York: Columbia University Press.

doi : 10.7312/hu--21100 .

ISBN 978-0-231-21101-7 .

^ "Xinhua: Constitution of the Communist Party of China" .

news.xinhuanet.com . Archived from the original on 17 October 2011 . Retrieved 10 November 2011 .

^ "UC Berkeley Journalism -Faculty - Deng's Revolution" . Archived from the original on 4 January 2009 . Retrieved 22 August 2007 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Exploring Chinese History :: Culture :: Philosophy :: Maoism" .

ibiblio.org .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 January 2019 .

^ Brown, Kerry; Nieuwenhuizen, Simone van (2016-08-15).

China and the New Maoists . Zed Books Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-78360-762-4 .

^ "Exploring Chinese History :: Culture :: Philosophy :: Maoism" .

ibiblio.org .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 26 February 2018 .

^ "China the Four Modernizations, 1979-82" .

country-studies.com .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 10 November 2011 .

^ S. Zhao, "A State-Led Nationalism: The Patriotic Education Campaign in Post-Tiananmen China", Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 1998, 31(3): p. 288.

^ "Enver Hoxha: Imperialism and the Revolution (1979)" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2025-02-05 .

^ For a newest expression of the official judgment see 中国共产党历史第二卷下册，中共中央党史研究室著，中共党史出版社，第二八章对"文化大革命"十年的基本分析(History of China Communist Party, Vol. 2, Party History Research Centre (November 2010), Chap. 28 Analysis on Cultural Revolution).

^ Yuan, Li (8 July 2021).

" 'Who Are Our Enemies?' China's Bitter Youths Embrace Mao" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 29 October 2022 .

^ Lau, Mimi (10 August 2018).

"Chinese Maoists join students in fight for workers' rights" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 4 May 2023 .

^ Hou, Xiaojia (2024). "China's Shift to Personalistic Rule: Xi Jinping's Centralization of Political Power". In Fang, Qiang; Li, Xiaobing (eds.).

China under Xi Jinping: A New Assessment .

Leiden University Press .

ISBN 9789087284411 .

JSTOR jj.15136086 .

^ Amin, Samir (October 2009).

"The Countries of the South Must Take Their Own Independent Initiatives" . The Third World Forum. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 February 2011 .

^ "Quotations From Chairman Mao" . Peking Foreign Languages Press.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 1 April 2018 .

^ Alexander C. Cook, "Third World Maoism" in A Critical Introduction to Mao. Cambridge, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Cambridge University, 2011. p. 290.

^ a b Alexander C. Cook, "Third World Maoism" in A Critical Introduction to Mao. Cambridge, England, UK; New York, New York, USA, Cambridge University Press, 2011, pp. 289–290.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1961) [1902]. "What Is To Be Done".

Lenin's Collected Works . Vol. 5. Translated by Fineberg, Joe; Hanna, George. Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House. pp.

347– 530.

^ "Short Definitions of the 'Mass Line' and a 'Mass Perspective' " .

massline.info . Retrieved 15 June 2014 .

^ David-Fox, Michael (1999).

"What Is Cultural Revolution?" .

The Russian Review .

58 (2): 181– 201.

doi : 10.1111/0036-0341.651999065 .

ISSN 0036-0341 .

^ a b Mertha, Andrew (2019-06-25), "Rectification", Afterlives of Chinese Communism: Political Concepts from Mao to Xi , ANU Press, doi : 10.22459/acc.2019.33 , hdl : 1885/164469 , ISBN 9781788734769 , S2CID 242980910 ^ Li, Xing (2001). "The Chinese Cultural Revolution Revisited".

China Review .

1 (1): 137– 165.

ISSN 1680-2012 .

JSTOR 23461931 .

^ Luo, Zhitian (2019-10-02). "Wholeness and individuality: Revisiting the New Culture Movement, as symbolized by May Fourth".

Chinese Studies in History .

52 ( 3– 4). Informa UK Limited: 188– 208.

doi : 10.1080/00094633.2019.1654802 .

ISSN 0009-4633 .

S2CID 211429408 .

^ Schwarcz, Vera (1986).

The Chinese enlightenment: intellectuals and the legacy of the May Fourth movement of 1919 . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-05027-4 .

^ Hon, Tze-ki (2014-03-28).

"The Chinese Path to Modernisation: Discussions of "Culture" and "Morality" in Republican China" .

International Journal for History, Culture and Modernity .

2 (3): 211– 228.

doi : 10.18352/hcm.470 .

ISSN 2213-0624 .

S2CID 56325531 .

^ a b "Maoism" Archived 2021-02-11 at the Wayback Machine . Glossary of Terms.

Encyclopedia of Marxism .

^ Wu, Yuan-Li (1968-03-01). "Economics, Ideology and the Cultural Revolution".

Asian Survey .

8 (3): 223– 235.

doi : 10.2307/2642569 .

ISSN 0004-4687 .

JSTOR 2642569 .

^ Macfarquhar, Roderick ; Schoenhals, Michael (2006-12-31).

Mao's Last Revolution .

Harvard University Press .

doi : 10.4159/9780674040410 .

ISBN 978-0-674-04041-0 .

^ Thornton, Patricia M. (2019), Sorace, Christian; Franceschini, Ivan; Loubere, Nicholas (eds.), "Cultural Revolution", Afterlives of Chinese Communism , Political Concepts from Mao to Xi, ANU Press, pp.

55– 62, ISBN 978-1-78873-476-9 , JSTOR j.ctvk3gng9.11 ^ Xiuyuan, Lü (1994). "A Step Toward Understanding Popular Violence in China's Cultural Revolution".

Pacific Affairs .

67 (4): 533– 563.

doi : 10.2307/2759573 .

ISSN 0030-851X .

JSTOR 2759573 .

^ Mao Tse Tung, "On contradiction" Archived 2021-01-24 at the Wayback Machine , Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-Tung, Foreign Language Press, Peking, 1967, p. 75.

^ Mao Tse-Tung, " On contradiction Archived 2021-01-24 at the Wayback Machine ", Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-Tung, op. cit., p. 89.

^ Cfr. Mao Tse-Tung, "On practice. On the relation between knowledge and practice, between knowing and doing" Archived 2021-02-11 at the Wayback Machine , Selected Readings from the Works of Mao Tse-Tung, op.cit., p. 55: "Man's social practice is not confined to activity in production, but takes many forms—class struggle, political life, scientific and artistic pursuits; in short, as a social being, man participates in all spheres of the practical life of society. Thus man, in varying degrees, comes to know the different relations between man and man, not only through his material life but also though his political and cultural life (both of which are intimately bound up with material life)".

^ John H. Badgley, John Wilson Lewis. Peasant Rebellion and Communist Revolution in Asia. Stanford, California, USA: Stanford University Press, 1974. p. 249.

^ Richards, Sam; Saba, Paul, eds. (August 1979).

"The Party of Labour of Albania – A New Centre of Revisionism" .

Revolution .

4 (1).

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2019-10-09 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ F.G.

"What Went Wrong with the Pol Pot Regime" .

A World to Win . Archived from the original on 10 August 2011 . Retrieved 10 November 2011 .

^ Latham, Judith (19 August 2010). "Roma of the former Yugoslavia".

Nationalities Papers: The Journal of Nationalism and Ethnicity . 27, 1999 (2): 205– 226.

doi : 10.1080/009059999109037 .

S2CID 154891173 .

^ Hobday, Charles (1986).

Communist and Marxist Parties of the World . Harlow: Longman. pp.

410– 411.

ISBN 0-582-90264-9 .

^ Hobday, Charles (1986).

Communist and Marxist Parties of the World . Harlow: Longman. p. 377.

ISBN 0-582-90264-9 .

^ "Afghanistan Maoists Unite in a Single Party" .

A World to Win . 2006-08-25. Archived from the original on 2006-08-25 . Retrieved 2021-01-12 .

^ "Declaration of Australian Marxist-Leninists" .

Marxists Internet Archive .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 16 November 2019 .

^ Alexander, Robert Jackson (2001).

Maoism in the Developed World . Greenwood. p. 59.

ISBN 978-0-275-96148-0 .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ "End of the Road for Grippa?" (PDF) .

World Outlook . 17 November 1967. p. 930.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ D. Van Herrewegen, "De verdeeldheid van radicaal-links in Vlaanderen: De strategische -en praktische breuklijnen tussen AMADA, de KPB en de RAL tussen 1969-1972" Archived 2021-01-24 at the Wayback Machine , unpublished masterpaper, Department of History, pp. 25–29.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Bourg, Julian (2013). "Principally Contradiction: The Flourishing of French Maoism". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b Crean, Jeffrey (2024).

The Fear of Chinese Power: an International History . New Approaches to International History series. London, UK: Bloomsbury Academic .

ISBN 978-1-350-23394-2 .

^ a b c d e Chakrabarti, Sreemanti (2013). "Empty Symbol: The Little Red Book in India". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ Chauhan, Neeraj (16 September 2016).

"Maoists fourth deadliest terror outfit after Taliban, IS, Boko Haram: Report" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2019-07-17 .

^ "India's Naxalites: A spectre haunting India" .

The Economist . 12 April 2006.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2010 . Retrieved 13 July 2009 .

^ "Fatalities in Left-wing Extremism" .

www.satp.org . South Asia Terrorism Portal . Retrieved 26 September 2023 .

^ Gorriti Ellenbogen, Gustavo (1999).

The Shining Path: a history of the millenarian war in Peru . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-807-82373-6 – via Internet Archive.

^ Cohen, Samy. "Doves Among Hawks: Struggles of the Israeli Peace Movements." Oxford University Press. 2019. Page 13 ^ "ISRAEL: The Sabra Spies." Time . December 25, 1972.

^ a b c d e f g h i Reill, Dominique Kirchner (2013). "Partisan Legacies and Anti-Imperialist Ambitions: The Little Red Book in Italy and Yugoslavia". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b c Lévy, Benny (1971).

"Investigation into the Maoists in France" .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Bourg, Julian (2017).

From Revolution to Ethics, Second Edition: May 1968 and Contemporary French Thought . MQUP. p. 86.

ISBN 978-0-7735-5247-0 – via Google Books .

It did not take long for the GP-ists to become known as "Mao-spontex," or Maoist-spontaneists. The name was originally an insult—Spontex was the brand name of a cleaning sponge—intended to belittle the group's embrace of antiauthoritarianism as an element of revolutionary contestation. The marxisant tradition had long criticized spontaneism as an anarchistic error.

^ Cobban, Helena .

The Palestinian Liberation Organisation: People, Power and Politics . Cambridge University Press. 1984. Page 155.

^ Scott Palmer, David (2013). "The Influence of Maoism in Peru". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b Degregori, Carlos Iván (2012).

How Difficult It Is to Be God: Shining Path's Politics of War in Peru, 1980-1999 . Critical Human Rights Series.

University of Wisconsin Press .

ISBN 978-0-299-28924-9 .

^ Abimael Guzmán: Peru's Shining Path guerrilla leader dies at 86 ^ Saulo, Alfredo.

Communism in the Philippines .

^ Constitution and Program (PDF) (2016 ed.). Communist Party of the Philippines.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-02-17 . Retrieved 2019-06-27 .

^ Säfve, Torbjörn (1971). "Rebellrörelsens förlopp".

Rebellerna i Sverige. Dokumentation, kritik, vision (in Swedish). Göteborg: Författarförlaget.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 March 2020 .

^ a b Lal, Priya (2013). "Maoism in Tanzania: Material Connections and Shared Imaginiaries". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ " "Perinçek 70'lerde Maocu, 80'lerde Kürtçü şimdi de Atatürkçü oldu" diyenler var. Gerçekten öyle mi?" .

Patriotic Party (in Turkish) . Retrieved 12 March 2023 .

^ a b c Elbaum, Max (1998).

"Maoism in the United States" .

www.marxists.org .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-06-23 .

^ Twombly, Matthew (January 2018).

"A Timeline of 1968: The Year That Shattered America" .

Smithsonian Magazine .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-06-23 .

^ Marks, Thomas A.; Rich, Paul B. (2017-05-04).

"Back to the future – people's war in the 21st century" .

Small Wars & Insurgencies .

28 (3): 409– 425.

doi : 10.1080/09592318.2017.1307620 .

ISSN 0959-2318 .

^ Leonard, Aaron J.; Gallagher, Conor A. (2015-02-27).

Heavy Radicals - The FBI's Secret War on America's Maoists: The Revolutionary Union / Revolutionary Communist Party 1968-1980 . John Hunt Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-78279-533-9 .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ a b c Elbaum, Max (2018-02-06).

Revolution in the Air: Sixties Radicals Turn to Lenin, Mao and Che . Verso Books.

ISBN 978-1-78663-459-7 .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-23 . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ "MIM Notes" .

www.prisoncensorship.info .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-06-23 .

^ CDT, Posted on 04 21 09 10:42 AM.

"RealClearSports - Richard Nixon - Mao Zedong" .

www.realclearpolitics.com .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-06-23 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Frankel, Max (1972-02-21).

"HISTORIC HANDSHAKE: President Nixon being welcomed by Premier Chou En-lal. At the left is Mrs. Nixon" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-06-23 .

^ Saba, Paul (22 May 1981).

"End of the Line for American Maoism" .

www.marxists.org .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-06-23 .

^ "Vietnam War" .

HISTORY . 29 October 2009.

Archived from the original on 2021-02-11 . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

^ Oliver, Pamela (19 October 2017).

"Black Against Empire: The History and Politics of the Black Panthers – Race, Politics, Justice" .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

^ Hermidda, Ariane.

"Mapping the Black Panther Party - Mapping American Social Movements" .

depts.washington.edu .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-13 . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

^ Earl, Anthony.

"Black Panther Party" .

web.stanford.edu .

Archived from the original on 2020-07-04 . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

^ a b Ren, Chao (2009) "" Concrete Analysis of Concrete Conditions": A Study of the Relationship between the Black Panther Party and Maoism Archived 2021-02-22 at the Wayback Machine ," Constructing the Past: Vol. 10 : Iss. 1, Article 7.

^ a b c Huey P. Newton, Revolutionary Suicide (New York: Writers and Readers Publishing Inc., 1995), 323.

^ Vasquez, Delio (2018-06-11).

"Intercommunalism: The Late Theorizations of Huey P. Newton, 'Chief Theoretician' of the Black Panther Party" .

Viewpoint Magazine .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-24 . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

^ Chao, Eveline (2016-10-14).

"Let One Hundred Panthers Bloom" .

ChinaFile .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-05 . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

^ Schmidt-Glintzer, Helwig (10 August 2017).

"70 per cent good, 30 per cent bad" .

International Politics and Society . Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.

Archived from the original on 2020-08-14 . Retrieved 2017-11-04 .

^ Young, Graham (1982). "On Socialist Development and the 'Two Roads' ".

The Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs .

8 (8). University of Chicago Press: 75– 84.

doi : 10.2307/2158927 .

ISSN 0156-7365 .

JSTOR 2158927 .

S2CID 147645749 .

^ Cohen, Martin (2001).

Political philosophy : from Plato to Mao . London: Pluto.

ISBN 0-585-43378-X .

.

^ a b "Enver Hoxha: Imperialism and the Revolution (1979)" .

Marxists Internet Archive .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2019 .

^ "Enver Hoxha: Imperialism and the Revolution (1979)" .

Marxists Internet Archive .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 September 2019 .

^ "Enver Hoxha: Imperialism and the Revolution (1979)" .

Marxists Internet Archive .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2019 .

^ Chang, Jung; Halliday, Jon (2005).

Mao: The Unknown Story . Jonathan Cape. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-224-07126-0 .

^ Teiwes, Frederick C (2016-07-01).

China's Road to Disaster: Mao, Central Politicians and Provincial Leaders in the Great Leap Forward, 1955-59: Mao, Central Politicians and Provincial Leaders in the Great Leap Forward, 1955-59 (1 ed.). Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315502816 .

ISBN 978-1-315-50281-6 .

^ MacFarquhar, Roderick (1974).

The Origins of the Cultural Revolution . Oxford University Press for the Royal Institute of International Affairs, The East Asian Institute of Columbia University and the Research Institute on Communist Affairs of Columbia University. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-231-11082-2 .

^ Sorace, Christian; Franeschini, Ivan; Loubere, Nicholas (2019). "Introduction".

Afterlives of Chinese Communism: Political Concepts from Mao to Xi . Acton, Australia: Australian National University Press . pp.

4– 5.

ISBN 978-1-760-46249-9 .

JSTOR j.ctvk3gng9.3 .

^ Link, Perry (18 July 2007).

"Legacy Of a Maoist Injustice" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2019 . Retrieved 1 April 2018 .

^ Shapiro, Judith (2001-03-05).

Mao's War Against Nature: Politics and the Environment in Revolutionary China .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-78680-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Maoism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Brown, Jeremy, and Matthew D. Johnson, eds.

Maoism at the Grassroots: Everyday Life in China's Era of High Socialism (Harvard UP, 2015) online review .

Cook, Alexander C., ed.

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History (Cambridge UP, 2014).

Marxism in the Chinese Revolution by Arif Dirlik.

Feigon, Lee.

Mao: A Reinterpretation . Ivan R. Dee, Publisher.

Fields, Belden (1984). Sayrers, Sohnya (ed.). "French Maoism".

Social Text . The 60s Without Apology (9/10). University of Minnesota Press: 148– 178.

doi : 10.2307/466540 .

ISSN 0164-2472 .

JSTOR 466540 .

Trotskyism and Maoism: Theory and Practise in France and the United States . A. Belden Fields (1988).

Gregor, A. James; Chang, Maria Hsia (1978). "Maoism and Marxism in Comparative Perspective".

The Review of Politics .

40 (3): 307– 327.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500028527 .

ISSN 0034-6705 .

JSTOR 1407255 .

S2CID 145556746 .

Kang, Liu. "Maoism: Revolutionary globalism for the Third World revisited." Comparative Literature Studies 52.1 (2015): 12–28.

online [ permanent dead link ] Rethinking Mao: Explorations in Mao Zedong's Thought by Nick Knight.

Lanza, Fabio.

The end of concern: Maoist China, activism, and Asian studies (Duke UP, 2017).

online review Lovell, Julia .

Maoism: A Global History (2019), a comprehensive scholarly history; excerpt Lowe, Donald.

The Function of "China" in Marx, Lenin, and Mao Liu, Elliott.

Maoism and the Chinese Revolution: A Critical Introduction Marquis, Christopher ; Qiao, Kunyuan (2022).

Mao and Markets: The Communist Roots of Chinese Enterprise .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-26338-1 .

Meisner, Maurice (January–March 1971). "Leninism and Maoism: Some Populist Perspectives on Marxism-Leninism in China".

The China Quarterly .

45 (45): 2– 36.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000010407 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

JSTOR 651881 .

S2CID 154407265 .

Meisner, Maurice.

Li Ta-chao and the Origins of Chinese Marxism Meisner, Maurice.

Marxism, Maoism, and Utopianism: Eight Essays Mesiner, Maurice.

Mao's China and After Mignon, Carlos; Fishwick, Adam (4 July 2018).

"Origins and evolution of Maoism in Argentina, 1968–1971" (docx) .

Labor History .

59 (4): 454– 471.

doi : 10.1080/0023656X.2018.1422382 .

hdl : 2086/14717 .

ISSN 0023-656X .

S2CID 148976890 .

Continuity and Rupture: Philosophy in the Maoist Terrain by J. Moufawad-Paul (2017).

Ning, Wang (2015).

"Introduction: Global Maoism and Cultural Revolutions in the Global Context" .

Comparative Literature Studies .

52 (1): 1– 11.

doi : 10.5325/complitstudies.52.1.0001 .

ISSN 1528-4212 .

Palmer, David Scott. ed.

The Shining Path of Peru (2nd ed 1994) excerpt Schram, Stuart , The Political Thought of Mao Tse-Tung Schram, Stuart.

Mao Tse-Tung Unrehearsed Seth, Sanjay. "India Maoism: The Significance of Naxalbari," in Critical Perspectives on Media and Society, ed. R. Avery and D. Easton (Guilford Press, 1991), 289–313.

Starn, Orin (May 1995).

"Maoism in the Andes: The Communist Party of Peru-Shining Path and the Refusal of History" (PDF) .

Journal of Latin American Studies .

27 (2): 399– 421.

doi : 10.1017/S0022216X00010804 .

ISSN 1469-767X .

JSTOR 158120 .

S2CID 145740201 .

Srivastava, Arun.

Maoism in India (2015) excerpt Steiner, H. Arthur (January 14, 1953).

"Maoism or Stalinism for Asia?" .

Far Eastern Survey .

22 (1).

Institute of Pacific Relations : 1– 5.

doi : 10.2307/3024690 .

ISSN 0362-8949 .

JSTOR 3024690 .

Mao Tse-Tung, the Marxist Lord of Misrule: On Practice and Contradiction by Slavoj Zizek.

External links [ edit ] Maoism at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata "Guiding thought of revolution: the heart of Maoism" (PDF). international project.

Marx2Mao.org . Mao Internet Library.

The Encyclopedia of Marxism . Mao Zedong Thought.

The Encyclopedia of Marxism . Mao's life.

Monthly Review Archived 2011-03-17 at the Wayback Machine (January 2005). Text of the leaflets distributed by the Zhengzhou Four.

World Revolution Media . Maoist revolutionary film, music and art archive.

Batchelor, J. (2009).

"Maoism and Classical Marxism" Archived 2018-09-02 at the Wayback Machine .

Clio History Journal .

"A new economic study says China could grow more quickly by 2036 if Chairman Mao's policies were brought back" Archived 2017-07-17 at the Wayback Machine .

Business Insider . 10 August 2015.

v t e Mao Zedong Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (1943–1976) Chairman of the Central Military Commission (1954–1976) History and politics Overviews Early life Rule as Chinese leader Cult of personality Death and state funeral Chairman Mao Memorial Hall Chronology Chinese Civil War Long March Chinese Soviet Republic Second Sino-Japanese War Second United Front Yan'an Rectification Movement Yan'an Forum 7th National Congress of the Communist Party Chinese Communist Revolution Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China Land Reform Movement Korean War People's Volunteer Army Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan First Taiwan Strait Crisis 1954 Constitution Bandung Conference 8th National Congress of the Communist Party Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Two Bombs, One Satellite Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Lushan Conference Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Sino-Soviet split Socialist Education Movement Vietnam War Cultural Revolution Cleansing the Class Ranks Chairman Mao badge Four Olds Gang of Four Red August Red Guards 9th National Congress of the Communist Party Abolition of the presidency Lin Biao incident 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China 10th National Congress of the Communist Party Concepts Maoism Capitalist roader Continuous Revolution Theory Mass line New Democracy Newborn socialist things One Divides into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Three Worlds Theory Works Political works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Ten Major Relationships Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Family Mao Zemin (brother) Mao Zetan (brother) Mao Zejian (cousin) Luo Yixiu (first wife) Yang Kaihui (second wife) Mao Anying (son) Mao Anqing (son) Mao Anlong (son) Yang Yuehua (daughter) Li Min (daughter) Jiang Qing (fourth wife) Li Na (daughter) Mao Xinyu (grandson) Kong Dongmei (granddaughter) Mao Yuanxin (nephew) Category v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government Forms Absolute monarchy Autocracy Liberal Tsarist Communist state Counterintelligence state Dictatorship Benevolent Civilian Constitutional Dictablanda Grassroots Military Proletarian Right-wing Dominant-party system Illiberal democracy Totalitarian Libertarian authoritarianism Mafia state Managerial state Mediacracy Ochlocracy One-party state Oligarchy Police state Theocracy Islamic state Tyranny Majoritarian Soft Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Putinism Metaxism Authoritarian capitalism Pinochetism Authoritarian socialism Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Maoism Deng Xiaoping Theory Xi Jinping Thought Juche Despotism Enlightened Soft Ecoauthoritarianism Fascism Eco Neo Imperialism Nazism Neo Religious Caesaropapism Khomeinism Ziaism Shōwa Statism Techno See also Democracy indices Deep state Inverted totalitarianism Personality Leadership style Left-wing Right-wing Social dominance orientation Statism Strongman List of totalitarian states v t e Cultural Revolution Prelude Anti-Rightist Campaign Great Chinese Famine Great Leap Forward Lushan Conference Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Fengqiao experience Taoyuan Experience Major events Down to the Countryside Movement Cleansing the Class Ranks 12-3 incident January Storm February Countercurrent Great Exchange of Revolutionary Experience Wuhan incident Smashing gong-jian-fa 9th Party Congress One Strike-Three Anti Campaign Abolition of the presidency in China Project 571 Lin Biao incident 10th Party Congress Black Painting incident Criticize Lin, Criticize Confucius Snail Incident Hangzhou incident 1975 Banqiao Dam failure Counterattack the Right-Deviationist Reversal-of-Verdicts Trend 1976 Nanjing incident 1976 Tiananmen Incident Smashing the Gang of Four Massacres Red August Daxing Massacre Guangxi Massacre Inner Mongolia incident Guangdong Massacre Yangjiang Massacre Hunan Massacres Daoxian massacre Shaoyang County Massacre Yunnan Massacres Zhao Jianmin spy case Shadian incident Ruijin Massacre Qinghai 223 Incident Key figures Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhou Enlai Lin Biao Deng Xiaoping Gang of Four ( Jiang Qing Zhang Chunqiao Yao Wenyuan Wang Hongwen ) Peng Dehuai Wu Han Peng Zhen Tao Zhu Chen Boda Wang Dongxing Xie Fuzhi Ji Dengkui Wang Li Qi Benyu Wu Faxian Qiu Huizuo Yang Chengwu Chen Zaidao Kang Sheng Mao Yuanxin Hua Guofeng Ye Jianying Documents 1970 Draft Constitution A List of Cadres to Be Protected Bombard the Headquarters Quotations from Chairman Mao Hai Rui Dismissed from Office May 16 Notification Six Articles of Public Security Sweep Away All Cow Demons and Snake Spirits On Class Origins " With you in charge, I'm at ease " Concepts Four Olds Newborn socialist things Struggle session Feudal fascism Big-character poster Cow demons and snake spirits Bloodline theory Continuous Revolution Theory Seizure of power Violent Struggle One Divides into Two Democracy Wall Eight model plays Loyalty dance Capitalist roader Yiku sitian Learn from Daqing in industry Learn from Dazhai in agriculture Stinking Old Ninth Five Black Categories Five Red Categories Two Newspapers and One Journal Groups Red Guards Conservative Faction Little Red Guards Rebel Faction Scarlet Guards Ultra-Left Faction Xiaoyao Faction May Sixteenth elements Five Man Group Cultural Revolution Group Central Case Examination Group Central Organization and Propaganda Leading Group Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee Revolutionary committee in Beijing in Fujian in Heilongjiang in Shanghai 8341 Special Regiment Sent-down youth 61 Renegades Barefoot doctor Worker-Peasant-Soldier student May Seventh Cadre School Xiang River Storm and Thunder Related topics Maoism Mao Zedong's cult of personality Mango cult List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party Class struggle Sino-Soviet split Two Whatevers Morning Sun (film) Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee Boluan Fanzheng New Enlightenment Scar literature Evaluation of the Cultural Revolution Category Portals : China Politics History Communism Socialism Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maoism&oldid=1305600717 " Categories : Maoism Maoist terminology 1950s in China 1960s in China 1970s in China 1950s establishments in China 1970s disestablishments in China Anti-fascism Anti-capitalism Anti-revisionism Authoritarianism Contemporary Chinese philosophy Eponymous political ideologies Far-left politics Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Mao Zedong Marxism–Leninism Marxist schools of thought Culture of the People's Republic of China Political history of China Totalitarianism Totalitarian ideologies Types of socialism Hidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1: long volume value CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from February 2023 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2025 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2024 Articles containing Swedish-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 01:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maoism 74 languages Add topic

