Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Use and acceptance 3 Variants 4 Registries and mapping 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Public bookcase 20 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Հայերեն עברית Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Publicly available book shelf serving as an informal free library "Free library" redirects here. For freely accessible institutional libraries, see public library . For the online archive, see The Free Dictionary § The Free Library .

Public bookcase in use, Bonn, Germany (2008) A public bookcase (also known as a free library or book swap or street library or sidewalk library ) is a cabinet which may be freely and anonymously used for the exchange and storage of books without the administrative rigor associated with formal libraries . When in public places these cabinets are of a robust and weatherproof design which are available at all times. However, cabinets installed in public or commercial buildings may be simple, unmodified book-shelves and may only be available during certain periods.

Origin [ edit ] Closely allied with the BookCrossing concept, the original public bookcases were conceived as artistic acts.

[ 1 ] Very early examples are the creations of performance artist duo Clegg & Guttmann in 1991. Collections of bookcases were conceived as "free open-air libraries" in Darmstadt and Hannover in Germany in the late 1990s.

[ 2 ] In 2002, the Bonn Community Foundation awarded Trixy Royeck funding for her idea "outdoor books – books in the open" which she submitted while studying interior design in Mainz [ 3 ] and since this time the concept has been widely replicated.

[ 4 ] A public bookcase opened in 2010 in Vienna, Austria .

[ 5 ] In Basel, Switzerland , where many coffee shops and other venues host open bookshelves, [ 6 ] a public bookcase was unveiled in June 2011.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Open bookcases are financed by a wide range of organisations (individuals, foundations, Lions Clubs , civic associations, and so on).

[ 9 ] Visitors to the bookcases decide which books to deposit and borrow, and whether to return or exchange borrowed books for others.

Use and acceptance [ edit ] If a public bookcase is centrally and accessibly located and is stocked with sufficient material, public bookcases are quickly and widely appreciated. Vandalism has occurred in some places and, in successful cases, is countered by "bookcase sponsors" who devote their time and attention to care of the collection.

The acceptance, motivation and user-profile of public bookshelves was examined in 2008 by a study at the University of Bonn .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] It was found that the system had developed as a notable alternative to conventional bookstores.  Surveyed users also indicated that they believed that regular use of public bookcases could function as an example for similar schemes for other desirable goods.

[ 12 ] This acceptance has led to a rapid dissemination of public bookshelves throughout Germany. It has been found that durable construction and storm-resistance promote sustained use.

[ 13 ] As of December 2023, there are 3400 such libraries in Germany.

[ citation needed ] In North America , public bookcases have been criticized for being mostly placed redundantly in neighborhoods of wealthier, well-educated people, where there are already high-quality traditional public libraries nearby.

[ 14 ] Variants [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Public bookcase" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Oerlinghausen there is a modified version of the public bookcase. A small bookcase has been installed in Simon Square by the Friends of The Public Library, in collaboration with the Cohabitation/Society/Culture group of the local Agenda 21. These groups stock the bookcase as needed from a so-called "book exchange", a larger public event which has taken place in the Dietrich-Bonhoeffer-Haus in Oerlingsausen-South every Saturday since 2007. One may also deposit book requests to be matched from stock by the operators of the exchange.

The Salbke Bookmark is a large, open-air construction which includes a number of public bookcases. Originally built on the site of a demolished library in a depopulated district of Magdeburg , the local civic association has moved much of the stock to a nearby vacant shop where more than 10000 donations are securely housed.

A cafe in Marburg includes a public bookcase. The city library now includes a cabinet of books which may be freely taken or exchanged by patrons rather than organising complex book disposal events. The operation of this variant combines the library's daily operations with community control. As the bookcase is located in a protected space it does not require sponsorship or weather protection.

In New Zealand, several cities have installed "Lilliput Libraries" (after the diminutive fictional island in Gulliver's Travels ) consisting of repurposed cupboards or cabinets outside private houses, which are essentially identical to public bookcases. The Lilliput Library scheme began in Dunedin in 2015, [ 15 ] and has since spread to over 300 Lilliput Libraries in around 40 towns and cities around the country, as well as to Queensland, Australia .

[ 16 ] Registries and mapping [ edit ] In North America small enclosed bookcases, usually in front of residences, have become a common sight in many cities. Some of these are purchased from or otherwise officially registered with Little Free Library , which was founded in 2009.

[ 14 ] In Australia, Street Library Australia operates along similar lines, while in Europe many public bookcases are registered via the Open Book Case project.

[ citation needed ] The mapping project OpenStreetMap has a designated tag for registering the location types and more of public bookcases.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Gallery [ edit ] Bookcase at Onnen-Visser-Platz, Norderney , Lower Saxony , Germany Street library, made with a telephone booth , in Giromagny , France Public Bookcase outside of Grace Episcopal Church (Madison, Wisconsin) A Pizza Hut –themed Little Free Library in Gillette, Wyoming Browsing a public bookcase in Essen , Germany "Free Swap Lilliput Library" bookcase in Wellington , New Zealand "Book Tower"  in Wippra , Germany See also [ edit ] Book sales club Book swapping Bookleggers Library Community fridge Give-away shop Little Free Libraries References [ edit ] ^ Book Crossing: Offene Bücherschränke in Bonn , reticon-Report von Martin Ragg, 2. April 2006 Archived 2009-11-03 at the Wayback Machine ^ Die Geschichte der Offenen Bibliotheken auf hannover.de Archived 2011-08-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ " Bürgerstiftung Bonn stellt offenen Bücherschrank auf , Presseerklärung der Bürgerstiftung Bonn, 15. November 2003" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-10-27 . Retrieved 2012-09-24 .

^ Bücherwald – erstes öffentliches Bücherregal im Berliner Straßenraum , Presseerklärung Berliner Senatsverwaltung für Stadtentwicklung, 27. Juni 2008 ^ "offener Bücherschrank – Wien" . 2010 . Retrieved 8 February 2010 .

^ Öffentliche Bücherregale ^ Christoph Merian Stiftung Medienmitteilung , 14 June 2011.

Archived 2014-01-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ 3land.info: dies & das & ein neuer Bücherschrank ^ Das JüLichT: Jülich ganz „sozial“ Beitrag 2. September 2010 ^ Der Bonner Bücherschrank auf der PoppelsdorferAllee – Ein merkwürdiges Versorgungssystem . Kurzfassung der Ergebnisse des Projekts „Das Nutzungsverhalten am Poppelsdorfer Bücherschrank“ Archived 2014-09-03 at the Wayback Machine (pdf) Autoren: Prof. Dr. Michael-Burkhard Piorkowsky, Sandra Bichler, Kerstin Hilt, Olga Reger ^ Bonner "Gemeinschaftsmöbel" Studienobjekt: Offener Bücherschrank als soziales System (pdf) Autorin: Ulrike Klopp. In: forsch / Bonner Universitäts-Nachrichten 2/2009. (S.27) ^ Poppelsdorfer Bücherschrank: Die Frauen geben, die Männer nehmen ; Bonner General-Anzeiger, 3. February 2009 Archived 2011-08-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ein Schrank für ausgesetzte Bücher/Bürgerstiftung Bonn eröffnet in den kommenden Tagen zwei weitere Freiluft-Bibliotheken , Bonner General-Anzeiger, 20. November 2008 Archived 2011-08-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Capps, Kriston (May 3, 2017).

"Against Little Free Libraries" . CityLab . Retrieved 2020-03-15 .

^ " Lilliput Libraries ," Dunedin City of Literature . Retrieved 5 July 2023.

^ " Lilliput Library map ," Lilliput Libraries . Retrieved 5 July 2023.

^ "OpenstreetMap tag Amenity:public_bookcase" . OpenStreetMap . Retrieved 20 February 2017 .

^ "Rich Dad Poor Dad PDF" . zlibrary . Retrieved 20 February 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Public bookcases .

List of public bookcases on German Wikipedia (in German) Free application —Delivrez is a participative & free project, also available for Android platform (in French and English) A subset of Public bookcases presented on a map as part of the OpenBookCase.org project (archived 11 October 2019) Public bookcases map —A map with public bookcases for book exchange. The map is based on OpenStreetMap data.

v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal v t e Libraries and library science Types of library Academic Archive Branch Children's Christian Consortium Digital shadow Hybrid Law Lending Library of things Map Medicine Mobile Music National Presidential U.S.

Prison Private Public Carnegie Research School Learning Resource Centre virtual Special collections Special library Street Subscription Tool Toy Transportation Traveling Types of librarian Distance education E-science Law Music ensemble Periodicals/serials School Information professional Informationist Library and information scientist Library science Five laws Library and information science Education for librarianship Acquisitions Archival science Assessment Cataloging catalog OPAC Circulation Classification Collection development Collective collection Conservation Discovery system Electronic resource management Information literacy Inventory Legal deposit Library history Library instruction Library management Library publishing Preservation Readers' advisory Reference virtual roving Technical services Weeding History History of libraries History of library science Lists Libraries by country by size ancient destroyed medical national Library associations Library schools Librarians women fictional Archivists women Category:Libraries Category:Library science Commons Glossary Outline WikiProject Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_bookcase&oldid=1305957324 " Categories : 1990s introductions Book swapping Public sphere Types of library Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles needing additional references from March 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 02:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public bookcase 20 languages Add topic

