Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Mission 3 Core description 4 Data holdings Toggle Data holdings subsection 4.1 International cooperation and data exchange 4.2 Data management for global change studies 5 NOAA library and information network Toggle NOAA library and information network subsection 5.1 User services 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents National Oceanographic Data Center Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Former United States data centre This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "National Oceanographic Data Center" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The National Oceanographic Data Center ( NODC ) was one of the national environmental data centers operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of the U.S. Department of Commerce . The main NODC facility was located in Silver Spring, Maryland , and consisted of five divisions.

[ 1 ] The NODC also had field offices collocated with major government or academic oceanographic laboratories in Stennis Space Center , MS; Miami, FL; La Jolla, San Diego, California ; Seattle, WA; Austin, Texas ; Charleston, South Carolina ; Norfolk, Virginia ; and Honolulu, Hawaii .  In 2015, NODC was merged with the National Climatic Data Center and the National Geophysical Data Center into the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI).

[ 2 ] NOAA also operated two other data centers: National Climatic Data Center (NCDC), Asheville, North Carolina and National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC), Boulder, Colorado .  In 2015, the three merged to form the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI).

[ 3 ] The National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) in Boulder, Colorado, is also operated for NGDC by the University of Colorado through the Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES) .

These discipline-oriented centers served as national repositories and dissemination facilities for global environmental data. The data archives amassed by the NODC and the other centers provide a record of Earth's changing environment, support numerous research and operational applications, and are still available through the NCEI. Working cooperatively, the centers provided data products and services to scientists, engineers, resource managers, policy makers, and other users—both in the United States and around the world.

History [ edit ] Established in 1961, the NODC was originally an interagency facility administered by the U.S. Naval Hydrographic (later Oceanographic) Office. The NODC was transferred to NOAA in 1970 when NOAA was created by Executive Order by then-President, Richard Nixon . In the words of its charter, the NODC serves to "acquire, process, preserve, and disseminate oceanographic data." Its primary mission is to ensure that global oceanographic data sets collected at great cost are maintained in a permanent archive that is easily accessible to the world science community, and to other users.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Mission [ edit ] The NODC's mission statement was "To provide scientific stewardship of marine data and information".

Core description [ edit ] The National Oceanographic Data Center, National Coastal Data Development Center (NCDDC) and NOAA Central Library, with its regional branch assets, were integrated to provide access to the world's most comprehensive sources of marine environmental data and information. NODC maintains and updates a national ocean archive with environmental data acquired from domestic and foreign activities, and produces products and research from these data, to help monitor global environmental changes. The data included physical, biological and chemical measurements derived from in situ oceanographic observations, satellite remote sensing of the oceans, and ocean model simulations. NODC personnel directly interacted with federal, state, academic, and industrial oceanographic activities, represent NESDIS on various interagency domestic panels, committees and councils, and represent the United States in various international organizations , such as the International Oceanographic Data Exchange. The Data Center represents NESDIS and NOAA to the general public, government agencies, private institutions, foreign governments, and the private sector on matters involving oceanographic data.

Data holdings [ edit ] The NODC managed the world's largest collection of publicly available oceanographic data. NODC holdings included in situ and remotely sensed physical, chemical, and biological oceanographic data from coastal and deep ocean areas. These were originally collected for a variety of operational and research missions by U.S. Federal agencies, including the Department of Defense (primarily the U.S. Navy); by State and local government agencies; by universities and research institutions; and private industry . NODC data holdings extended back over a hundred years, and the volume is expected to grow exponentially as new ocean observing systems are deployed.

Through NODC archive and access services, these ocean data were reused to answer questions about climate change, ocean phenomena, and management of coastal and marine resources, marine transportation, recreation, national security, and natural disasters. Another significant user community is Education, where these data and information products help teach each new generation of students about the oceans. Requests for oceanographic data and information have increased each year since the Center was established in 1961.  Access to these archives is still available through the NCEI.

International cooperation and data exchange [ edit ] A significant percentage of the oceanographic data held by NODC was foreign. NODC acquired foreign data through direct bilateral exchanges with other countries, and through the facilities of the World Data Center for Oceanography, [ 6 ] Silver Spring, which is collocated with, and operated by, NODC.

There are three World Data Centers for Oceanography:
World Data Center, Silver Spring, Maryland, United States, 
World Data Center, Moscow, Russia , and 
World Data Center, Tianjin, People's Republic of China. 
They are part of the World Data Center System initiated in 1957 to provide a mechanism for data exchange, and they operate under guidelines issued by the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).

Under NODC leadership, the Global Data Archeology and Rescue (GODAR) project grew into a major international program sponsored by the Inter-governmental Oceanographic Commission. GODAR is a comprehensive effort to locate, rescue, quality control , and disseminate historical global ocean profile data for use by the climate and global change research community .

[ 7 ] Data management for global change studies [ edit ] The NODC provided data management support for major ocean science projects and promotes improved working relations with the academic ocean research community.

[ 8 ] NOAA library and information network [ edit ] The NODC also managed the NOAA Library and Information Network, which included the NOAA Central Library in Silver Spring, MD; regional libraries in Miami, FL and Seattle, WA; and field libraries or information centers at about 30 NOAA sites throughout the United States. The combined libraries contained millions of volumes including books, journals, CD-ROMs , DVDs, audio, and video tapes .  These holdings are now managed by the NCEI.

User services [ edit ] Each year, the NODC responded to thousands of requests for oceanographic data and information. Copies of specified data sets or data selected from the NODC's archive databases were provided to users on various media types, or online. NODC data products were provided at prices that cover the cost of data selection and retrieval. However, data provided on the NODC public website is free of charge.

See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Expocode References [ edit ] ^ "NODC Overview" .

Nodc.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2016-01-24 .

^ "About the National Centers for Environmental Information | National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI)" .

Ncei.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2016-01-24 .

^ "About the National Centers for Environmental Information | National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI)" . Ncei.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2016-01-24 .

^ "Dedication of the National Oceanographic Data Center" (PDF) .

Nodc.noaa.gov . 1961-01-16 . Retrieved 2016-01-24 .

^ "Hydro Bulletin : Dedication of the National Oceanographic Data Center : Photograph" (PDF) .

Nodc.noaa.gov . 1961-01-27 . Retrieved 2016-01-24 .

^ "World Data Center for Oceanography, Silver Spring" .

Nodc.noaa.gov . 2015-11-05 . Retrieved 2016-01-24 .

^ Andrew Allegra (2015-11-05).

"International Activities" .

Nodc.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2016-01-24 .

^ "LEVITUS94 Ocean Climatology" .

iridl.ldeo.columbia.edu . Retrieved 2024-01-03 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Australia Czech Republic Norway Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Oceanographic_Data_Center&oldid=1215820999 " Categories : National Oceanographic Data Center National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Environmental data Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from February 2012 All articles with a promotional tone Articles needing additional references from August 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 27 March 2024, at 09:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Oceanographic Data Center Add languages Add topic

