Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin of the term 2 Examples 3 Concurrent majority 4 Viewpoints Toggle Viewpoints subsection 4.1 James Madison 4.2 Alexis de Tocqueville 4.3 Critique by Robert A. Dahl 4.4 Trampling the rights of minorities 4.5 Public choice theory 4.6 Class studies 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Tyranny of the majority 25 languages العربية বাংলা Български Dansk Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Inherent oppressive potential of simple majority rule For the form of democracy, see Ochlocracy . For the Flesh Field album, see Tyranny of the Majority (album) . For the concept in engineering, see Tyranny of numbers .

Tyranny of the majority refers to a situation in majority rule where the preferences and interests of the majority dominate the political landscape, potentially sidelining or repressing minority groups and using majority rule to take non-democratic actions.

[ 1 ] This idea has been discussed by various thinkers, including John Stuart Mill in On Liberty [ 2 ] and Alexis de Tocqueville in Democracy in America .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] To reduce the risk of majority tyranny, modern democracies frequently have countermajoritarian institutions that restrict the ability of majorities to repress minorities and stymie political competition.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] In the context of a nation, constitutional limits on the powers of a legislative body such as a bill of rights or supermajority clause have been used.

Separation of powers or judicial independence may also be implemented.

[ 6 ] In social choice , a tyranny-of-the-majority scenario can be formally defined as a situation where the candidate or decision preferred by a majority is greatly inferior (hence "tyranny") to the socially optimal candidate or decision according to some measure of excellence such as total utilitarianism or the egalitarian rule .

[ citation needed ] Origin of the term [ edit ] The origin of the term "tyranny of the majority" is commonly attributed to Alexis de Tocqueville , who used it in his book Democracy in America . It appears in Part 2 of the book in the title of Chapter 8, "What Moderates the Tyranny of the Majority in the United States' Absence of Administrative Centralization" ( French : De ce qui tempère aux États-Unis la tyrannie de la majorité [ 7 ] ) and in the previous chapter in the names of sections such as "The Tyranny of the Majority" and "Effects of the Tyranny of the Majority on American National Character; the Courtier Spirit in the United States".

[ 8 ] While the specific phrase "tyranny of the majority" is frequently attributed to various Founding Fathers of the United States , only John Adams is known to have used it, arguing against government by a single unicameral elected body. Writing in defense of the Constitution in March 1788, [ 9 ] Adams referred to "a single sovereign assembly, each member…only accountable to his constituents; and the majority of members who have been of one party" as a "tyranny of the majority", attempting to highlight the need instead for "a mixed government , consisting of three branches ". Constitutional author James Madison presented a similar idea in Federalist 10 , citing the destabilizing effect of "the superior force of an interested and overbearing majority" on a government, though the essay as a whole focuses on the Constitution's efforts to mitigate factionalism generally.

[ 10 ] Later users include Edmund Burke , who wrote in a 1790 letter that "The tyranny of a multitude is a multiplied tyranny." [ 11 ] It was further popularised by John Stuart Mill , influenced by Tocqueville, in On Liberty (1859).

Friedrich Nietzsche used the phrase in the first sequel to Human, All Too Human (1879).

[ 12 ] Ayn Rand wrote that individual rights are not subject to a public vote, and that the political function of rights is precisely to protect minorities from oppression by majorities and "the smallest minority on earth is the individual".

[ 13 ] In Herbert Marcuse 's 1965 essay Repressive Tolerance , he said "tolerance is extended to policies, conditions, and modes of behavior which should not be tolerated because they are impeding, if not destroying, the chances of creating an existence without fear and misery" and that "this sort of tolerance strengthens the tyranny of the majority against which authentic liberals protested".

[ 14 ] In 1994, legal scholar Lani Guinier used the phrase as the title for a collection of law review articles.

[ 15 ] Examples [ edit ] Herbert Spencer , in "The Right to Ignore the State" (1851), pointed the problem with the following example: [ 16 ] Suppose, for the sake of argument, that, struck by some Malthusian panic , a legislature duly representing public opinion were to enact that all children born during the next ten years should be drowned. Does anyone think such an enactment would be warrantable? If not, there is evidently a limit to the power of a majority.

Concurrent majority [ edit ] Main article: Concurrent majority 19th century concurrent majority theories held logical counterbalances to standard tyranny of the majority harms originating from Antiquity and onward. Essentially, illegitimate or temporary coalitions that held majority volume could disproportionately outweigh and hurt any significant minority, by nature and sheer volume. Calhoun's contemporary doctrine was presented as one of limitation within American democracy to prevent traditional tyranny, whether actual or imagined.

[ 17 ] Viewpoints [ edit ] James Madison [ edit ] Federalist No. 10 "The Same Subject Continued: The Union as a Safeguard Against Domestic Faction and Insurrection" (November 23, 1787): [ 18 ] The inference to which we are brought is, that the CAUSES of faction cannot be removed, and that relief is only to be sought in the means of controlling its EFFECTS. If a faction consists of less than a majority, relief is supplied by the republican principle, which enables the majority to defeat its sinister views by regular vote. It may clog the administration, it may convulse the society; but it will be unable to execute and mask its violence under the forms of the Constitution. When a majority is included in a faction, the form of popular government, on the other hand, enables it to sacrifice to its ruling passion or interest both the public good and the rights of other citizens. To secure the public good and private rights against the danger of such a faction, and at the same time to preserve the spirit and the form of popular government, is then the great object to which our inquiries are directed...By what means is this object attainable? Evidently by one of two only. Either the existence of the same passion or interest in a majority at the same time must be prevented, or the majority, having such coexistent passion or interest, must be rendered, by their number and local situation, unable to concert and carry into effect schemes of oppression.

Alexis de Tocqueville [ edit ] With respect to American democracy, Tocqueville, in his book Democracy in America , says: So what is a majority taken as a whole, if not an individual who has opinions and, most often, interests contrary to another individual called the minority. Now, if you admit that an individual vested with omnipotence can abuse it against his adversaries, why would you not admit the same thing for the majority? Have men, by gathering together, changed character? By becoming stronger, have they become more patient in the face of obstacles? As for me, I cannot believe it; and the power to do everything that I refuse to any one of my fellows, I will never grant to several.

[ 19 ] So when I see the right and the ability to do everything granted to whatever power, whether called people or king, democracy or aristocracy, whether exercised in a monarchy or a republic, I say: the seed of tyranny is there and I try to go and live under other laws.

[ 20 ] When a man or a party suffers from an injustice in the United States, to whom do you want them to appeal? To public opinion? That is what forms the majority. To the legislative body? It represents the majority and blindly obeys it. To the executive power? It is named by the majority and serves it as a passive instrument. To the police? The police are nothing other than the majority under arms. To the jury? The jury is the majority vested with the right to deliver judgments. The judges themselves, in certain states, are elected by the majority. However iniquitous or unreasonable the measure that strikes you may be, you must therefore submit to it or flee. What is that if not the very soul of tyranny under the forms of liberty [ 21 ] Critique by Robert A. Dahl [ edit ] Robert A. Dahl argues that the tyranny of the majority is a spurious dilemma (p. 171): [ 22 ] Critic : Are you trying to say that majority tyranny is simply an illusion? If so, that is going to be small comfort to a minority whose fundamental rights are trampled on by an abusive majority. I think you need to consider seriously two possibilities; first, that a majority will infringe on the rights of a minority, and second, that a majority may oppose democracy itself.

Advocate : Let's take up the first. The issue is sometimes presented as a paradox. If a majority is not entitled to do so, then it is thereby deprived of its rights; but if a majority is entitled to do so, then it can deprive the minority of its rights. The paradox is supposed to show that no solution can be both democratic and just. But the dilemma seems to be spurious.

Of course a majority might have the power or strength to deprive a minority of its political rights. […] The question is whether a majority may rightly use its primary political rights to deprive a minority of its primary political rights.

The answer is clearly no. To put it another way, logically it can't be true that the members of an association ought to govern themselves by the democratic process, and at the same time a majority of the association may properly strip a minority of its primary political rights. For, by doing so the majority would deny the minority the rights necessary to the democratic process. In effect therefore the majority would affirm that the association ought not to govern itself by the democratic process. They can't have it both ways.

Critic : Your argument may be perfectly logical. But majorities aren't always perfectly logical. They may believe in democracy to some extent and yet violate its principles. Even worse, they may not believe in democracy and yet they may cynically use the democratic process to destroy democracy. […] Without some limits, both moral and constitutional, the democratic process becomes self-contradictory, doesn't it?

Advocate : That's exactly what I've been trying to show. Of course democracy has limits. But my point is that these are built into the very nature of the process itself. If you exceed those limits, then you necessarily violate the democratic process.

Trampling the rights of minorities [ edit ] Regarding recent American politics (specifically initiatives ), Donovan et al. argue that: One of the original concerns about direct democracy is the potential it has to allow a majority of voters to trample the rights of minorities. Many still worry that the process can be used to harm gays and lesbians as well as ethnic, linguistic, and religious minorities. … Recent scholarly research shows that the initiative process is sometimes prone to produce laws that disadvantage relatively powerless minorities … State and local ballot initiatives have been used to undo policies – such as school desegregation, protections against job and housing discrimination, and affirmative action – that minorities have secured from legislatures.

[ 23 ] Public choice theory [ edit ] The notion that, in a democracy, the greatest concern is that the majority will tyrannise and exploit diverse smaller interests, has been criticised by Mancur Olson in The Logic of Collective Action , who argues instead that narrow and well organised minorities are more likely to assert their interests over those of the majority.

[ 24 ] Class studies [ edit ] Tyranny of the majority has also been prevalent in some class studies. Rahim Baizidi uses the concept of "democratic suppression" to analyze the tyranny of the majority in economic classes. According to this, the majority of the upper and middle classes, together with a small portion of the lower class, form the majority coalition of conservative forces in the society.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Tyranny of the majority .

Anarchism – Political philosophy and movement Argumentum ad populum – Fallacy of claiming the majority is always correct Cancel culture – Modern form of ostracism Criticism of democracy – Critiques of democratic political systems Dictatorship of the proletariat – Marxist political concept Dominant minority – Minority group that holds a disproportionate amount of power Elective dictatorship – One-government dominance of a parliament Majoritarianism – Political philosophy Minoritarianism – Primacy of a minority in decision-making Minority rights – Rights of members of minority groups Populism – Political philosophy Totalitarianism – Extreme form of authoritarianism and a theoretical concept Utilitarianism – Ethical theory based on maximizing well-being References [ edit ] ^ a b Levitsky, Steven; Ziblatt, Daniel (2025).

"When Should the Majority Rule?" .

Journal of Democracy .

36 (1): 5– 20.

doi : 10.1353/jod.2025.a947880 .

ISSN 1086-3214 .

^ John Stuart Mill.

[1] ^ Maletz, Donald J. (2002).

"Tocqueville's Tyranny of the Majority Reconsidered" .

The Journal of Politics .

64 (3): 741– 763.

doi : 10.1111/1468-2508.00148 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

^ Horwitz, Morton J. (1966).

"Tocqueville and the Tyranny of the Majority" .

The Review of Politics .

28 (3): 293– 307.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500007105 .

ISSN 1748-6858 .

^ Abizadeh, Arash (2021).

"Counter-Majoritarian Democracy: Persistent Minorities, Federalism, and the Power of Numbers" .

American Political Science Review .

115 (3): 742– 756.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055421000198 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

^ A Przeworski, JM Maravall, I NetLibrary Democracy and the Rule of Law (2003) p. 223 ^ de Tocqueville, Alexis (2012).

De la démocratie en Amérique . Institut Coppet.

^ Tocqueville, Alexis de (2003).

Democracy in America : and Two essays on America . Gerald E. Bevan, Isaac Kramnick, Alexis de Tocqueville. London.

ISBN 0-14-044760-1 .

OCLC 51528434 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ John Adams , A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America , Vol. 3 (London: 1788), p. 290-291, 310.

^ "The Federalist Papers No. 10" . 29 December 1998.

^ Burke, Edmund (1844).

Correspondence of Edmund Burke between the year 1774 - 1797 . Rivington.

^ See for example maxim 89 of Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human: First Sequel: Mixed Opinions and Maxims , 1879 ^ Ayn Rand (1961), "Collectivized 'Rights,'" The Virtue of Selfishness .

^ The Repressive Tolerance by Herbert Marcuse ^ Lani Guinier, The Tyranny of the Majority (Free Press: 1994) ^ "Herbert Spencer, The Right to Ignore the State (1851)" .

www.panarchy.org . Retrieved 2019-11-18 .

^ Lacy K. Ford Jr., "Inventing the Concurrent Majority: Madison, Calhoun, and the Problem of Majoritarianism in American Political Thought", The Journal of Southern History, Vol. 60, No. 1 (Feb., 1994), pp. 19–58 in JSTOR ^ Madison, James; Hamilton, Alexander.

"Federalist Nos. 51-60" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ Democracy in America: Historical-Critical Edition of De la démocratie en Amérique, ed. Eduardo Nolla, translated from the French by James T. Schleifer. A Bilingual French-English editions, (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2010). Vol. 2.

Democracy in America: Historical-Critical Edition, vol. 2| Online Library of Liberty ^ Democracy in America: Historical-Critical Edition of De la démocratie en Amérique, ed. Eduardo Nolla, translated from the French by James T. Schleifer. A Bilingual French-English editions, (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2010). Vol. 2.

Democracy in America: Historical-Critical Edition, vol. 2| Online Library of Liberty ^ Democracy in America: Historical-Critical Edition of De la démocratie en Amérique, ed. Eduardo Nolla, translated from the French by James T. Schleifer. A Bilingual French-English editions, (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2010). Vol. 2.

Democracy in America: Historical-Critical Edition, vol. 2| Online Library of Liberty ^ Dahl, Robert (1989).

Democracy and Its Critics .

^ Todd Donovan; et al. (2014).

State and Local Politics . Cengage Learning. p. 131.

ISBN 9781285441405 .

^ Jr, Mancur Olson (January 1971).

The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups, with a New Preface and Appendix . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-28327-5 .

^ Baizidi, Rahim (2019-09-02).

"Paradoxical class: paradox of interest and political conservatism in middle class" .

Asian Journal of Political Science .

27 (3): 272– 285.

doi : 10.1080/02185377.2019.1642772 .

ISSN 0218-5377 .

S2CID 199308683 .

Further reading [ edit ] Nyirkos, Tamas (2018).

The Tyranny of the Majority: History, Concepts, and Challenges . Routledge.

Volk, Kyle G. (2014).

Moral Minorities and the Making of American Democracy . Oxford University Press.

Curriculum on Alexis de Tocqueville on Tyranny of the Majority from EDSITEment from the National Endowment for the Humanities v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government Forms Absolute monarchy Autocracy Liberal Tsarist Communist state Counterintelligence state Dictatorship Benevolent Civilian Constitutional Dictablanda Grassroots Military Proletarian Right-wing Dominant-party system Illiberal democracy Totalitarian Libertarian authoritarianism Mafia state Managerial state Mediacracy Ochlocracy One-party state Oligarchy Police state Theocracy Islamic state Tyranny Majoritarian Soft Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Putinism Metaxism Authoritarian capitalism Pinochetism Authoritarian socialism Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Maoism Deng Xiaoping Theory Xi Jinping Thought Juche Despotism Enlightened Soft Ecoauthoritarianism Fascism Eco Neo Imperialism Nazism Neo Religious Caesaropapism Khomeinism Ziaism Shōwa Statism Techno See also Democracy indices Deep state Inverted totalitarianism Personality Leadership style Left-wing Right-wing Social dominance orientation Statism Strongman List of totalitarian states NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9dnk6
Cached time: 20250816210110
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.635 seconds
Real time usage: 0.844 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4722/1000000
Revision size: 20598/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 107357/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8787/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86200/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.400/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16039599/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  716.125      1 -total
 21.36%  152.983      1 Template:Reflist
 20.19%  144.618     13 Template:Annotated_link
 18.17%  130.085      3 Template:Navbox
 13.56%   97.084      1 Template:Langx
 12.32%   88.203      5 Template:Cite_journal
  9.26%   66.338      1 Template:Conformity
  9.21%   65.958      1 Template:Authoritarian_types_of_rule
  8.17%   58.528      1 Template:Short_description
  4.92%   35.263      1 Template:Political_philosophy Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:348853:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816210110 and revision id 1306133538. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tyranny_of_the_majority&oldid=1306133538 " Categories : Authoritarianism Democracy Libertarian terms Political terminology Political theories Abuse Majority Majority–minority relations Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 03:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tyranny of the majority 25 languages Add topic

