Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Childhood 2 Marriage 3 Revolutionary activities 4 Salons at Coppet and Paris 5 Conflict with Napoleon 6 Years of exile Toggle Years of exile subsection 6.1 German travels 6.2 Mistress of Coppet 6.3 Return to France 6.4 East European travels 7 Restoration and death 8 Offspring 9 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 9.1 Precursor of feminism 9.2 Abolition 9.3 Letters to Jefferson 9.4 Staël and the Adams family 10 In popular culture 11 Works Toggle Works subsection 11.1 Correspondence in French 12 Multilingual editions 13 See also 14 References 15 Sources 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Germaine de Staël 53 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Anne Louise Germaine de Staël ) Swiss/French author (1766–1817) Germaine de Staël "Madame de Staël" (1813) Born Anne-Louise Germaine Necker ( 1766-04-22 ) 22 April 1766 Paris , France Died 14 July 1817 (1817-07-14) (aged 51) Paris, France Spouses Erik Magnus Staël von Holstein ​ ​ ( m.

1786; died 1802) ​ Albert Jean Michel de Rocca ​ ​ ( m.

1816) ​ died 1818 Parents Jacques Necker Suzanne Curchod Philosophical work School Romanticism Main interests Cosmopolitanism [ 1 ] [ 2 ] representative government constitutionalism Notable works Delphine (1802) Corinne ou l'Italie (1807) De l'Allemagne (1813) Signature Anne Louise Germaine de Staël-Holstein ( French: [an lwiz ʒɛʁmɛn də stal ɔlstajn] ; née Necker ; 22 April 1766 – 14 July 1817), commonly known as Madame de Staël ( / d ə ˈ s t ɑː l / də- STAHL ; [ 3 ] French: [madam də stal] ), was a prominent philosopher , woman of letters , and political theorist in both Parisian and Genevan intellectual circles. She was the daughter of banker and French finance minister Jacques Necker and Suzanne Curchod , a respected salonist and writer . Throughout her life, she held a moderate stance during the tumultuous periods of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era , persisting until the time of the French Restoration .

[ 4 ] Her presence at critical events such as the Estates General of 1789 and the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen underscored her engagement in the political discourse of her time.

[ 5 ] However, Madame de Staël faced exile for extended periods: initially during the Reign of Terror and subsequently due to personal persecution by Napoleon . She claimed to have discerned the tyrannical nature and ambitions of his rule ahead of many others.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ non-primary source needed ] During her exile, she fostered the Coppet group , a network that spanned across Europe, positioning herself at its heart. Her literary works, emphasizing individuality and passion, left an enduring imprint on European intellectual thought. De Staël's repeated championing of Romanticism contributed significantly to its widespread recognition.

[ 7 ] Within her work, de Staël not only advocates for the necessity of public expression but also sounds cautionary notes about its potential hazards.

[ 8 ] Childhood [ edit ] Germaine Necker by Carmontelle Germaine (or Minette ) was the only child of the Swiss governess Suzanne Curchod , who had an aptitude for mathematics and science, and prominent Genevan banker and statesman Jacques Necker . Jacques was the son of Karl Friedrich Necker from Brandenburg ( Holy Roman Empire ), himself a lawyer and professor. Jacques became the Director-General of Finance under King Louis XVI . Mme Staël would later host one of the most popular salons in Paris in Rue de la Chaussée-d'Antin .

[ 9 ] Mme Necker wanted her daughter educated according to the principles of the Swiss philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau ; Germaine's father instilled in her  intellectual rigor and Calvinist discipline.

[ 10 ] On Fridays, Mme Necker regularly brought Germaine to sit at her feet in the salon. Even at a young age, Germaine engaged in stimulating conversations with her mother's guests. Celebrities such as the Comte de Buffon , Jean-François Marmontel , Melchior Grimm , Edward Gibbon , the Abbé Raynal , Jean-François de la Harpe , Jacques-Henri Bernardin de Saint-Pierre , Denis Diderot , and Jean d'Alembert were frequent visitors.

[ 11 ] At the age of 13, she read Montesquieu, Shakespeare, Rousseau and Dante.

[ 12 ] Her parents' social life led to a somewhat neglected and wild Germaine, unwilling to bow to her mother's demands.

Her father "is remembered today for taking the unprecedented step in 1781 of making public the country's budget , a novelty in an absolute monarchy where the state of the national finances had always been kept secret, leading to his dismissal by the King in May of that year." [ 13 ] The family eventually took up residence in 1784 at Château Coppet , an estate on Lake Geneva . The family returned to the Paris region in 1785.

[ 9 ] Marriage [ edit ] Baron Erik Magnus Staël von Holstein, 1796 by Ulrika Pasch The Swedish Embassy , Hôtel de Ségur, later Hôtel de Salm-Dyck Aged 11, Germaine had suggested to her mother that she marry Edward Gibbon , a visitor to her salon, whom she found most attractive. Then, she reasoned, he would always be around for her.

[ 14 ] In 1783, at seventeen, she was courted by William Pitt the Younger and by Comte de Guibert , whose conversation, she thought, was the most far-ranging, spirited and fertile she had ever known.

[ 15 ] When she did not accept their offers Germaine's parents became impatient. With the help of Marie-Charlotte Hippolyte de Boufflers , a marriage was arranged with Baron Erik Magnus Staël von Holstein , a Protestant and attaché of the Swedish legation to France . The wedding took place on 14 January 1786 in the Swedish embassy at 97, Rue du Bac ; Germaine was 19, and her husband 37.

[ 16 ] On the whole, the marriage seems to have been workable for both parties, although neither seems to have had much affection for the other. Madame de Staël continued to write miscellaneous works, including the three-act romantic drama Sophie (1786) and the five-act tragedy Jeanne Grey (1787). The baron, also a gambler, obtained great benefits from the match as he received 80,000 pounds and was confirmed as lifetime ambassador to Paris.

[ 17 ] Revolutionary activities [ edit ] On 4 and 5 May 1789 Germaine de Staël watched the assembly of the Estates-General in Versailles, where she met the young Mathieu de Montmorency .

"Dix Août 1792. Siege et prise du Chateau des Tuileries": French soldiers (volunteers) and citizens storming the Tuileries Palace to capture the royal family and end the monarchy.

In 1788, de Staël published Letters on the works and character of J.J. Rousseau .

[ 18 ] De Staël was at this time enthusiastic about the mixture of Rousseau's ideas about love and Montesquieu 's on politics.

[ 19 ] In December 1788 her father persuaded Louis XVI to double the number of deputies at the Third Estate in order to gain enough support to raise taxes to pay for the excessive costs of supporting the revolutionaries in America. This approach had serious repercussions on Necker's reputation; he appeared to consider the Estates-General as a facility designed to help the administration rather than to reform the government.

[ 20 ] In an argument with the king, whose speech on 23 June he did not attend, Necker was dismissed and exiled on 11 July. Her parents left France on the same day in unpopularity and disgrace. On Sunday, 12 July the news became public, and an angry Camille Desmoulins suggested storming the Bastille .

[ 21 ] On 16 July he was reappointed; Necker entered Versailles in triumph. His efforts to clean up public finances were unsuccessful and his idea of a National Bank failed. Necker was attacked by Jean-Paul Marat and Count Mirabeau in the Constituante , when he did not agree with using assignats as legal tender .

[ 22 ] He resigned on 4 September 1790. Accompanied by their son-in-law, Necker and his wife left for Switzerland, without the two million livres , half of his fortune, that he had loaned as an investment in the public treasury in 1778.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] The increasing disturbances caused by the Revolution made her privileges as the consort of an ambassador an important safeguard. Germaine held a salon in the Swedish embassy, where she gave "coalition dinners", which were frequented by moderates such as Talleyrand and De Narbonne , monarchists ( Feuillants ) such as Antoine Barnave , Charles Lameth and his brothers Alexandre and Théodore, the Comte de Clermont-Tonnerre , Pierre Victor, baron Malouet , the poet Abbé Delille , Thomas Jefferson , the one-legged Minister Plenipotentiary to France Gouverneur Morris , Paul Barras (from the Plain ) and the Girondin Condorcet .

[ citation needed ] During this time of her political thoughts, de Staël was focused on the problem of leadership, or the perceived lack of it. In her later works she often returned to the idea that "the French Revolution has been characterized by a surprising absence of eminent personalities".

[ 26 ] She experienced the death of Mirabeau, accused of royalism, as a sign of great political disorientation and uncertainty.

[ citation needed ] Louis-Marie de Narbonne by Herminie Déhérain Following the 1791 French legislative election , and after the French Constitution of 1791 was announced in the National Assembly , she resigned from a political career and decided not to stand for re-election. "Fine arts and letters will occupy my leisure." [ 27 ] She did, however, play an important role in the succession of Comte de Montmorin the Minister of Foreign Affairs , and in the appointment of Narbonne as minister of War and continued to be centre stage behind the scenes.

[ 28 ] Marie Antoinette wrote to Hans Axel Fersen : "Count Louis de Narbonne is finally Minister of War, since yesterday; what a glory for Mme de Staël and what a joy for her to have the whole army, all to herself." [ 29 ] In 1792 the French Legislative Assembly saw an unprecedented turnover of ministers, six ministers of the interior , seven ministers of foreign affairs , and nine ministers of war .

[ 30 ] On 10 August 1792 Clermont-Tonnere was thrown out of a window of the Louvre Palace and trampled to death. De Staël offered baron Malouet a plan of escape for the royal family to Dieppe .

[ 31 ] On 20 August De Narbonne arrived in England on a German passport. As there was no government, militant members of the Insurrectionary Commune were given extensive police powers from the provisional, executive council, " to detain, interrogate and incarcerate suspects without anything resembling due process of law".

[ 32 ] She helped De Narbonne, dismissed for plotting, to hide under the altar in the chapel in the Swedish embassy, and lectured the sans-culottes from the section in the hall.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 12 ] On Sunday 2 September, the day the Elections for the National Convention and the September massacres began, she fled herself in the garb of an ambassadress. Her carriage was stopped and the crowd forced her into the Paris town hall , where Robespierre presided.

[ 36 ] That same evening she was conveyed home, escorted by the procurator Louis Pierre Manuel . The next day the commissioner to the Commune of Paris Jean-Lambert Tallien arrived with a new passport and accompanied her to the edge of the barricade .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Salons at Coppet and Paris [ edit ] Château de Coppet near Nyon After her flight from Paris, de Staël moved to Rolle in Switzerland, where Albert was born. She was supported by de Montmorency and the Marquis de Jaucourt , whom she had previously supplied with Swedish passports.

[ 39 ] In January 1793, she made a four-month visit to England to be with her then-lover, the Comte de Narbonne , at Juniper Hall . (Since 1 February, France and Great Britain had been at war.) Within a few weeks, she was pregnant; it was apparently one of the reasons for the scandal she caused in England. According to Fanny Burney , the result was that her father urged Fanny to avoid the company of de Staël and her circle of French Émigrés in Surrey .

Suzanne Curchod , De Staël's mother, strongly disapproved of the affair.

[ 40 ] De Staël met Horace Walpole , James Mackintosh , Lord Sheffield , a friend of Edward Gibbon, and Lord Loughborough , the new Lord Chancellor . She was not impressed with the condition of women in English society, finding that they were not afforded the voice and respect they deserved.

[ 41 ] [ 5 ] Staël viewed freedom as twofold: political freedom from institutions and individual freedom from social norms.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Benjamin Constant by Lina Vallier In 1797 de Staël and Benjamin Constant lived in the remains of the Abbey of Herivaux.

In the summer of 1793, de Staël returned to Switzerland, because she recognized De Narbonne was indifferent towards her and desired to end their relationship. De Staël reacted to this with misery and frustration.

[ 40 ] She published a defence of the character of Marie Antoinette , entitled, Réflexions sur le procès de la Reine , 1793 ("Reflections on the Queen's trial"). In de Staël's view, France should have adapted from an absolute to a constitutional monarchy as was the case in England. Living in Jouxtens-Mézery , farther away from the French border than Coppet, Germaine was visited by Adolph Ribbing .

[ 12 ] [ 39 ] Count Ribbing was living in exile, after his conviction for taking part in a conspiracy to assassinate the Swedish king, Gustav III .  In September 1794, the recently divorced Benjamin Constant visited her, wanting to meet her before he committed suicide.

In May 1795, de Staël moved to Paris, now with Constant in tow, as her protégé and lover.

[ 44 ] De Staël rejected the idea of the right of resistance – which had been introduced into the never implemented French Constitution of 1793 , and was removed from the Constitution of 1795 .

[ 45 ] In 1796, she published Sur l'influence des passions , in which she praised suicide and discussed how passions affect the happiness of individuals and societies, a book which attracted the attention of the German writers Schiller and Goethe .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] "Passionate love is natural to human beings and to yield oneself to love will not result in abandoning virtue".

[ 48 ] Still absorbed by French politics, de Staël reopened her salon.

[ 49 ] It was during these years that Mme de Staël arguably exerted most political influence. For a time she was still visible in the diverse and eccentric society of the mid-1790s. However, on the 13 Vendémiaire the Comité de salut public ordered her to leave Paris after accusations of politicking, and put Constant in detention for one night.

[ 50 ] De Staël spent that autumn in the spa of Forges-les-Eaux . She was considered a threat to political stability and mistrusted by both sides in the political conflict.

[ 51 ] She corresponded with Francisco de Miranda whom she wished to see again.

[ 52 ] The couple moved to Ormesson-sur-Marne where they stayed with Mathieu Montmorency.  In Summer 1796 Constant founded the "Cercle constitutionnel" in Luzarches with de Staël's support.

[ 53 ] In May 1797, she was back in Paris and eight months pregnant. She organized the Club du Salm in Hôtel de Salm .

[ 54 ] De Stael succeeded in getting Talleyrand from the list of Émigrés and on his return from the United States to have him appointed   Minister of Foreign Affairs in July.

[ 55 ] From the coup of 18 Fructidor it was announced that anyone campaigning to restore the monarchy or the French Constitution of 1793 would be shot without trial.

[ 56 ] Germaine moved to Saint-Ouen , on her father's estate and became a close friend of the beautiful and wealthy Juliette Récamier to whom she sold her parents' house in the Rue de la Chaussée-d'Antin .

De Staël completed the initial part of her first most substantial contribution to political and constitutional theory, "Of present circumstances that can end the Revolution, and of the principles that must found the republic of France".

[ 13 ] Conflict with Napoleon [ edit ] Napoleon Bonaparte in 1803 by François Gérard On 6 December 1797 de Staël had her first meeting with Napoleon Bonaparte in Talleyrand's office, and met him again on 3 January 1798 during a ball. Though she initially believed Napoleon would be devoted to republican ideals and even welcomed him into her social circle, de Staël became an outspoken critic as his regime grew increasingly authoritarian.

[ 57 ] She made it clear to him that she did not agree with his planned invasion of Switzerland . He ignored her opinions and would not read her letters.

[ 58 ] In January 1800, Napoleon appointed Benjamin Constant a member of the Tribunat ; not long after, Constant became his enemy. Two years later, Napoleon forced him into exile on account of his speeches which he took to be actually written by Mme de Staël.

[ 48 ] In August 1802, Napoleon was elected first consul for life. This put de Staël into opposition to him both for personal and political reasons. In her view, Napoleon had begun to resemble Machiavelli 's princes in The Prince (in fact tyrants); while for Napoleon, Voltaire , J.J. Rousseau and their followers were the cause of the French Revolution.

[ 59 ] This view was cemented when Jacques Necker published his "Last Views on Politics and Finance" and his daughter, her "De la littérature considérée dans ses rapports avec les institutions sociales". It was her first philosophical treatment of the Europe question: it dealt with such factors as nationality, history, and social institutions.

[ 60 ] Napoleon started a campaign against her latest publication. He did not like her cultural determinism and generalizations , in which she stated that "an artist must be of his own time".

[ 48 ] [ 61 ] In his opinion a woman should stick to knitting.

[ 62 ] He said about her, according to the Memoirs of Madame de Rémusat , that she "teaches people to think who had never thought before, or who had forgotten how to think".

[ 63 ] It became clear that the first man of France and de Staël were not likely ever to get along together.

[ 64 ] "It seems to me that life's circumstances, being ephemeral , teach us less about durable truths than the fictions based on those truths; and that the best lessons of delicacy and self-respect are to be found in novels where the feelings are so naturally portrayed that you fancy you are witnessing real life as you read." [ 65 ] De Staël published a provocative, anti-Catholic novel Delphine ,  in which the femme incomprise (misunderstood woman) living in Paris between 1789 and 1792, is confronted with conservative ideas about divorce after the Concordat of 1801 . In this tragic novel, influenced by Goethe's The Sorrows of Young Werther and Rousseau's Julie, ou la nouvelle Héloïse , she reflects on the legal and practical aspects on divorce, the  arrests and the September Massacres , and the fate of the émigrés . (During the winter of 1794 it seems De Staël was pondering a divorce and whether to marry Ribbing.) The main characters have traits of the unstable Benjamin Constant, and Talleyrand is depicted as an old woman, herself as the heroine with the liberal view of the Italian aristocrat and politician Melzi d'Eril .

[ 66 ] When Constant moved to Maffliers in September 1803 de Staël went to see him and let Napoleon know she would be wise and cautious. Thereupon her house immediately became popular again among her friends, but Napoleon, informed by Madame de Genlis , suspected a conspiracy. "Her extensive network of connections – which included foreign diplomats and known political opponents, as well as members of the government and of Bonaparte's own family – was in itself a source of suspicion and alarm for the government." [ 67 ] Her protection of Jean Gabriel Peltier – who plotted the death of Napoleon – influenced his decision on 13 October 1803 to exile her without trial.

[ 68 ] Years of exile [ edit ] For ten years, de Staël was not allowed to come within 40 leagues (almost 200 km) of Paris. She accused Napoleon of "persecuting a woman and her children".

[ 69 ] On 23 October, she left for Germany "out of pride", in the hope of gaining support and to be able to return home as soon as possible.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] German travels [ edit ] Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach in 1805 by Georg Melchior Kraus Madame de Staël as her character Corinne (posthumously) by François Gérard Château de Chaumont With her children and Constant, de Staël stopped off in Metz and met Kant 's French translator Charles de Villers . In mid-December, they arrived in Weimar , where she stayed for two and a half months at the court of the Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach and his mother Anna Amalia . Goethe who had become ill hesitated about seeing her. After meeting her, Goethe went on to refer to her as an "extraordinary woman" in his private correspondence.

[ 72 ] Schiller complimented her intelligence and eloquence, but her frequent visits distracted him from completing William Tell .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] De Staël was constantly on the move, talking and asking questions.

[ 75 ] [ 48 ] Constant decided to abandon her in Leipzig and return to Switzerland. De Staël travelled on to Berlin,  where she made the acquaintance of August Schlegel who was lecturing there on literature. She appointed him on an enormous salary to tutor her children. On 18 April they all left Berlin when the news of her father's death reached her.

Mistress of Coppet [ edit ] On 19 May, de Staël arrived in Coppet now its wealthy and independent mistress. She spent the summer at the chateau sorting through his writings and published an essay on his private life. In April 1804, Friedrich Schlegel married Dorothea Veit in the Swedish embassy. In July Constant wrote about de Staël, "She exerts over everything around her a kind of inexplicable but real power. If only she could govern herself, she might have governed the world." [ 76 ] In December 1804 she travelled to Italy, accompanied by her children, August Wilhelm Schlegel , and the historian Sismondi . There she met the poet Monti and the painter, Angelica Kauffman . "Her visit to Italy helped her to develop her theory of the difference between northern and southern societies..." [ 5 ] De Staël returned to Coppet in June 1805, moved to Meulan (Château d'Acosta), and spent nearly a year writing her next book on Italy's culture and history. In Corinne ou l'Italie (1807), her own impressions of a sentimental and intellectual journey, the heroine appears to have been inspired by the Italian poet Diodata Saluzzo Roero .

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The book tells the story of two lovers: Corinne, the Italian poet, and Lord Nelvil, the English noble, traveling through Italy on a journey in part mirroring Staël’s own travels. (Staël appears to have identified with her character, and there are several portraits of Staël represented as Corinne.) [ 79 ] She combined romance with travelogue, showed all of Italy's works of art still in place, rather than plundered by Napoleon and taken to France.

[ 80 ] The book's publication acted as a reminder of her existence, and Napoleon sent her back to Coppet. Her house became, according to Stendhal , "the general headquarters of European thought" and was a debating club hostile to Napoleon, "turning conquered Europe into a parody of a feudal empire, with his own relatives in the roles of vassal states ".

[ 81 ] Madame Récamier, also banned by Napoleon, Prince Augustus of Prussia , Charles Victor de Bonstetten , and Chateaubriand all belonged to the " Coppet group ".

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Each day the table was laid for about thirty guests. Talking seemed to be everybody's chief activity.

For a time de Staël lived with Constant in Auxerre (1806), Rouen (1807), Aubergenville (1807). Then she met Friedrich Schlegel , whose wife Dorothea had translated Corinne into German.

[ 84 ] The use of the word Romanticism was invented by Schlegel but spread more widely across France through its persistent use by de Staël.

[ 85 ] Late in 1807 she set out for Vienna and visited Maurice O'Donnell .

[ 86 ] She was accompanied by her children and August Schlegel who gave his famous lectures there. In 1808 Benjamin Constant was afraid to admit to her that he had married Charlotte von Hardenberg in the meantime. "If men had the qualities of women", de Staël wrote, "love would simply cease to be a problem." [ 87 ] De Staël set to work on her book about Germany – in which she presented the idea of a state called "Germany" as a model of ethics and aesthetics and praised German literature and philosophy.

[ 88 ] The exchange of ideas and literary and philosophical conversations with Goethe, Schiller, and Wieland had inspired de Staël to write one of the most influential books of the nineteenth century on Germany.

[ 89 ] Return to France [ edit ] Pretending she wanted to emigrate to the United States, de Staël was given permission to re-enter France. She moved first into the Château de Chaumont (1810), then relocated to Fossé and Vendôme . She was determined to publish De l'Allemagne in France, a multi-volume book about German culture and in particular the growing movement of German Romanticism . The book was considered "dangerous" by Napoleon as it favorably presented "new and foreign ideas" that challenged existing French political structures.

[ 90 ] Constrained by censorship, she wrote to the emperor a letter of complaint.

[ 91 ] The minister of police Savary had emphatically forbidden her to publish her "un-French" book.

[ 89 ] In 1810, after de Staël had successfully published her book in France, Napoleon ordered the destruction of all 10,000 copies.

[ 92 ] In October of the same year, she was exiled again and had to leave France within three days.

August Schlegel was also ordered to leave the Swiss Confederation as an enemy of French literature. De Staël found consolation in a wounded veteran officer named Albert de Rocca , twenty-three years her junior, to whom she got privately engaged in 1811 but did not marry publicly until 1816.

[ 48 ] East European travels [ edit ] Madame de Staël in 1812 by Vladimir Borovikovsky The operations of the French imperial police in the case of de Staël are rather obscure. She was at first left undisturbed, but by degrees, the chateau itself became a source of suspicion, and her visitors found themselves heavily persecuted.

François-Emmanuel Guignard , De Montmorency and Mme Récamier were exiled for the crime of visiting her. She remained at home during the winter of 1811, planning to escape to England or Sweden with the manuscript. On 23 May 1812, she left Coppet under the pretext of a short outing, but journeyed through Bern , Innsbruck and Salzburg to Vienna, where she met Metternich . There, after some trepidation and trouble, she received the necessary passports to go on to Russia.

[ 93 ] During Napoleon's invasion of Russia , de Staël, her two children, and Schlegel travelled through Galicia in the Habsburg empire from Brno to Łańcut where de Rocca, having deserted the French army and having been searched by the French gendarmerie , was waiting for her. The journey continued to Lemberg . On 14 July 1812 they arrived in Volhynia . In the meantime, Napoleon, who took a more northern route, had crossed the Niemen River with his army. In Kyiv, she met Miloradovich , governor of the city. De Staël hesitated to travel on to Odessa , Constantinople , and decided instead to go north. Perhaps she was informed of the outbreak of plague in the Ottoman Empire . In Moscow, she was invited by the governor Fyodor Rostopchin . According to de Staël, it was Rostopchin who ordered his mansion in Italian style near Winkovo to be set on fire.

[ 94 ] She left only a few weeks before Napoleon arrived there. Until 7 September, her party stayed in Saint Petersburg . According to John Quincy Adams , the American ambassador in Russia, her sentiments appeared to be as much the result of personal resentment against Bonaparte as of her general views of public affairs. She complained that he would not let her live in peace anywhere, merely because she had not praised him in her works. She met twice with the tsar Alexander I of Russia who "related to me also the lessons a la Machiavelli which Napoleon had thought proper to give him." [ 95 ] "You see," said he, "I am careful to keep my ministers and generals at variance among themselves, in order that each may reveal to me the faults of the other; I keep up a continual jealousy by the manner I treat those who care about me: one day one thinks himself the favourite, the next day another, so that no one is ever certain of my favour." [ 96 ] For de Staël, that was a vulgar and vicious theory. General Kutuzov sent her letters from the Battle of Tarutino ; before the end of that year he succeeded, aided by the extreme weather, in chasing the Grande Armée out of Russia.

[ 97 ] August Wilhelm von Schlegel by Adolf Hohneck After four months of travel, de Staël arrived in Sweden. In 1811, she began writing her "Ten Years' Exile", detailing her travels and encounters.  She traveled to Stockholm the following year, and continued work there.

[ 98 ] She did not finish the manuscript and after eight months, she set out for England, without August Schlegel, who meanwhile had been appointed secretary to the Crown Prince Carl Johan, formerly French Marshal Jean Baptiste Bernadotte (She supported Bernadotte as the new ruler of France, as she hoped he would introduce a constitutional monarchy ).

[ 99 ] In London she received a great welcome. She met Lord Byron , William Wilberforce , the abolitionist, and Sir Humphry Davy , the chemist and inventor. According to Byron, "She preached English politics to the first of our English Whig politicians ... preached politics no less to our Tory politicians the day after." [ 100 ] In March 1814 she invited Wilberforce for dinner and devoted the remaining years of her life to the fight for the abolition of the slave trade.

[ 101 ] Her stay was severely marred by the death of her son Albert, who as a member of the Swedish army had fallen in a duel with a Cossack officer in Doberan as a result of a gambling dispute. In October John Murray published De l'Allemagne both in French and English translation, in which she reflected on nationalism and suggested a re-consideration of cultural rather than natural boundaries.

[ 102 ] In May 1814, after Louis XVIII had been crowned ( Bourbon Restoration ) she returned to Paris. She wrote her Considérations sur la révolution française , based on Part One of "Ten Years' Exile". Again her salon became a major attraction both for Parisians and foreigners.

Restoration and death [ edit ] Lord Byron in Albanian Dress by Thomas Phillips , 1813 When news came of Napoleon's landing on the Côte d'Azur, between Cannes and Antibes , early in March 1815, de Staël fled again to Coppet, and never forgave Constant for approving of Napoleon's return.

[ 103 ] Although she had no affection for the Bourbons she succeeded in obtaining restitution for the huge loan Necker had made to the French state in 1778 before the Revolution (see above).

[ 104 ] In October, after the Battle of Waterloo , she set out for Italy, not only for the sake of her own health but for that of her second husband, de Rocca, who was suffering from tuberculosis . In May her 19-year-old daughter Albertine married Victor, 3rd duc de Broglie in Livorno .

The whole family returned to Coppet in June.

Lord Byron , at that time in debt, left London in great trouble and frequently visited de Staël during July and August. For Byron, she was Europe's greatest living writer, but "with her pen behind her ears and her mouth full of ink". "Byron was particularly critical of de Staël's self-dramatizing tendencies".

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Byron was a supporter of Napoleon, but for de Staël Bonaparte "was not only a talented man but also one who represented a whole pernicious system of power", a system that "ought to be examined as a great political problem relevant to many generations." [ 107 ] "Napoleon imposed standards of homogeneity on Europe that is, French taste in literature, art and the legal systems, all of which de Staël saw as inimical to her cosmopolitan point of view." [ 106 ] Byron wrote she was "sometimes right and often wrong about Italy and England – but almost always true in delineating the heart, which is of but one nation of no country, or rather, of all." [ 108 ] Despite her increasingly ill health, de Staël returned to Paris for the winter of 1816–17, living at 40, rue des Mathurins. Constant argued with de Staël, who had asked him to pay off his debts to her. A warm friendship sprang up between de Staël and the Duke of Wellington , whom she had first met in 1814, and she used her influence with him to have the size of the Army of Occupation greatly reduced.

[ 109 ] De Staël became confined to her house, paralyzed since 21 February 1817 following a stroke . She died on 14 July 1817. Her deathbed conversion to Roman Catholicism, after reading Thomas à Kempis , was reported [ citation needed ] but is subject to some debate. Wellington remarked that, while he knew that she was greatly afraid of death, he had thought her incapable of believing in the afterlife .

[ 109 ] Wellington makes no mention of de Staël reading Thomas à Kempis in the quote found in Elizabeth Longford 's biography of the Iron Duke. Furthermore, he reports hearsay, which may explain why two modern biographies of de Staël – Herold and Fairweather – discount the conversion entirely. Herold states that "her last deed in life was to reaffirm in her 'Considerations, her faith in Enlightenment, freedom, and progress'." [ 110 ] Rocca survived her by little more than six months. The first edition of her complete works was published by his son with the publishing house Treuttel & Würtz in 1820-1821.

[ 111 ] Offspring [ edit ] Madame de Staël and her daughter Albertine by Marguerite Gérard In total, Madame de Staël had six children, who were all acknowledged by her husband (except her last son, who was born after his death). In all likelihood, only the first two children were actually fathered by Erik de Staël-Holstein : Gustavine Sophie Madeleine de Staël-Holstein (July 1787), died in infancy.

Gustava Hedwig de Staël-Holstein (August 1789), died in infancy.

It is believed Louis, Comte de Narbonne-Lara (himself a reputed unacknowledged illegitimate child of Louis XV ), fathered her next two sons: [ 112 ] 3.

Louis Auguste de Staël-Holstein (1 September 1790 - 11 November 1827), an abolitionist .

4. Mattias Albert de Staël-Holstein (2 October 1792 - 12 July 1813), killed in a duel in Mecklenburg .

It is believed that Benjamin Constant was the biological father of her daughter: [ 112 ] 5.

Albertine Ida Gustavine de Staël-Holstein (8 June 1797 - 22 September 1838), who married Victor, Duc de Broglie .

With her second husband, Albert de Rocca , de Staël then aged 46, had one disabled son: 6. Théodore Gilles Louis Alphonse de Rocca (7 April 1812 - 12 November 1842), who married Marie-Louise-Antoinette de Rambuteau, daughter of Claude-Philibert Barthelot de Rambuteau , [ 48 ] and granddaughter of De Narbonne.

[ 113 ] Even as she gave birth, there were fifteen people in her bedroom.

[ 114 ] After the death of de Staël's husband, Mathieu de Montmorency became the legal guardian of her children. Like August Schlegel he was one of her intimates until the end of her life.

Legacy [ edit ] Albertine Necker de Saussure , married to de Staël's cousin, wrote her biography in 1821 and published it as part of the collected works.

Auguste Comte included Mme de Staël in his 1849 Calendar of Great Men . "In one version of the calendar, the 24th day of the month of Dante is dedicated to Madame de Staël, who finds herself among such poets as Milton, Cervantes, and Chaucer. In another version, Staël finds herself honored, instead, on the 19th day of the tenth month, known as “Shakespeare,” among the likes of Goethe, Racine, Voltaire, and Madame de Sevigné." [ 115 ] Her political legacy has been generally identified with a stout defence of "liberal" values: equality, individual freedom, and the limitation of state power by constitutional rules.

[ 116 ] "Yet although she insisted to the Duke of Wellington that she needed politics in order to live, her attitude towards the propriety of female political engagement varied: at times she declared that women should simply be the guardians of domestic space for the opposite sex, while at others, that denying women access to the public sphere of activism and engagement was an abuse of human rights. This paradox partly explains the persona of the "homme-femme" she presented in society, and it remained unresolved throughout her life." [ 117 ] Comte's disciple Frederic Harrison wrote about de Staël that her novels "precede the works of Walter Scott , Byron, Mary Shelley , and partly those of Chateaubriand , their historical importance is great in the development of modern Romanticism , of the romance of the heart, the delight in nature, and in the arts, antiquities, and history of Europe." Precursor of feminism [ edit ] Recent studies by historians, including feminists , have been assessing the specifically feminine dimension in de Staël's contributions both as an activist-theorist and as a writer about the tumultuous events of her time.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Some scholars call her a precursor of feminism.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] Staël had a robust theory of female liberation. At the time that Staël was writing, in the peak years of the French Revolution, early French feminism was animated over the issue of legal and political equality for the sexes. At the advent of the French Revolution in 1789, the image of a traditional homemaking woman had given way to a more militant feminist approach found in pamphlets that circulated in France at the time. In this sea of tumultuous events, Staël’s use of the novel and more implicit methods to communicate her beliefs about the Revolution and gender equality, coupled with her social status, aided in ensuring her endurance on the political and literary scene.

[ 123 ] Staël’s extensive set of writings, from her correspondence with lovers to her philosophy to her fiction, betray not just the tension between intellectual and romantic fulfillment but also between feminist political equality and romantic fulfillment. Her work indicates that she finds her two desires, personal freedom and emotional intimacy, to be diametrically opposed in practice, especially in post-Revolutionary French society. In particular, she deplored that men took the central roles in Enlightenment philosophy and politics, neither of which included avenues for women’s direct participation.

[ 124 ] Abolition [ edit ] Staël was a strong advocate for the abolition of slavery in the French colonies. In her later years, her salon was frequented by abolitionists, and emancipation was a recurring topic of their discussions. After meeting the famous abolitionist William Wilberforce in 1814, Staël published a preface for his essay on the slave trade in which she called for the end of slavery in Europe. In that text, Staël argued in particular against those who defended slavery on the grounds that the economic impact of abandoning the slave trade would be too grave: "When it is proposed that some abuse of power be eliminated, those who benefit from that abuse are certain to declare that all the benefits of the social order are attached to it. ‘This is the keystone,’ they say, while it is only the keystone to their own advantages; and when at last the progress of enlightenment brings about the long-desired reform, they are astonished at the improvements which result from it. Good sends out its roots everywhere; equilibrium is effortlessly restored; and truth heals the ills of the human species, as does nature, without anyone’s intervention." (Kadish and Massardier-Kenney 2009, 169) Staël argues here that the claim that abolition would have “dire consequences” for the French economy is nothing but an illusory threat used by those who benefit from the institution of slavery (Kadish and Massardier-Kenney 2009, 169). Staël believed that the termination of the slave trade would improve France and bring about a positive consequence that ‘sends out its roots everywhere.

[ 90 ] Letters to Jefferson [ edit ] In 1807, Jacques Le Ray de Chaumont sent Jefferson a copy of Corinne , and also conveyed to Staël Jefferson’s first letter addressed to her. This marked the beginning of a series of eight letters between the two, the last of which was sent from Staël to Jefferson shortly before her passing in 1817.

The correspondence between Staël and Jefferson sheds light upon the fascinating relationship between two momentous figures, covering the personal (such as Staël’s son Auguste’s desire to visit the United States to “make a pilgrimage toward reason and freedom”) and the global (the War of 1812 is the pressing topic, and there is even an interlude where Jefferson details the state of South American geopolitics, replete with a map).

Famously, in 1816, in a letter to Thomas Jefferson , Staël writes, “If one succeeds in destroying slavery in the South, at least one government in the world will be as perfect as human reason can possibly conceive.” Although this is generally understood by scholars to be a criticism of slavery in the southern states of the United States, due to ambiguity in translating the word "south" from the original French, other scholars have suggested that de Staël could be referring to colonization in South America.

[ 125 ] Staël and the Adams family [ edit ] The Adams family (including former American presidents John Adams and John Quincy Adams and former First Lady Abigail Adams) was an important political family in the U.S during the 18th and early 20th century. Staël was a frequent topic of discussion amongst the Adams. John Quincy Adams, the 6th U.S president, in particular, recommended and sent many copies of Staël’s works to his father, John Adams; mother, Abigail Adams; and wife, Louisa Catherine Adams.

In letters written between the end of the 18th century and beginning of the 19th century , these members of the Adams family discussed Delphine , A Treatise on the Influence of the Passions, Upon the Happiness of Individuals and of Nations , and The Reflections Upon Peace .

[ 92 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Republican activist Victor Gold quoted Madame de Staël when characterizing American Vice President Dick Cheney , "Men do not change, they unmask themselves." De Staël is credited in Tolstoy 's epilogue to War and Peace as a factor of the 'influential forces' which historians say led to the movement of humanity in that era.

[ 126 ] The popular wrestling compilation series Botchamania has referenced her on several occasions saying One must choose in life, between boredom and suffering which is normally followed by a humorous joke.

On the popular HBO television show, The Sopranos , character Meadow Soprano quotes Madame de Staël in Season 2, Episode 7, D-Girl , when she says, "Madame de Staël said, 'In life one must choose between boredom or suffering.'" Mme de Staël is used several times to characterize Mme de Grandet in Stendhal 's Lucien Leuwen .

Mme de Staël is mentioned several times, always approvingly, by Russia's national poet, Alexander Pushkin . He described her in 1825 as a woman whose persecution distinguished her and who commanded respect from all of Europe, and gave her a positive portrayal in his unfinished 1836 novel Roslavlev .

[ 127 ] Her high stature in Russia is attested by Pushkin's warning to a critic: "Mme de Staël is ours, do not touch her!" [ 128 ] Pushkin's friend Pyotr Vyazemsky was also an admirer of her life and works.

[ 129 ] Mme de Staël is frequently quoted by Ralph Waldo Emerson and she is credited with introducing him to recent German thought.

[ 130 ] Herman Melville considered de Staël among the greatest women of the century and Margaret Fuller consciously adopted de Staël as her role model.

[ 131 ] Danish radical Georg Brandes gave pride of place to de Staël in his survey of Emigrantlitteraturen and highly esteemed her novels, particularly Corinne , which was also admired by Henrik Ibsen and used as a guidebook for his travels through Italy.

[ 132 ] Talleyrand observed with his customary cynicism that Germaine enjoyed throwing people overboard simply to have the pleasure of fishing them out of the water again.

[ 133 ] Sismondi accused De Staël of a lack of tact, when they were travelling through Italy and wrote Mme De Staël was easily bored if she had to pay attention to things.

For Heinrich Heine she was the "grandmother of doctrines ".

[ 134 ] For Byron she was "a good woman at heart and the cleverest at bottom, but spoilt by a wish to be – she knew not what. In her own house she was amiable; in any other person's, you wished her gone, and in her own again".

[ 135 ] Works [ edit ] Delphine , 1803 edition.

De l'Allemagne , 1813 edition.

Journal de Jeunesse , 1785 Sophie ou les sentiments secrets , 1786 (published anonymously in 1790) Jane Gray , 1787 (published in 1790) Lettres sur le caractère et les écrits de J.-J. Rousseau , 1788 [ 136 ] Éloge de M. de Guibert À quels signes peut-on reconnaître quelle est l'opinion de la majorité de la nation?

Réflexions sur le procès de la Reine , 1793 Zulma : fragment d'un ouvrage , 1794 Réflexions sur la paix adressées à M. Pitt et aux Français , 1795 Réflexions sur la paix intérieure Recueil de morceaux détachés (comprenant : Épître au malheur ou Adèle et Édouard, Essai sur les fictions et trois nouvelles : Mirza ou lettre d'un voyageur, Adélaïde et Théodore et Histoire de Pauline) , 1795 Essai sur les fictions , translated by Goethe into German De l'influence des passions sur le bonheur des individus et des nations , 1796 [ 137 ] Des circonstances actuelles qui peuvent terminer la Révolution et des principes qui doivent fonder la République en France De la littérature dans ses rapports avec les institutions sociales , 1799 Delphine , 1802 deals with the question of woman's status in a society hidebound by convention and faced with a Revolutionary new order Vie privée de Mr. Necker , 1804 Épîtres sur Naples Corinne ou l'Italie , 1807 is as much a travelogue as a fictional narrative. It discusses the problems of female artistic creativity in two radically different cultures, England and Italy.

Agar dans le désert Geneviève de Brabant La Sunamite Le capitaine Kernadec ou sept années en un jour (comédie en deux actes et en prose) La signora Fantastici Le mannequin (comédie) Sapho De l'Allemagne , 1813, translated as Germany 1813.

[ 138 ] Réflexions sur le suicide , 1813 Morgan et trois nouvelles , 1813 An appeal to the nations of Europe against the continental system: published at Stockholm, by authority of Bernadotte, in March, 1813. By Madame de Staël Holstein.

De l'esprit des traductions Considérations sur les principaux événements de la révolution française, depuis son origine jusques et compris le 8 juillet 1815 , 1818 (posthumously) [ 139 ] Dix Années d'Exil (1818), posthumously published in France by Mdm Necker de Saussure. In 1821 translated and published as Ten Years' Exile. Memoirs of That Interesting Period of the Life of the Baroness De Stael-Holstein, Written by Herself, during the Years 1810, 1811, 1812, and 1813, and Now First Published from the Original Manuscript, by Her Son.

[ 140 ] Essais dramatiques , 1821 Oeuvres complètes 17 t., 1820–21 Oeuvres complètes de Madame la Baronne de Staël-Holstein [ Complete works of Madame Baron de Staël-Holstein ]. Paris: Firmin Didot frères. 1836.

Volume 1 · Volume 2 Correspondence in French [ edit ] Lettres de Madame de Staël à Madame de Récamier , première édition intégrale, présentées et annotées par Emmanuel Beau de Loménie , éditions Domat, Paris, 1952.

Lettres sur les écrits et le caractère de J.-J.

Rousseau . – De l'influence des passions sur le bonheur des individus et des nations. – De l'éducation de l'âme par la vie./Réflexions sur le suicide.

– Sous la direction de Florence Lotterie. Textes établis et présentés par Florence Lotterie. Annotation par Anne Amend Söchting, Anne Brousteau, Florence Lotterie, Laurence Vanoflen. 2008.

ISBN 978-2745316424 .

Correspondance générale . Texte établi et présenté par Béatrice W. Jasinski et Othenin d'Haussonville.

Slatkine (Réimpression), 2008–2009.

Volume I. 1777–1791 .

ISBN 978-2051020817 .

Volume II. 1792–1794 .

ISBN 978-2051020824 .

Volume III. 1794–1796 .

ISBN 978-2051020831 .

Volume IV. 1796–1803 .

ISBN 978-2051020848 .

Volume V. 1803–1805 .

ISBN 978-2051020855 .

Volume VI. 1805–1809 .

ISBN 978-2051020862 .

Volume VII. date:15 May 1809–23 May 1812 .

ISBN 978-2051020879 .

Madame de Staël ou l'intelligence politique. Sa pensée, ses amis, ses amants, ses ennemis… , textes de présentation et de liaison de Michel Aubouin, Omnibus, 2017.

ISBN 978-2258142671 commentaire biblio, Lettres de Mme de Staël, extraits de ses textes politiques et de ses romans, textes et extraits de lettres de Chateaubriand, Talleyrand, Napoléon, Benjamin Constant. This edition contains extracts from her political writings and from letters addressed to her by Chateaubriand, Talleyrand, Napoleon and Benjamin Constant.

Multilingual editions [ edit ] A short Account of Lady Jane Grey / Historische Nachricht über Lady Jane Grey / Notice sur Lady Jane Grey.

Calambac Publishing House , Germany 2020, trilingual edition: English/German/French, ISBN 978-3-943117-10-3.

See also [ edit ] History portal France portal Contributions to liberal theory Liberalism Women in the French Revolution Sophie Doin References [ edit ] ^ Wilkinson, L. R. (2017). Hibbitt, Richard (ed.).

Other Capitals of the Nineteenth Century An Alternative Mapping of Literary and Cultural Space . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

51– 67.

^ Simon, Sherry (2003).

Gender in Translation . Routledge. pp.

61– 62.

ISBN 978-1134820863 .

^ "Staël, de" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ Staël, Germaine de , in the Historical Dictionary of Switzerland .

^ a b c Bordoni, Silvia (2005) Lord Byron and Germaine de Staël , The University of Nottingham ^ Madame de Staël (Anne-Louise-Germaine) (1818).

Considerations on the Principal Events of the French Revolution: Posthumous Work of the Baroness de Stael . James Eastburn and Company at the literary rooms, Broadway. Clayton & Kingsland, Printers. p. 46.

^ a b "Madame de Staël" .

^ Eveline Groot – Public Opinion and Political Passions in the Work of Germaine de Stäel, p. 190 ^ a b Saintsbury 1911 , p. 750.

^ Casillo, R. (2006).

The Empire of Stereotypes: Germaine de Staël and the Idea of Italy . Springer.

ISBN 978-1403983213 .

^ Gabriel Paul Othenin de Cléron, (Comte d'Haussonville) (1882) The Salon of Madame Necker. Trans. Henry M. Trollope. London: Chapman and Hall.

^ a b c "Vaud: Le château de Mezery a Jouxtens-Mezery" .

^ a b "Stael and the French Revolution | Online Library of Liberty" .

oll.libertyfund.org . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ Niebuhr, Barthold Georg; Michaelis, Johann David (1836).

The Life of Carsten Niebuhr, the Oriental Traveller . T. Clark. p. 6.

^ Schama , p. 257 ^ Dixon, Sergine (2007).

Germaine de Staël, daughter of the enlightenment: the writer and her turbulent era . Amherts (N.Y.): Prometheus books.

ISBN 978-1-59102-560-3 .

^ Napoleon's nemesis ^ Grimm, Friedrich Melchior; Diderot, Denis (1815).

Historical & literary memoirs and anecdotes . Printed for H. Colburn. p. 353.

^ "Germaine de Staël | Books, Biography, & Facts | Britannica" . 18 April 2024.

^ Schama , pp. 345–346.

^ Schama , p. 382 ^ Schama , pp. 499, 536 ^ Craiutu, Aurelian A Voice of Moderation in the Age of Revolutions: Jacques Necker's Reflections on Executive Power in Modern Society . p. 4 ^ The Works of John Moore, M.D.: With Memoirs of His Life and Writings, Band 4 by John Moore (1820) ^ d’Haussonville, Othénin (2004) "La liquidation du ‘dépôt’ de Necker: entre concept et idée-force" , pp. 156–158 Cahiers staëliens, 55 ^ Fontana , p. 29 ^ Fontana , p. 33 ^ Fontana , pp. 37, 41, 44 ^ Correspondance (1770–1793). Published by Évelyne Lever. Paris 2005, pp. 660, 724 ^ Fontana , p. 49 ^ "Mémoires de Malouet", p. 221 ^ Schama , pp. 624, 631 ^ Fontana , p. 61 ^ Moore , p. 138 ^ Herold , p. 272 ^ Madame de Staël (Anne-Louise-Germaine) (1818).

Considerations on the Principal Events of the French Revolution . Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy. p. 75.

^ Ballard, Richard (2011).

A New Dictionary of the French Revolution . I.B. Tauris. p. 341.

ISBN 978-0857720900 .

^ It was Tallien who announced the September Massacres and sent off the famous circular of 3 September to the French provinces, recommending them to take similar action.

^ a b Anne Louise Germaine de Staël (2012).

Selected Correspondence . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 110.

ISBN 978-9401142830 .

^ a b Fontana, Biancamaria (2016).

Germaine De Staël: A Political Portrait . Princeton University Press. p. 62.

^ "Staël (1766-1817)" .

^ "Staël (1766-1817)" .

^ Moore , p. 15 ^ The Thermidorians had opened the way back to Paris.

^ Fontana , p. 125 ^ Müller , p. 29.

^ Team, Project Vox.

"Germaine de Staël (1766-1817)" .

Project Vox . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ a b c d e f Anne-Louise-Germaine Necker, Baroness de Staël-Holstein (1766–1817) by Petri Liukkonen ^ Moore , p. 332 ^ Fontana , p. 178; Moore , p. 335 ^ Moore , pp. 345, 349 ^ Custine, Delphine de Custine, 66, note 1.

^ Fontana , p.159 ^ Les clubs contre-révolutionnaires, cercles, comités, sociétés ..., Band 1 von Augustin Challamel, S. 507-511 ^ Fontana , p. 159 ^ Moore , p. 348 ^ Skrod, Matthew O. (17 April 2023).

"Madame de Staël: Europe's Best-Known Enemy of Napoleon" .

The Dartmouth Review . Retrieved 16 April 2025 .

^ Moore , pp. 350–352 ^ Madame de Staël (Anne-Louise-Germaine) (1818).

Considerations on the Principal Events of the French Revolution: Posthumous Work of the Baroness de Stael . James Eastburn and Company at the literary rooms, Broadway. Clayton & Kingsland, Printers. pp. 90, 95– 96.

^ Madame de Staël (1818).

Considerations on the Principal Events of the French Revolution: Posthumous Work of the Baroness de Stael . James Eastburn and Company at the literary rooms, Broadway. Clayton & Kingsland, Printers. p. 42.

^ Goodden , p. 18 ^ Moore , p. 379 ^ Memoirs of Madame de Remusat, trans.

Cashel Hoey and John Lillie, p. 407.

Books.Google.com ^ Saintsbury 1911 , p. 751.

^ Delphine (1802), Préface ^ From the Introduction to Madame de Staël (1987) Delphine . Edition critique par S. Balayé & L. Omacini. Librairie Droz S.A. Genève ^ Fontana , p. 204 ^ "Un journaliste contre-révolutionnaire, Jean-Gabriel Peltier (1760–1825) – Etudes Révolutionnaires" . Etudes-revolutionnaires.org. 7 October 2011. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 17 September 2013 .

^ Fontana , p. 263, note 47 ^ Fontana , p. 205 ^ Müller , p. 292 ^ Sainte-Beuve, Charles Augustin (1891).

Portraits of Women . A. C. M'Clurg. p.

107 .

^ Jonas, Fritz, ed. (1892).

Schillers Briefe. Kritische Gesamtausgabe. Vol VII . Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt. p. 109.

^ Graf, Hans Gerhard; Leitzmann, Albert, eds. (1955).

Der Briefwechsel zwischen Schiller und Goethe . Leipzig. pp.

474– 485.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Madame de Staël von Klaus-Werner Haupt ^ Herold , p. 304 ^ Panizza, Letizia; Wood, Sharon.

A History of Women's Writing in Italy . p. 144.

^ The novel prompted, none too inspiringly, The Corinna of England, and a Heroine in the Shade (1809) by E. M. Foster , in which retribution is wreaked on a shallowly portrayed version of the French author's heroine.

^ Team, Project Vox.

"Germaine de Staël (1766-1817)" .

Project Vox . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Goodden , p. 61 ^ Fontana , p. 230 ^ Herold , p. 290 ^ Stevens, A. (1881).

Madame de Stael: A Study of her Life and Times, the First Revolution and the First Empire . London: John Murray. pp.

15– 23.

^ Schlegel and Madame de Staël have endeavoured to reduce poetry to two systems, classical and romantic.

^ Ferber, Michael (2010) Romanticism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199568918 .

^ Madame de Staël et Maurice O’Donnell (1805–1817), d’apres des letters inédites, by Jean Mistler, published by Calmann-Levy, Editeurs, 3 rue Auber, Paris, 1926.

^ Goodden , p. 73 ^ Müller ^ a b Fontana , p. 206 ^ a b Team, Project Vox.

"Germaine de Staël (1766-1817)" .

Project Vox . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Staël (Anne-Louise-Germaine, Madame de); Auguste Louis Staël-Holstein (baron de) (1821).

Ten years' exile: or, Memoirs of that interesting period of the life of the Baroness de Stael-Holstein . Printed for Treuttel and Würtz. pp.

101– 110.

^ a b Team, Project Vox.

"Germaine de Staël (1766-1817)" .

Project Vox . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Ten Years' After, p. 219, 224, 264, 268, 271 ^ Ten Years' Exile, pp. 350–352 ^ Ten Years' Exile, p. 421 ^ Ten Years' Exile, p. 380 ^ Tolstoy, Leo (2017).

The Complete Works of Leo Tolstoy . Musaicum Books. pp. 2583–.

ISBN 978-8075834553 .

^ Team, Project Vox.

"Germaine de Staël (1766-1817)" .

Project Vox . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Zamoyski, Adam. (2007) Rites of Peace. The fall of Napoleon & the Congress of Vienna . Harper Perennial. p. 105.

ISBN 978-0060775193 ^ Nicholson , pp. 184–185 ^ Autograph letter in French, signed 'N. de Staël H' to William Wilberforce ^ Lord Byron and Germaine de Staël by Silvia Bordoni, p. 4 ^ Fontana , p. 227.

^ Fontana , p. 208.

^ BLJ , 8 January 1814; 4:19.

^ a b Wilkes, Joanne (1999).

Lord Byron and Madame de Staël: Born for Opposition . London: Ashgate.

ISBN 1840146990 .

^ de Staël, Germaine (2008). Craiutu, Aurelian (ed.).

Considerations on the Principal Events of the French Revolution: Newly Revised Translation of the 1818 English Edition (PDF) . Indianapolis: Liberty Fund. p. xvii.

ISBN 978-0865977310 .

^ Nicholson , pp. 223–224 ^ a b Longford, Elizabeth (1972).

Wellington: Pillar of State . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. p. 38.

^ Herold , p. 392 ^ Haß, Annika (10 August 2023).

Europäischer Buchmarkt und Gelehrtenrepublik: Die transnationale Verlagsbuchhandlung Treuttel & Würtz, 1750–1850 (in German). Heidelberg University Publishing.

doi : 10.17885/heiup.817 .

ISBN 978-3-96822-073-4 .

^ a b Goodden , p. 31 ^ Moore , p. 390 ^ Moore , p. 8 ^ Project Vox Team (17 April 2024).

"Staël (1766-1817)" .

^ Fontana , p. 234.

^ Goodden, Angelica (2007). "The Man-Woman and the Idiot: Madame de Staël's Public/Private Life".

Forum for Modern Language Studies .

43 (1): 34– 45.

doi : 10.1093/fmls/cql117 .

^ Marso, Lori J. (2002). "Defending the Queen: Wollstonecraft and Staël on the Politics of Sensibility and Feminine Difference".

The Eighteenth Century .

43 (1). University of Pennsylvania Press: 43– 60.

JSTOR 41468201 .

^ Moore, L. (2007).

Liberty: The Lives and Times of Six Women in Revolutionary France .

^ Popowicz, Kamil (2013).

Madame de Staël (in Polish). Vol. 4. Warsaw: Collegium Civitas.

^ Casillo, R. (2006).

The Empire of Stereotypes: Germaine de Staël and the Idea of Italy . Springer. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1403983213 .

^ Powell, Sara (1994).

"Women Writers in Revolution: Feminism in Germaine de Staël and Ding Ling" .

Masters Theses & Specialist Projects . Retrieved 15 February 2020 .

^ "Staël (1766-1817)" .

^ "Staël (1766-1817)" .

^ Team, Project Vox.

"Germaine de Staël (1766-1817)" .

Project Vox . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Abramowitz, Michael (2 April 2007).

"Rightist Indignation" .

Washington Post . Retrieved 30 June 2007 .

^ Hasty, Olga Peters (1999).

Pushkin's Tatiana . University of Wisconsin Press. p. 245.

ISBN 978-0299164041 .

^ Vincent, Patrick H. (2004).

The Romantic Poetess: European Culture, Politics, and Gender, 1820–1840 . UPNE. pp.

79– 80.

ISBN 978-1584654308 .

^ Rossettini, Olga (1963). "Madame de Staël et la Russie".

Rivista de Letterature Moderne e Comparate .

16 (1): 50– 67.

^ "Emerson – Roots – Madame DeStael" .

transcendentalism-legacy.tamu.edu . Archived from the original on 11 August 2014 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ Porte, Joel (1991).

In Respect to Egotism: Studies in American Romantic Writing . Cambridge University Press. p. 23.

^ Moi, Toril (2006).

Henrik Ibsen and the Birth of Modernism: Art, Theater, Philosophy . Oxford University Press. p.

83 .

ISBN 978-0199295876 .

^ Moore , p. 350 ^ Sämtliche Schriften (Anm. 2), Bd. 3, S. 882 f.

^ Nicholson , p. 222 ^ Lettres sur la Caractère et les Écrits de Jean-Jacques Rousseau ^ A Treatise on the influence of Passions on the Happiness of individuals and of nations ^ Madame de Staël (Anne-Louise-Germaine) (1813).

Germany . John Murray. pp. 1–.

^ Considérations sur les principaux événements de la révolution française ^ Ten Years' Exile by Madame de Staël Sources [ edit ] Fontana, Biancamaria (2016).

Germaine de Staël: A Political Portrait . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691169040 .

Goodden, Angelica (2008).

Madame de Staël : the dangerous exile . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199238095 .

Herold, J. Christopher (2002).

Mistress to an Age: A Life of Madame de Staël . Grove Press.

ISBN 978-0802138378 .

Moore, L. (2007).

Liberty. The Lives and Times of Six Women in Revolutionary France .

Müller, Olaf (2008).

"Madame de Staël und Weimar. Europäische Dimensionen einer Begegnung" (PDF) . In Hellmut Th. Seemann (ed.).

Europa in Weimar. Visionen eines Kontinents. Jahrbuch der Klassik Stiftung Weimar . Göttingen: Wallstein Verlag.

Nicholson, Andrew, ed. (1991).

Lord Byron: The Complete Miscellaneous Prose . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198185437 .

Schama, Simon (1989).

Citizens: A Chronicle of the French Revolution . Random House.

ISBN 0679-726101 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bredin, Jean-Denis.

Une singulière famille: Jacques Necker, Suzanne Necker et Germaine de Staël . Paris: Fayard, 1999 ( ISBN 2213602808 ) (in French) Casillo, Robert (2006).

The Empire of Stereotypes. Germaine de Stael and the Idea of Italy . London: Palgrave MacMillan.

ISBN 1349533688 .

Daquin, Françoise Marie Danielle (2020) Slavery and feminism in the writings of Madame de Staël.

https://doi.org/10.25903/5f07e50eaaa2b Fairweather, Maria.

Madame de Staël . New York: Carroll & Graf, 2005 (hardcover, ISBN 0786713399 ); 2006 (paperback, ISBN 078671705-X ); London: Constable & Robinson, 2005 (hardcover, ISBN 1841198161 ); 2006 (paperback, ISBN 1845292278 ).

Garonna, Paolo (2010).

L'Europe de Coppet – Essai sur l'Europe de demain (in French). Le Mont-sur-Lausanne: LEP Éditions Loisirs et Pėdagogie.

ISBN 978-2606013691 .

Hilt, Douglas. "Madame De Staël: Emotion and Emancipation".

History Today (Dec 1972), Vol. 22 Issue 12, pp. 833–842, online.

Hofmann, Étienne, ed. (1982).

Benjamin Constant, Madame de Staël et le Groupe de Coppet: Actes du Deuxième Congrès de Lausanne à l'occasion du 150e anniversaire de la mort de Benjamin Constant Et Du Troisième Colloque de Coppet, 15–19 juilliet 1980 (in French). Oxford, The Voltaire Foundation and Lausanne, Institut Benjamin Constant.

ISBN 0729402800 .

Levaillant, Maurice (1958).

The passionate exiles: Madame de Staël and Madame Récamier . Farrar, Straus and Cudahy.

ISBN 978-0836980868 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Sluga, Glenda (2014). "Madame de Staël and the Transformation of European Politics, 1812–17".

The International History Review .

37 : 142– 166.

doi : 10.1080/07075332.2013.852607 .

hdl : 2123/25775 .

S2CID 144713712 .

Winegarten, Renee.

Germaine de Staël & Benjamin Constant: A Dual Biography . New Haven: Yale University Press , 2008 ( ISBN 978-0300119251 ).

Winegarten, Renee.

Mme. de Staël . Dover, NH: Berg, 1985 ( ISBN 0907582877 ).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Madame de Staël .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Germaine de Staël .

Library resources about Germaine de Staël Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Germaine de Staël Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Stael and the French Revolution Introduction by Aurelian Craiutu BBC4 In Our Time on Germaine de Staël Madame de Staël and the Transformation of European Politics, 1812–17 by Glenda Sluga. In: The International history review 37(1):142–166 · November 2014 (in French) Stael.org , with detailed chronology (in French) BNF.fr (Searching "stael").

Works by Germaine de Staël at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Germaine de Staël at the Internet Archive Works by Germaine de Staël at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) "Staël, Germaine de" in The Columbia Encyclopedia , Sixth Edition: 2001–05.

The Great de Staël by Richard Holmes from The New York Review of Books http://www.dieterwunderlich.de/madame_Germaine_de_Stael.htm (in German) Corinne at the Cape of Misena . is a painting by Baron Gerard with illustrative verse by Letitia Elizabeth Landon , which shows Madame de Staël as Corinne. The poem includes a translation of part of Corinne's song at Naples.

Corinna at the Capitol . by Felicia Hemans has two versions of the poem.

Saintsbury, George (1911).

"Staël, Madame de" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

750– 752.

Links to related articles v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category v t e French Revolution Causes Timeline Ancien Régime Revolution Constitutional monarchy Republic Directory Consulate Glossary Journals Museum Significant civil and political events by year 1788 Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788) Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788) 1789 What Is the Third Estate?

(Jan 1789) Réveillon riots (28 Apr 1789) Convocation of the Estates General (5 May 1789) Death of the Dauphin (4 June 1789) National Assembly (17 Jun – 9 Jul 1790) Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789) National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul – 30 Sep 1791) Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789) Great Fear (20 Jul – 5 Aug 1789) Abolition of Feudalism (4–11 Aug 1789) Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (26 Aug 1789) Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789) Nationalization of the Church properties (2 Nov 1789) 1790 Abolition of the Parlements (Feb–Jul 1790) Avignon–Comtat Venaissin War (Jun 1790 – 1791) Abolition of the Nobility (23 Jun 1790) Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790) Fête de la Fédération (14 Jul 1790) 1791 Flight to Varennes (20–21 Jun 1791) Champ de Mars massacre (17 Jul 1791) Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791) The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791) National Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791 – Sep 1792) 1792 France declares war (20 Apr 1792) Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792) Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792) 10th of August (10 Aug 1792) September Massacres (Sep 1792) National Convention (20 Sep 1792 – 26 Oct 1795) First republic declared (22 Sep 1792) 1793 Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793) Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793 – 31 May 1795) Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793 – 27 Jul 1794) Committee of Public Safety Committee of General Security Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793) Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793) Levée en masse (23 Aug 1793) The Death of Marat (painting) Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793) Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793) Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year) 1794 Danton and Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794) Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794) Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794) Robespierre guillotined  (28 Jul 1794) White Terror (Fall 1794) Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794) 1795–6 Insurrection of 12 Germinal Year III (1 Apr 1795) Constitution of the Year III (22 Aug 1795) Directoire (1795–99) Council of Five Hundred Council of Ancients 13 Vendémiaire (5 Oct 1795) Conspiracy of the Equals (May 1796) 1797 Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797) Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797) 1798 Law of 22 Floréal Year VI (11 May 1798) 1799 Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799) Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799) Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799) Consulate Revolutionary campaigns 1792 Verdun Thionville Valmy Royalist Revolts Chouannerie Vendée Dauphiné Lille Siege of Mainz Jemappes Namur 1793 First Coalition War in the Vendée Battle of Neerwinden Battle of Famars (23 May 1793) Expedition to Sardinia (21 Dec 1792 – 25 May 1793) Battle of Kaiserslautern Siege of Mainz Battle of Wattignies Battle of Hondschoote Siege of Bellegarde Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees) Siege of Toulon (18 Sep – 18 Dec 1793) First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793) Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees) Second Battle of Wissembourg (26–27 Dec 1793) 1794 Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794) Second Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees)  (30 Apr – 1 May 1794) Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794) Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794) Glorious First of June (1 Jun 1794) Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794) Chouannerie Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794) Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 – 7 Jun 1795) 1795 Siege of Luxembourg (22 Nov 1794 – 7 Jun 1795) Peace of Basel 1796 Italian campaign (1796) Battle of Lonato (3–4 Aug 1796) Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796) Battle of Theiningen Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796) Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796) Battle of Würzburg (3 Sep 1796) Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796) First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796) Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796) Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796) Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796) Battle of Calliano (6–7 Nov 1796) Battle of Arcole (15–17 Nov 1796) Ireland expedition (Dec 1796) 1797 Italian campaign (1797) Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797) Battle of Rivoli (14–15 Jan 1797) Battle of the Bay of Cádiz (25 Jan 1797) Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797) Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797) Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797) 1798 French invasion of Switzerland (28 January – 17 May 1798) French Invasion of Egypt (1798–1801) Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May – 23 Sep 1798) Quasi-War (1798–1800) Peasants' War (12 Oct – 5 Dec 1798) 1799 Second Coalition (1798–1802) Siege of Acre (20 Mar – 21 May 1799) Battle of Ostrach (20–21 Mar 1799) Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799) Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799) Battle of Cassano (27–28 Apr 1799) First Battle of Zurich (4–7 Jun 1799) Battle of Trebbia (17–20 Jun 1799) Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799) Second Battle of Zurich (25–26 Sep 1799) 1800 Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800) Convention of Alessandria (15 Jun 1800) Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800) League of Armed Neutrality (1800–02) 1801 Treaty of Lunéville (9 Feb 1801) Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801) Algeciras campaign (8 Jul 1801) 1802 Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802) Treaty of Paris (25 Jun 1802) Military leaders France French Army Eustache Charles d'Aoust Charles-Pierre Augereau Alexandre de Beauharnais Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte Louis-Alexandre Berthier Jean-Baptiste Bessières Napoléon Bonaparte Guillaume Brune Jean François Carteaux Jean-Étienne Championnet Chapuis de Tourville Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine Louis-Nicolas Davout Louis Desaix Jacques François Dugommier Thomas-Alexandre Dumas Charles François Dumouriez Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino Louis-Charles de Flers Paul Grenier Emmanuel de Grouchy Jacques Maurice Hatry Lazare Hoche Jean-Baptiste Jourdan François Christophe de Kellermann Jean-Baptiste Kléber Pierre Choderlos de Laclos Jean Lannes Charles Leclerc Claude Lecourbe François Joseph Lefebvre Étienne Macdonald Jean-Antoine Marbot Marcellin Marbot François Séverin Marceau Auguste de Marmont André Masséna Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey Jean Victor Marie Moreau Édouard Mortier, Duke of Trévise Joachim Murat Michel Ney Pierre-Jacques Osten [ fr ] Nicolas Oudinot Catherine-Dominique de Pérignon Jean-Charles Pichegru Józef Poniatowski Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer Jean-Mathieu-Philibert Sérurier Joseph Souham Jean-de-Dieu Soult Louis-Gabriel Suchet Belgrand de Vaubois Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno French Navy Charles-Alexandre Linois Opposition Austria József Alvinczi Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen Count of Clerfayt  (Walloon) Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze  (Swiss) Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth Pál Kray  (Hungarian) Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc  (French) Maximilian Baillet de Latour  (Walloon) Karl Mack von Leiberich Rudolf Ritter von Otto  (Saxon) Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen Johann Mészáros von Szoboszló  (Hungarian) Karl Philipp Sebottendorf Dagobert von Wurmser Britain Sir Ralph Abercromby James Saumarez, 1st Baron de Saumarez Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany Netherlands William V, Prince of Orange Prussia Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen Russia Alexander Korsakov Alexander Suvorov Andrei Rosenberg Spain Luis Firmin de Carvajal Antonio Ricardos Other significant figures and factions Patriotic Society of 1789 Jean Sylvain Bailly Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette François Alexandre Frédéric, duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt Isaac René Guy le Chapelier Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Nicolas de Condorcet Feuillants and monarchiens Grace Elliott Arnaud de La Porte Jean-Sifrein Maury François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas Antoine Barnave Lafayette Alexandre-Théodore-Victor, comte de Lameth Charles Malo François Lameth André Chénier Jean-François Rewbell Camille Jordan Madame de Staël Boissy d'Anglas Jean-Charles Pichegru Pierre Paul Royer-Collard Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac Girondins Jacques Pierre Brissot Jean-Marie Roland de la Platière Madame Roland Father Henri Grégoire Étienne Clavière Marquis de Condorcet Charlotte Corday Marie Jean Hérault Jean Baptiste Treilhard Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve Jean Debry Olympe de Gouges Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux The Plain Abbé Sieyès de Cambacérès Charles-François Lebrun Pierre-Joseph Cambon Bertrand Barère Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot Philippe Égalité Louis Philippe I Mirabeau Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville Jean Joseph Mounier Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours François de Neufchâteau Montagnards Maximilien Robespierre Georges Danton Jean-Paul Marat Camille Desmoulins Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Paul Barras Louis Philippe I Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau Jacques-Louis David Marquis de Sade Georges Couthon Roger Ducos Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois Jean-Henri Voulland Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville Philippe-François-Joseph Le Bas Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier Jean-Pierre-André Amar Prieur de la Côte-d'Or Prieur de la Marne Gilbert Romme Jean Bon Saint-André Jean-Lambert Tallien Pierre Louis Prieur Antoine Christophe Saliceti Hébertists and Enragés Jacques Hébert Jacques-Nicolas Billaud-Varenne Pierre Gaspard Chaumette Charles-Philippe Ronsin Antoine-François Momoro François-Nicolas Vincent François Chabot Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel François Hanriot Jacques Roux Stanislas-Marie Maillard Charles-Philippe Ronsin Jean-François Varlet Theophile Leclerc Claire Lacombe Pauline Léon Gracchus Babeuf Sylvain Maréchal Others Figures Charles X Louis XVI Louis XVII Louis XVIII Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien Louis Henri, Prince of Condé Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé Marie Antoinette Napoléon Bonaparte Lucien Bonaparte Joseph Bonaparte Joseph Fesch Joséphine de Beauharnais Joachim Murat Jean Sylvain Bailly Jacques-Donatien Le Ray Guillaume-Chrétien de Malesherbes Talleyrand Thérésa Tallien Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target Catherine Théot Madame de Lamballe Madame du Barry Louis de Breteuil de Chateaubriand Jean Chouan Loménie de Brienne Charles Alexandre de Calonne Jacques Necker Jean-Jacques Duval d'Eprémesnil List of people associated with the French Revolution Factions Jacobins Cordeliers Panthéon Club Social Club Influential thinkers Les Lumières Beaumarchais Edmund Burke Anacharsis Cloots Charles-Augustin de Coulomb Pierre Claude François Daunou Diderot Benjamin Franklin Thomas Jefferson Antoine Lavoisier Montesquieu Thomas Paine Jean-Jacques Rousseau Abbé Sieyès Voltaire Mary Wollstonecraft Cultural impact La Marseillaise Cockade of France Flag of France Liberté, égalité, fraternité Marianne Muscadin Bastille Day Panthéon French Republican calendar Metric system Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen Cult of the Supreme Being Cult of Reason Temple of Reason Sans-culottes Phrygian cap Women in the French Revolution Incroyables and merveilleuses Symbolism in the French Revolution Historiography of the French Revolution Influence of the French Revolution Films v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐l7dgw
Cached time: 20250817073049
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.834 seconds
Real time usage: 2.208 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13027/1000000
Revision size: 84470/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 737859/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 182235/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 359041/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.051/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23836240/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1647.141      1 -total
 21.16%  348.555      1 Template:Reflist
 18.09%  297.992      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 18.06%  297.463     44 Template:Cite_book
 11.25%  185.247      1 Template:Navboxes
  9.61%  158.314     10 Template:Military_navigation
  7.50%  123.489      2 Template:IPA
  6.72%  110.704      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
  6.58%  108.316      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.50%   90.533      3 Template:Plainlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:210684:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817073049 and revision id 1306346434. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Germaine_de_Staël&oldid=1306346434 " Categories : Germaine de Staël 1766 births 1817 deaths Writers from Paris Writers from the Republic of Geneva Women in the French Revolution 18th-century French women politicians People of the First French Empire 18th-century French women writers 18th-century philosophers 18th-century French letter writers 19th-century French letter writers 19th-century French women writers 19th-century French novelists 19th-century Swiss women writers 19th-century French philosophers French Roman Catholics French women philosophers French literary critics French feminists French travel writers French women novelists Converts to Roman Catholicism from Calvinism Coppet group Swiss feminists Swiss writers in French Swedish nobility French women literary critics Swedish women literary critics Women historical novelists Women travel writers Conversationalists Romantic philosophers French salon-holders Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Use British English from February 2020 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Articles with excerpts Articles with French-language sources (fr) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 07:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Germaine de Staël 53 languages Add topic

