Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Between issues of redistribution and decision-making processes 2 Environmental justice 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Spatial justice 3 languages العربية Français עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Linking social justice to geographic space Spatial justice links social justice to space , most notably in the works of geographers David Harvey and Edward W. Soja . The field analyzes the impact of regional planning and urban planning decisions. It is promoted by the scholarly tradition of critical geography , which arose in the 1970s.

[ 1 ] Between issues of redistribution and decision-making processes [ edit ] Building on the work of several famous Justice philosophers ( John Rawls , 1971; Iris Marion Young , 1990, 2000), two contrasting approaches of justice have polarized the debate: one focuses on redistribution issues, the other concentrates on decision-making processes.

[ citation needed ] A first set of approaches consists in asking questions about spatial or socio-spatial distributions and working to achieve an equal geographical distribution of society's wants and needs, such as job opportunities , access to health care , good air quality , et cetera.  This is of particular concern in regions where the population has difficulty moving to a more spatially just location due to poverty, discrimination, or political restrictions (such as apartheid pass laws ).  Even in free, developed nations, access to many places are limited.  Geographer Don Mitchell points to the mass privatization of once-public land as a common example of spatial injustice. In this distributive justice perspective, the access to material and immaterial goods, or to social positions indicates whether the situation is fair or not. At the scale of urban space, questions of accessibility, walkability and transport equity can also be seen as matters of distribution of spatial resources.

Another way of tackling the concept of spatial justice is to focus on decision-making procedures: this approach also raises issues of representations of space, of territorial or other identities and of social practices. For instance, focusing on minorities allows to explore their spatial practices but also to investigate how these are experienced and managed by various agents: this may lead to reveal forms of oppression or discrimination that a universalist approach might disregard otherwise. Architect and urbanist Liz Ogbu argues, for instance, that successful spatial justice planning requires designers to "engage people who don’t have a seat at the table and think about them as co-designers in the process".

[ 2 ] Environmental justice [ edit ] Environmental justice is a related concept, arising in the 1970s in North American cities.

[ citation needed ] It criticizes the concentration of pollution and natural hazards disproportionately in minority neighborhoods, which is seen by proponents as a form of racial discrimination .

See also [ edit ] geography portal philosophy portal Hermann Knoflacher References [ edit ] ^ See David Harvey , Social Justice and the City , 1973.

^ Greenspan, Elizabeth (31 May 2018).

"Liz Ogbu, Studio O" .

Architect .

Bibliography [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) BRAWLEY Lisa, «The Practice of Spatial Justice in Crisis», justice spatiale - spatial justice , n° 01, september 2009 BRET Bernard, «Rawlsian universalism confronted with the diversity of reality», justice spatiale - spatial justice , n° 01, september 2009 Coll., « Justice spatiale », Annales de Géographie , n°665–666, jan–avril 2009.

Coll., "Spatial Justice", Critical Planning , Volume 14 Summer 2007.

DIKEÇ Mustafa, «Space, politics and (in)justice», justice spatiale - spatial justice , n° 01, september 2009 FAINSTEIN Susan S., «Spatial Justice and Planning», justice spatiale - spatial justice , n° 01, september 2009 FIEDLER, Johannes; HUMANN, Melanie and KÖLKE, Manuela (2012): "Radical Standard for the Implementation of Spatial Justice in Urban Planning and Design"; published by the Center for Gender Studies of TU Braunschweig HARVEY David, 1973, Social Justice and the City , London, Edward Arnold.

HARVEY David, 1992, "Social justice, Postmodernism and the City", International Journal of Urban and Regional Research , 16, 4, pp. 588–601.

LEFEBVRE Henri, 1968, Le Droit à la ville , Paris, Anthropos.

LEFEBVRE Henri, 1972, Espace et politique , Paris, Anthropos.

MARCUSE Peter, «Spatial Justice: Derivative but Causal of Social Injustice», justice spatiale - spatial justice , n° 01, september 2009 PIRIE Gordon, 1983, "On Spatial Justice", Environment and planning , A 15, pp. 465–473.

RAWLS John, 1971, A Theory of Justice , Cambridge, Harvard University Press.

REYNAUD Alain, 1981, Société, espace et justice , Paris, PUF.

SMITH D. M., 1994, Geography and Social Justice , Oxford, Blackwell.

SOJA Edward W., «The city and spatial justice», justice spatiale - spatial justice , n° 01, september 2009 SOJA Edward W., 2000, Postmetropolis, Critical Studies of Cities and Regions , Oxford, Blackwell.

SOJA Edward W., 2010, Seeking Spatial Justice , Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.

YOUNG Iris Marion, 1990, Justice and the Politics of Difference , Princeton, Princeton University Press.

YOUNG Iris Marion, 2000, Inclusion and Democracy , Oxford, Oxford University Press.

External links [ edit ] What Makes Justice Spatial? What Makes Spaces Just? / Three Interviews on the Concept of Spatial Justice Critical Planning, UCLA Urban Planning Journal, Volume 14: Spatial Justice Summer 2007 justice spatiale - spatial justice , a new journal, published in English and in French, by the University of Paris-Ouest Nanterre, France [1] Spatial Justice Test for the US using race and income data v t e Types of justice In philosophy Commutative Distributive Divine Interactional Global Natural Organizational Procedural Victor's Recognition Areas Climate Criminal Economic Environmental Equality Fairness Gender Military Racial Reproductive Restorative Retributive Resource Social Spatial Speedy Trade Transformative Utilitarian Other Frontier Poetic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spatial_justice&oldid=1282154672 " Categories : Justice Political philosophy Human sciences Urban planning Geography Social justice Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 17:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spatial justice 3 languages Add topic

