Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Immigrant assimilation 3 Perspective of dominant culture 4 Adaptation to new country 5 Non-indigenous assimilation Toggle Non-indigenous assimilation subsection 5.1 United States 5.2 Canada 5.2.1 20th century–present: Shift from assimilation to integration 5.3 Ireland 6 Indigenous assimilation Toggle Indigenous assimilation subsection 6.1 Australia 6.2 Brazil 6.3 Canada 1800s–1990s: Forced assimilation 6.4 Croatia and Transylvania 6.5 Mexico and Peru 6.6 New Zealand 6.7 United States 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Cultural assimilation 64 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Sardu Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Adoption of features of another culture Not to be confused with Integration of immigrants , Racial integration , or Social integration .

Immigration General Immigration by country List of immigrant populations Immigration country Immigration policy Illegal immigration Forced displacement Internal migration History and law Alien Asylum shopping Border security Citizenship Crime Deportation Self-deportation Detention Emigration Externalization Immigration law Immigrant investor programs Immigration tariff Indefinite leave to remain Migration diplomacy Net migration rate list Non-refoulement Permanent residency Population transfer Pushback Repatriation Extradition Residence permit Return migration Right of asylum Right of return Refugee Safe third country Smuggling Surveillance Voluntary return Social processes Acculturation ( Acculturation gap ) Birth tourism Anchor baby Satellite babies Economic effects Expatriate Human capital flight Human migration Immigrant assimilation Immigration consultant Integration Migration background Persecution Refugee crisis Social exclusion Student migration Unreported employment Visa fraud Political Theories Civic nationalism Religious nationalism Replacement migration Social cohesion Nativism Multiculturalism Plurinationalism Push and pull factors Ethnocentrism Foot voting Causes Chain migration Economic migrant Foreign worker Global labor arbitrage War Weaponized Opposition and reform Criticism of multiculturalism Immigration reform Opposition to immigration White genocide conspiracy theory v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Cultural assimilation is the process in which a minority group or culture comes to resemble a society's majority group or fully adopts the values, behaviors, and beliefs of another group.

[ 1 ] The melting pot model is based on this concept. A related term is cultural integration , which describes the process of becoming economically and socially integrated into another society while retaining elements of one's original culture. This approach is also known as cultural pluralism , [ 2 ] and it forms the basis of a cultural mosaic model that upholds the preservation of cultural rights . Another closely related concept is acculturation , which occurs through cultural diffusion and involves changes in the cultural patterns of one or both groups, while still maintaining distinct characteristics.

[ 3 ] There are various types of cultural assimilation, including full assimilation and forced assimilation . Full assimilation is common, as it occurs spontaneously.

[ 4 ] Assimilation can also involve what is called additive assimilation , [ 5 ] in which individuals or groups expand their existing cultural repertoire rather than replacing their ancestral culture. This is an aspect it shares with acculturation as well.

[ 2 ] When used as a political ideology, assimilationism refers to governmental policies of deliberately assimilating ethnic groups into a national culture.

[ 6 ] It encompasses both voluntary and involuntary assimilation.

[ 7 ] In both cultural assimilation and integration, majority groups may expect minority groups to outright adopt the everyday practices of the dominant culture by using the common language in conversations , following social norms , integrating economically and engaging in sociopolitical activities such as cultural participation, active advocacy and electoral and community participation .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Various forms of exclusion, social isolation, and discrimination can hinder the progress of this process.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Cultural integration, which is mostly found in multicultural communities, resembles a type of sociocultural assimilation because, over time, the minority group or culture may assimilate into the dominant culture , and the defining characteristics of the minority culture may become less obverse or disappear for practical reasons. Hence, in certain sociopolitical climates, cultural integration could be conceptualized as similar to cultural assimilation, with the former considered merely as one of the latter's phases.

[ 13 ] Overview [ edit ] Cultural assimilation may occur either quickly or gradually, depending on the circumstances of the group. Full assimilation takes place when members of a society are no longer distinguishable from those of the dominant group in that society.

[ 4 ] Whether a group is expected to assimilate is often disputed by both members of the group and the dominant members of society.

Cultural assimilation does not necessarily result in similarity of appearance. Geographical and other natural barriers between groups, even when influenced by a predominant culture, may lead to cultural differences.

[ vague ] Cultural assimilation can happen either spontaneously or forcibly, the latter when more dominant cultures use various means aimed at forced assimilation .

[ 4 ] Various types of assimilation, including forced cultural assimilation, are particularly relevant regarding Indigenous groups during colonialism taking place between the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries. This type of assimilation included religious conversion, separation of families, changes of gender roles, division of property among foreign power, elimination of local economies, and lack of sustainable food supply. Whether via colonialism or within one nation, methods of forced assimilation are often unsustainable, leading to revolts and collapses of power to maintain control over cultural norms. Often, cultures that are forced into different cultural practices through forced cultural assimilation revert to their native practices and religions that differ from the forced cultural values of other dominant powers.

[ 4 ] In addition throughout history, voluntary assimilation is often in response to pressure from a more predominant culture, and conformity is a solution for people to remain in safety. An example of voluntary cultural assimilation would be during the Spanish Inquisition , when Jews and Muslims accepted the Roman Catholic Church as their religion, but meanwhile, many people still privately practised their traditional religions. That type of assimilation is used to convince a dominant power that a culture has peacefully assimilated yet often voluntary assimilation does not mean the group fully conforms to the accepted cultural beliefs.

[ 7 ] The term "assimilation" is often used about not only indigenous groups but also immigrants settled in a new land. A new culture and new attitudes toward the original culture are obtained through contact and communication. Assimilation assumes that a relatively-tenuous culture gets to be united into one unified culture. That process happens through contact and accommodation between each culture. The current definition of assimilation is usually used to refer to immigrants, but in multiculturalism , cultural assimilation can happen all over the world and within varying social contexts and is not limited to specific areas.

Immigrant assimilation [ edit ] Social scientists rely on four primary benchmarks to assess immigrant assimilation: socioeconomic status , geographic distribution, second language attainment, and intermarriage .

[ 14 ] William A.V. Clark defines immigrant assimilation in the United States as "a way of understanding the social dynamics of American society and that it is the process that occurs spontaneously and often unintended in the course of interaction between majority and minority groups ." [ 15 ] Studies have also noted the positive effects of immigrant assimilation. A study by Bleakley and Chin (2010) found that people who arrived in the US at or before the age of nine from non-English speaking countries tend to speak English at a similar level as those from English speaking countries. Conversely, those who arrived after nine from non–English speaking countries have much lower speaking proficiency and this increases linearly with age at arrival. The study also noted sociocultural impacts such as those with better English skills are less likely to be currently married, more likely to divorce, have fewer children, and have spouses closer to their age. Learning to speak English well is estimated to improve income by over 33 percent.

[ 16 ] A 2014 study done by Verkuyten found that immigrant children who adapt through integration or assimilation are received more positively by their peers than those who adapt through marginalization or separation.

Perspective of dominant culture [ edit ] Main article: Dominant culture There has been little to no existing research or evidence that demonstrates whether and how immigrant's mobility gains—assimilating to a dominant country such as language ability, socioeconomic status etc.— causes changes in the perception of those who were born in the dominant country. This essential type of research provides information on how immigrants are accepted into dominant countries. In an article by Ariela Schachter, titled "From "different" to "similar": an experimental approach to understanding assimilation", a survey was taken of white American citizens to view their perception of immigrants who now resided in the United States.

[ 17 ] The survey indicated the whites tolerated immigrants in their home country. White natives are open to having "structural" relation with the immigrants-origin individuals, for instance, friends and neighbors; however, this was with the exception of black immigrants and natives and undocumented immigrants.

[ 17 ] However, at the same time, white Americans viewed all non-white Americans, regardless of legal status, as dissimilar.

A similar journal by Jens Hainmueller and Daniel J. Hopkins titled "The Hidden American Immigration Consensus: A Conjoint Analysis of Attitudes toward Immigrants" confirmed similar attitudes towards immigrants.

[ 18 ] The researchers used an experiment to reach their goal which was to test nine theoretical relevant attributes of hypothetical immigrants. Asking a population-based sample of U.S. citizens to decide between pairs of immigrants applying for admission to the United States, the U.S. citizen would see an application with information for two immigrants including notes about their education status, country, origin, and other attributes. The results showed Americans viewed educated immigrants in high-status jobs favourably, whereas they view the following groups unfavourably: those who lack plans to work, those who entered without authorization, those who are not fluent in English and those of Iraqi descent.

Adaptation to new country [ edit ] As the number of international students entering the US has increased, so has the number of international students in US colleges and universities. The adaptation of these newcomers is important in cross-cultural research. In the study "Cross-Cultural Adaptation of International College Student in the United States" by Yikang Wang, the goal was to examine how the psychological and socio-cultural adaptation of international college students varied over time.

[ 19 ] The survey contained a sample of 169 international students attending a coeducational public university. The two subtypes of adaptation: psychological and socio-cultural were examined. Psychological adaptation refers to "feelings of well-being or satisfaction during cross-cultural transitions;" [ 20 ] while socio-cultural refers to the ability to fit into the new culture.

[ 20 ] The results for both graduate and undergraduate students show both satisfaction and socio-cultural skills changed over time. Psychological adaptation had the most significant change for a student who has resided in the US for at least 24 months while socio-cultural adaptation steadily increased over time. It can be concluded that eventually over time, the minority group will shed some of their culture's characteristic when in a new country and incorporate new culture qualities. Also, it was confirmed that more time spent in a new country would result in becoming more accustomed to the dominant countries' characteristics.

Figure 2 demonstrates as the length of time resided in the United States increase—the dominant country, the life satisfaction and socio-cultural skill increase as well—positive correlation.

[ 19 ] In turn, research by Caligiuri 's group, published in 2020, shows that one semester of classroom experiential activities designed to foster international and domestic student social interaction serve to foster international students’ sense of belonging and social support .

[ 21 ] In a study by Viola Angelini, "Life Satisfaction of Immigrant: Does cultural assimilation matter?", the theory of assimilation as having benefits for well-being.

[ 22 ] The goal of this study was to assess the difference between cultural assimilation and the subjective well-being of immigrants. The journal included a study that examined a "direct measure of assimilation with a host culture and immigrants' subjective well-being." [ 22 ] Using data from the German Socio-Economic Panel, it was concluded that there was a positive correlation between cultural assimilation and an immigrant's life's satisfaction/wellbeing even after discarding factors such as employment status, wages, etc. "Life Satisfaction of Immigrant: Does cultural assimilation matter?" also confirms "association with life satisfaction is stronger for established immigrants than for recent ones." [ 22 ] It was found that the more immigrants that identified with the German culture and who spoke the fluent national language—dominant country language, the more they reported to be satisfied with their lives. Life satisfaction rates were higher for those who had assimilated to the dominant country than those who had not assimilated since those who did incorporate the dominant language, religion, psychological aspects, etc.

Non-indigenous assimilation [ edit ] In the study "Examination of cultural shock, intercultural sensitivity and willingness to adopt" by Clare D’Souza, the study uses a diary method to analyze the data collected.

[ 23 ] The study involved students undergoing a study abroad tour. The results show negative intercultural sensitivity is much greater in participants who experience culture shock .

[ 23 ] Those who experience culture shock have emotional expression and responses of hostility, anger, negativity, anxiety frustration, isolation, and regression. Also, for one who has traveled to the country before permanently moving, they would have predetermined beliefs about the culture and their status within the country. The emotional expression for this individual includes excitement, happiness, eagerness, and euphoria.

Another article titled "International Students from Melbourne Describing Their Cross-Cultural Transitions Experiences: Culture Shock, Social Interaction, and Friendship Development" by Nish Belford focuses on cultural shock.

[ 24 ] Belford interviewed international students to explore their experience after living and studying in Melbourne , Australia. The data collected were narratives from the students that focused on variables such as "cultural similarity, intercultural communication competence, intercultural friendship, and relational identity to influence their experiences." [ 24 ] United States [ edit ] Further information: Americanization (immigration) Between 1880 and 1920, the United States took in roughly 24 million immigrants .

[ 14 ] This increase in immigration can be attributed to many historical changes. The beginning of the 21st century has also marked a massive era of immigration, and sociologists are once again trying to make sense of the impacts that immigration has on society and on the immigrants themselves.

[ 14 ] Assimilation had various meanings in American sociology.

Henry Pratt Fairchild associates American assimilation with Americanization or the " melting pot " theory. Some scholars also believed that assimilation and acculturation were synonymous. According to a common point of view, assimilation is a "process of interpretation and fusion" from another group or person. That may include memories, behaviors, and sentiments. By sharing their experiences and histories, they blend into the common cultural life.

[ 25 ] A related theory is structural pluralism proposed by American sociologist Milton Gordon . It describes the American situation wherein despite the cultural assimilation of ethnic groups to mainstream American society, they maintained structural separation.

[ 26 ] Gordon maintained that there is limited integration of the immigrants into American social institutions such as educational, occupational, political, and social cliques.

[ 2 ] During The Colonial Period from 1607 to 1776, individuals immigrated to the British colonies on two very different paths—voluntary and forced migration. Those who migrated to the colonies on their own volition were drawn by the allure of cheap land, high wages, and the freedom of conscience in British North America.

[ 27 ] On the latter half, the largest population of forced migrants to the colonies was African slaves.

[ 28 ] Slavery was different from the other forced migrations as, unlike in the case of convicts, there was no possibility of earning freedom, although some slaves were manumitted in the centuries before the American Civil War.

[ 29 ] The long history of immigration in the established gateways means that the place of immigrants in terms of class , racial , and ethnic hierarchies in the traditional gateways is more structured or established, but on the other hand, the new gateways do not have much immigration history and so the place of immigrants in terms of class, racial, and ethnic hierarchies are less defined, and immigrants may have more influence to define their position. Secondly, the size of the new gateways may influence immigrant assimilation. Having a smaller gateway may influence the level of racial segregation among immigrants and native-born people. Thirdly, the difference in institutional arrangements may influence immigrant assimilation. Traditional gateways, unlike new gateways, have many institutions set up to help immigrants such as legal aid, bureaus, and social organizations. Finally, Waters and Jimenez have only speculated that those differences may influence immigrant assimilation and the way researchers that should assess immigrant assimilation.

[ 14 ] Furthermore, the advancement and integration of immigrants into the United States has accounted for 29% of U.S. population growth since 2000.

[ 30 ] Recent arrival of immigrants to the United States has been examined closely over the last two decades. The results show the driving factors for immigration including citizenship, homeownership, English language proficiency, job status, and earning a better income.

[ 31 ] Canada [ edit ] Canada's multicultural history dates back to the period European colonization from the 16th to 19th centuries, with waves of ethnic European emigration to the region. In the 20th century, Indian , Chinese and Japanese were the largest immigrant groups.

[ 32 ] 20th century–present: Shift from assimilation to integration [ edit ] Canada remains one of the largest immigrant populations in the world . The 2016 census recorded 7.5 million documented immigrants, representing a fifth of the country's total population.

[ 33 ] Focus has shifted from a rhetoric of cultural assimilation to cultural integration.

[ 34 ] In contrast to assimilationism, integration aims to preserve the roots of a minority society while still allowing for smooth coexistence with the dominant culture.

[ 32 ] Ireland [ edit ] From the 2020s, Ireland has experienced an increase in racially motivated incidents targeting non-European migrants, with a notable concentration of cases involving Indian nationals. Reported events include physical assaults in public areas, harassment on buses, and attacks in residential neighbourhoods. Some incidents have resulted in serious injuries, and in certain situations victims were accused of misconduct before being subjected to violence. Reports indicate these events have occurred across several urban centres, with Dublin and its suburbs recording many of the most severe cases. In some incidents, CCTV footage and eyewitness accounts were available, but arrests have been limited, and victims have expressed concerns about inadequate official protection.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Among the affected communities, daily routines have been adjusted in response to perceived safety risks, such as reducing evening or nighttime activities, limiting children’s outdoor play, and in some cases considering relocation. Commentators have noted that this climate of hostility may discourage acculturation and integration, reducing interaction between groups. Some observers have characterised these conditions as leading to assimilation shaped by caution and self-protection rather than open cultural exchange.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Indigenous assimilation [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Further information: Aboriginal Australians , New Deal for Aborigines , and Stolen Generations Legislation applying the policy of "protection" over Aboriginal Australians (separating them from white society [ 37 ] ) was adopted in some states and territories of Australia when they were still colonies, before the federation of Australia : in the Victoria in 1867, Western Australia in 1886, and Queensland in 1897. After federation, New South Wales crafted their policy in 1909, South Australia and the Northern Territory (which was under the control and of South Australia at the time) in 1910–11.

Mission stations missions and Government-run Aboriginal reserves were created, and Aboriginal people moved onto them. Legislation restricted their movement, prohibited alcohol use and regulated employment. The policies were reinforced in the first half of the 20th century (when it was realized that Aboriginal people would not die out or be fully absorbed in white society [ 37 ] ) such as in the provisions of the Welfare Ordinance 1953 , in which Aboriginal people were made wards of the state . "Part-Aboriginal" (known as half-caste ) children were forcibly removed from their parents in order to educate them in European ways; the girls were often trained to be domestic servants .

[ 38 ] The protectionist policies were discontinued, and assimilationist policies took over. These proposed that "full-blood" Indigenous Australians should be allowed to “die out”, while "half-castes" were encouraged to assimilate into the white community. Indigenous people were regarded as inferior to white people by these policies, and often experienced discrimination in the predominantly white towns after having to move to seek work.

[ 37 ] [ 39 ] Between 1910 and 1970, several generations of Indigenous children were removed from their parents, and have become known as the Stolen Generations . The policy has done lasting damage to individuals, family and Indigenous culture.

[ 37 ] The New Deal for Aborigines announced in 1939 marked the end of official policies based around "biological absorption" or "elimination" of Indigenous peoples, replaced with cultural assimilation as a prerequisite for civil rights. The 1961 Native Welfare Conference in Canberra, Australian federal and state government ministers formulated an official definition of "assimilation" of Indigenous Australians for government contexts. The Menzies Government's Federal Territories Minister Paul Hasluck informed the House of Representatives in April 1961 that: [ 40 ] [ excessive quote ] The policy of assimilation means in the view of all Australian governments that all aborigines and part-aborigines are expected eventually to attain the same manner of living as other Australians and to live as members of a single Australian community enjoying the same rights and privileges, accepting the same responsibilities, observing the same customs and influenced by the same beliefs, hopes and loyalties as other Australians. Thus, any special measures taken for aborigines and part-aborigines are regarded as temporary measures not based on colour but intended to meet their need for special care and assistance to protect them from any ill effects of sudden change and to assist them to make the transition from one stage to another in such a way as will be favourable to their future social, economic and political advancement.

After leading the successful 1967 referendum that removed discriminatory clauses of the Australian Constitution , Liberal Prime Minister Harold Holt explained his government's policy on assimilation thus: The word 'assimilation' is often misunderstood. There is nothing mandatory or arbitrary about it and it does not mean inter-breeding with the avowed objective of eventually eliminating the Aboriginal physical features or Aboriginal culture. Assimilation means that the Aborigines can be similar to other citizens, not of course in looks, but with regard to all the privileges and responsibilities of citizenship.

— Prime Minister Harold Holt , Sept, 1967 [ 41 ] Holt's successor John Gorton endorsed a policy of "advancement" of Aboriginal people by means of "the assimilation of Aboriginal Australians as fully effective members of a single Australian society", and applauded "efforts being made by the States to involve Aboriginals themselves in the administration of their own affairs and in the exercise of proper authority among their own people," promising to emulate them at a Federal level. He outlined his Government's position thus: [ 42 ] In other words, without destroying Aboriginal culture, we want to help our Aboriginals to become an integral part of the rest of the Australian people, and we want the Aboriginals themselves to have a voice in the pace at which this process occurs. We will measure policy proposals against this objective, and will wish to avoid measures which are likely to set Aboriginal citizens permanently apart from other Australians through having their development based upon separate or different standards [...] However, we recognise that... many Aboriginal Australians are subject to special handicaps which impede their advancement. We are ready, therefore, to support additional action designed to help Aboriginals overcome these handicaps in the transitional phase.

— Prime Minister John Gorton , 12 July 1968 Government policies of 'assimilation' fell out of favour in Australia from the 1970s, with campaigners such as Australia's first Aboriginal Senator Neville Bonner favouring policies of 'integration' and 'self determination', and the Whitlam Labor and Fraser Liberal Governments promoting Land Rights legislation .

Brazil [ edit ] In January 2019, the newly elected Brazil President Jair Bolsonaro stripped the Indigenous Affairs Agency FUNAI of the responsibility to identify and demarcate Indigenous lands . He argued that those territories have very tiny isolated populations and proposed to integrate them into the larger Brazilian society.

[ 43 ] According to the Survival International , "Taking responsibility for Indigenous land demarcation away from FUNAI, the Indian affairs department, and giving it to the Agriculture Ministry is virtually a declaration of open warfare against Brazil's tribal peoples ." [ 44 ] Canada 1800s–1990s: Forced assimilation [ edit ] During the 19th and 20th centuries, and continuing until 1996, when the last Canadian Indian residential school was closed, the Canadian government, aided by Christian Churches, began an assimilationist campaign to forcibly assimilate Indigenous peoples in Canada . The government consolidated power over Indigenous land through treaties and the use of force, eventually isolating most Indigenous peoples to reserves. Marriage practices and spiritual ceremonies were banned, and spiritual leaders were imprisoned. Additionally, the Canadian government instituted an extensive residential school system to assimilate children. Indigenous children were separated from their families and no longer permitted to express their culture at these new schools. They were not allowed to speak their language or practice their own traditions without receiving punishment. There were many cases of violence and sexual abuse committed by the Christian church. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada concluded that this effort amounted to cultural genocide . The schools actively worked to alienate children from their cultural roots. Students were prohibited from speaking their native languages, were regularly abused, and were arranged marriages by the government after their graduation. The explicit goal of the Canadian government, through the Catholic and Anglican churches, was to completely assimilate Indigenous peoples into broader Canadian society and destroy all traces of their native history.

[ 45 ] Croatia and Transylvania [ edit ] During Croatia's personal union with Hungary , ethnic Croatians were pressured to abandon their traditional customs in favor of adopting elements of Hungarian culture, such as Catholicism and the Latin alphabet .  Because of this, elements of Hungarian culture were considered part of Croatian culture, and can still be seen in modern Croatian culture.

[ 46 ] Throughout the Kingdom of Hungary , many citizens, primarily those who belonged to minority groups, were forced to convert to Catholicism . The forced conversion policy was harshest in Croatia and Transylvania, where civilians could be sent to prison for refusing to convert.

[ 47 ] Romanian cultural anthropologist Ioan Lupaș claims that between 1002, when Transylvania became part of the Kingdom of Hungary, to 1300, approximately 200,000 non-Hungarians living in Transylvania were jailed for resisting Catholic conversion, and about 50,000 of them died in prison.

[ 48 ] Mexico and Peru [ edit ] A major contributor to cultural assimilation in South America began during exploration and colonialism that often is thought by Bartolomé de Las Casas to begin in 1492 when Europeans began to explore the Atlantic in search of "the Indies", leading to the discovery of the Americas. Europe remained dominant over the Americas' Indigenous populations as resources such as labor, natural resources i.e. lumber, copper, gold, silver, and agricultural products flooded into Europe, yet these gains were one-sided, as Indigenous groups did not benefit from trade deals with colonial powers.

[ 49 ] In addition to this, colonial metropoles such as Portugal and Spain required that colonies in South America assimilate to European customs – such as following the Holy Roman Catholic Church , acceptance of Spanish or Portuguese over Indigenous languages and accepting European-style government.

[ 50 ] Through forceful assimilationist policies, colonial powers such as Spain used methods of violence to assert cultural dominance over Indigenous populations.

[ 51 ] One example occurred in 1519 when the Spanish explorer Hernán Cortés reached Tenochtitlán – the original capital of the Aztec Empire in Mexico.

[ 52 ] After discovering that the Aztecs practiced human sacrifice, Cortés killed high-ranked Aztecs and held Moctezuma II , the Aztec ruler, captive. Shortly after, Cortés began creating alliances to resume power in Tenochtitlán and renamed it Mexico City. Without taking away power through murder and spread of infectious diseases the Spanish conquistadores (relatively small in number) would not have been able to take over Mexico and convert many people to Catholicism and slavery.  While Spaniards influenced linguistic and religious cultural assimilation among Indigenous peoples in South America during colonialism, many Indigenous languages such as the Incan language Quechua are still used in places such as Peru to this day by at least 4 million people.

New Zealand [ edit ] In the course of the colonization of New Zealand from the late-18th century onwards, assimilation of the indigenous Maori population to the culture of incoming European visitors and settlers at first occurred spontaneously. Genetic assimilation commenced early and continued – the 1961 New Zealand census classified only 62.2% of Māori as "full-blood Maoris".

[ 53 ] (Compare Pākehā Māori .) Linguistic assimilation also occurred early and ongoingly: European settler populations adopted and adapted Māori words , while European languages affected Māori vocabulary (and possibly phonology).

[ 54 ] In the 19th century colonial governments de facto encouraged assimilationist policies; [ 55 ] by the late-20th century, policies favored bicultural development.

[ 56 ] Māori readily and early adopted some aspects of European-borne material culture (metals, [ 57 ] muskets , [ 58 ] potatoes [ 59 ] ) relatively rapidly. Imported ideas – such as writing, [ 60 ] Christianity, [ 61 ] monarchy , sectarianism , everyday European-style clothing, [ 62 ] or disapproval of slavery [ 63 ] – spread more slowly.  Later developments (socialism, [ 64 ] anti-colonialist theory, [ 65 ] New Age ideas [ 66 ] ) have proven more internationally mobile. One long-standing view presents Māori communalism as unassimilated with European-style individualism .

[ 67 ] United States [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Cultural assimilation of Native Americans .

[ edit ] A series of efforts were made by the United States to assimilate Native Americans into mainstream European–American culture between the years of 1790 and the 1960s.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] George Washington and Henry Knox were first to propose, in the American context, the cultural assimilation of Native Americans .

[ 70 ] They formulated a policy to encourage the so-called " civilizing process ".

[ 69 ] With increased waves of immigration from Europe, there was growing public support for education to encourage a standard set of cultural values and practices to be held in common by the majority of citizens. Education was viewed as the primary method in the acculturation process for minorities.

See also [ edit ] Politics portal Society portal Acculturation Code-switching Conformity Cultural agility Cultural amalgamation Cultural appropriation Cultural genocide Cultural bereavement Cultural imperialism Deindividuation Diaspora politics Durham Report Enculturation Ethnic interest group Ethnic relations Ethnocide Forced assimilation Forced conversion Globalization Hegemony Immigrant-host model Immigration and crime Indigenization Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Language death Language shift Leitkultur Mankurt Melting Pot Nationalism Parallel society Patriotism Political correctness Racial integration Racial segregation Recuperation (politics) Religious assimilation Respectability politics Social integration Sociology of race and ethnic relations Sovietization Culture-specific: Anglicisation Arabization Christianization Croatisation Francization Germanization Hellenization Hispanicization Indianisation Islamification Italianization Japanization Javanisation Jewish assimilation Lithuanization Magyarization Malayisation Norwegianization Pashtunization Persianization Polonization Russification Romanianization Romanization Sanskritisation Serbianisation Sinicization Slavicisation Slovakization Swedification Ukrainization Thaification Turkification Vietnamization (cultural) Gerim " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Stolen Generations (of Australian Aborigines) References [ edit ] ^ Spielberger, Charles (2004).

Encyclopedia of Applied Psychology . New York: Academic Press. pp.

615 .

ISBN 9780126574104 .

^ a b c Abe, David K. (2017-07-19).

Rural Isolation and Dual Cultural Existence: The Japanese-American Kona Coffee Community . Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

17– 18.

ISBN 9783319553023 .

^ Phillip Kottak, Conrad (2007).

Window on Humanity: A Concise Introduction to General Anthropology with Powerweb . McGraw-Hill Higher Education. p. 445.

ISBN 978-0-07-325893-5 .

The exchange of cultural features that results when groups come into continuous firsthand contact; the original cultural patterns of either or both groups may be altered, but the groups remain distinct.

^ a b c d Dr. Rajashree Dasgupta, Asst. Professor.

"Cultural Assimilation" (PDF) .

Part II, Geography Honors (1+1+1 SYSTEM), Module 7, UNIT III, TOPIC 3.4 . Kolkat, India: Department of Geography, Government Girls’ General Degree College.

Cultural assimilation can happen either spontaneously or forcibly [...].

^ May, Stephen (2012) [2011].

Language and Minority Rights: Ethnicity, Nationalism and the Politics of Language (2, revised ed.). New York: Routledge. p. 346.

ISBN 9780805863079 . Retrieved 27 March 2025 .

Barry does allow that the acquisition of a new identity may not require completely dispensing with the old one. He describes this process as one of 'additive assimilation' (2001: 81). However, he tends to associate this with overtly multinational states, such as Switzerland or Britain. And certainly [...] it remains for him the exception, rather than the rule.

^ "assimilationism" .

Dictionary.com . Rock Holdings.

^ a b "assimilation | Definition, History, & Facts" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 2020-05-28 .

^ B. Brettell, Caroline (2020-02-07).

"The Political and Civic Engagement of Immigrants" .

www.amacad.org .

^ Aleksynska, Mariya (2011-09-01).

"Civic participation of immigrants in Europe: Assimilation, origin, and destination country effects" .

European Journal of Political Economy .

27 (3): 566– 585.

doi : 10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2010.12.004 .

ISSN 0176-2680 .

^ Bilecen, Başak; Vacca, Raffaele (2021-08-01).

"The isolation paradox: A comparative study of social support and health across migrant generations in the U.S." Social Science & Medicine .

283 114204.

doi : 10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114204 .

hdl : 2434/902041 .

ISSN 0277-9536 .

PMID 34271369 .

^ Carter, Prudence L. (2005-09-15).

Keepin' It Real: School Success Beyond Black and White . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199883387 .

^ Brandt, Lasse; Liu, Shuyan; Heim, Christine; Heinz, Andreas (2022-09-21).

"The effects of social isolation stress and discrimination on mental health" .

Translational Psychiatry .

12 (1): 398.

doi : 10.1038/s41398-022-02178-4 .

ISSN 2158-3188 .

PMC 9490697 .

PMID 36130935 .

^ "Cultural Assimilation" . Archived from the original on June 21, 2021.

^ a b c d Waters, Mary C.; Jiménez, Tomás R. (2005).

"Assessing Immigrant Assimilation: New Empirical and Theoretical Challenges" .

Annual Review of Sociology .

31 (1): 105– 125.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100026 .

S2CID 9815854 .

^ Clark, W. (2003).

Immigrants and the American Dream: Remaking the Middle Class . New York: Guilford Press.

ISBN 978-1-57230-880-0 .

^ Bleakley, Hoyt; Chin, Aimee (May 2004).

"Language Skills and Earnings: Evidence from Childhood Immigrants*" .

Review of Economics and Statistics .

86 (2): 481– 496.

doi : 10.1162/003465304323031067 .

ISSN 0034-6535 .

S2CID 18694108 .

^ a b Schachter, Ariela (1 October 2016). "From "Different" to "Similar": An Experimental Approach to Understanding Assimilation".

American Sociological Review .

81 (5): 981– 1013.

doi : 10.1177/0003122416659248 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

S2CID 151621019 .

^ Hainmueller, Jens; Hopkins, Daniel J. (2015).

"The Hidden American Immigration Consensus: A Conjoint Analysis of Attitudes toward Immigrants" .

American Journal of Political Science .

59 (3): 529– 548.

doi : 10.1111/ajps.12138 .

ISSN 0092-5853 .

JSTOR 24583081 .

^ a b Wang, Yikang; Li, Ting; Noltemeyer, Amity; Wang, Aimin; Zhang, Jinghua; Shaw, Kevin (2017-11-30).

"Cross-Cultural Adaptation of International College Students in the United States" .

Journal of International Students .

8 (2): 821– 842.

doi : 10.32674/jis.v8i2.116 .

ISSN 2162-3104 .

^ a b Ward, Colleen A. (2001).

The psychology of culture shock . Bochner, Stephen., Furnham, Adrian. (2nd ed.). Hove, East Sussex: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415162340 .

OCLC 44927055 .

^ Caligiuri, Paula; DuBois, Cathy L.Z.; Lundby, Kyle; Sinclair, Elizabeth A (2020-12-01).

"Fostering international students' sense of belonging and perceived social support through a semester-long experiential activity" .

Research in Comparative and International Education .

15 (4): 357– 370.

doi : 10.1177/1745499920954311 .

ISSN 1745-4999 .

S2CID 225001702 .

^ a b c Angelini, Viola; Casi, Laura; Corazzini, Luca (1 July 2015).

"Life satisfaction of immigrants: does cultural assimilation matter?" (PDF) .

Journal of Population Economics .

28 (3): 817– 844.

doi : 10.1007/s00148-015-0552-1 .

ISSN 1432-1475 .

S2CID 9417180 .

^ a b D’Souza, Clare; Halimi, Tariq; Singaraju, Stephen; Sillivan Mort, Gillian (2016-09-21). "Examination of cultural shock, intercultural sensitivity and willingness to adapt".

Education + Training .

58 (9): 906– 925.

doi : 10.1108/ET-09-2015-0087 .

ISSN 0040-0912 .

^ a b Belford, Nish (2017).

"International Students from Melbourne Describing Their Cross-Cultural Transitions Experiences: Culture Shock, Social Interaction, and Friendship Development" .

Journal of International Students .

7 (3): 499– 521.

doi : 10.32674/jis.v7i3.206 .

ISSN 2162-3104 .

^ "Assimilation facts, information, pictures | Encyclopedia.com articles about Assimilation" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2016-11-11 .

^ Anderson, Shannon Latkin (2016).

Immigration, Assimilation, and the Cultural Construction of American National Identity . New York: Routledge. p. 135.

ISBN 9781138100411 .

^ Spickard, Paul (2007).

Almost All Aliens: Immigration, Race, and Colonialism in American History and Identity . New York: Routledge. pp.

50– 51.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "An Overview of the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade" .

Brewminate: A Bold Blend of News and Ideas . 2018-07-25 . Retrieved 2022-04-14 .

^ "A Brief History of U.S. Immigration Policy from the Colonial Period to the Present Day" .

www.cato.org . Retrieved 2022-04-14 .

^ "Chapter 5: U.S. Foreign-Born Population Trends" .

Pew Research Center's Hispanic Trends Project . 2015-09-28 . Retrieved 2022-04-14 .

^ "Assimilation Today" .

Center for American Progress . September 2010 . Retrieved 2022-04-14 .

^ a b Griffith, Andrew (2017-10-31).

"Building a Mosaic: The Evolution of Canada's Approach to Immigrant Integration" .

migrationpolicy.org . Retrieved 2018-12-10 .

^ Government of Canada, Statistics Canada (2017-10-25).

"Immigrant population in Canada, 2016 Census of Population" .

www150.statcan.gc.ca . Retrieved 2018-12-10 .

^ "Canadian Multiculturalism" .

lop.parl.ca . Retrieved 2019-11-16 .

^ a b "Indian Embassy in Dublin Issues Security Advisory After Surge in Brutal Racist Attacks on Nationals" .

The Logical Indian . 2025-08-02.

^ a b "Attack on Indians in Ireland: Why are migrants face rising tide of racial violence?" .

BusinessToday . 2025-08-08.

^ a b c d "A White Australia" .

Australians Together . Retrieved 10 August 2020 .

^ Australian Law Reform Commission (18 August 2010). "3. Aboriginal Societies: The Experience of Contact: Changing Policies Towards Aboriginal People".

Recognition of Aboriginal Customary Laws . ALRC Report 31 . Retrieved 10 August 2020 .

^ Northern Territory Administration. Welfare Branch (1959).

"Annual Report 1958/59" (PDF) . Retrieved 10 August 2020 – via AIATSIS.

^ Hasluck, Paul (1961).

"The Policy of Assimilation: Decisions of Commonwealth and Statement Ministers at the Native Welfare Conference, Canberra, January 26th and 27th, 1961" (PDF) . Canberra: Commonwealth Government Printer – via AIATSIS Library.

^ PM Explains Policy on Aborigines , The Canberra Times, 8 Sep 1967, p.8 ^ Address by John Gorton at the Conference of Commonwealth and State Ministers Responsible for Aboriginal Affairs - 12 July 1968 ; pmc.gov.au ^ "Brazil's new president makes it harder to define Indigenous lands" .

Global News . January 2, 2019.

^ "President Bolsonaro 'declares war on Brazil's Indigenous peoples – Survival responds" .

Survival International . January 3, 2019.

^ "Honouring the Truth, Reconciling for the Future: Summary of the Final Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2018.

^ The Central European Observer – Joseph Hanč, F. Souček, Aleš Brož, Jaroslav Kraus, Stanislav V. Klíma – Google Books . December 1933 . Retrieved 2024-07-09 .

^ Kostelj, Ivica (1998).

Hrvatski arkivi: Zatvorski spisi od 1000. do 1500. godine [ Croatian archives: Prison records from the years 1000 to 1500 ] (in Croatian). Zagreb, Croatia (published 24 October 1998).

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Lupaș, Ioan (1992).

The Hungarian Policy of Magyarization . Romanian Cultural Foundation.

^ "The American Yawp" . 22 May 2013.

^ "The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492" .

^ Gabbert, Wolfgang (2012). "The longue durée of Colonial Violence in Latin America".

Historical Social Research / Historische Sozialforschung .

37 (3 (141)): 254– 275.

ISSN 0172-6404 .

JSTOR 41636608 .

^ "The Spanish conquistadores and colonial empire (article)" .

Khan Academy . Retrieved 2020-05-28 .

^ New Zealand. Department of Statistics (1962).

Population Census, 1961 . Vol. 10. p. 23 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

Full-blood Maoris totalled 103,987 [...], or 62 2 per cent of the Maori population as it is defined for the purposes of the census.

^ Thomason, Sarah Grey (2001).

Language Contact . Reference, Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects Series. Georgetown University Press. p. 135.

ISBN 9780878408542 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

It is possible that, although older English loanwords were nativized into Maori phonology, newer loanwords are no longer being nativized, with the eventual result being a changed Maori phonological system.

^ Hoskins, Te Kawehau; McKinley, Elizabeth (2015). "New Zealand: Maori Education in Aotearoa". In Crossley, Michael; Hancock, Greg; Sprague, Terra (eds.).

Education in Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific . Education Around the World. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 159.

ISBN 9781472503589 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

The gaping disparity in outcomes between indigenous Māori students and Pākehā (New Zealand Europeans) has its genesis in the colonial provision of education for Māori driven by a social policy of cultural assimilation and social stratification for over 100 years.

^ Hoskins, Te Kawehau; McKinley, Elizabeth (2015). "New Zealand: Maori Education in Aotearoa". In Crossley, Michael; Hancock, Greg; Sprague, Terra (eds.).

Education in Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific . Education Around the World. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 159.

ISBN 9781472503589 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

From the 1970s, Maori activism across the social field has led to [...] a formal social policy of biculturalism and iwi (tribes) positioned as partners with the state.

^ Neich, Roger (2001).

Carved Histories: Rotorua Ngati Tarawhai Woodcarving . Auckland: Auckland University Press. p. 147.

ISBN 9781869402570 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

The change from stone to metal tools occurred at different times in different areas of the North Island, depending on the amount of contact with European visitors. In the coastal areas this happened very early, starting with the metal obtained from Captain Cook's men and other eighteenth-century explorers such as Jean-Francois-Marie de Durville and Marion du Fresne, followed very soon after by the sealers and whalers. Away from the coasts, the first metals arrived later, in the early nineteenth century, usually as trade items brought by missionary explorers.

^ Smith, Ian (2019). "Sojourning settlers".

Pākehā Settlements in a Māori World: New Zealand Archaeology 1769–1860 . Wellington: Bridget Williams Books (published 2020). p. 129.

ISBN 9780947492496 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

It appears that firearms were first acquired by Māori somewhere in the northern North Island about 1806 or 1807.

^ Harris, Warwick; Kapoor, Promila, eds. (1988).

Nga Mahi Maori O Te Wao Nui a Tane: Contributions to an International Workshop on Ethnobotany, Te Rehua Marae, Christchurch, New Zealand, 22–26 February 1988 . Botany Division, DSIR. p. 181.

ISBN 9780477025799 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

The first record of potatoes being grown in New Zealand is dated 1769. [...] The Maori community were quick to see the advantages the potato had over the kumara: its greater cold tolerance, better storage qualities and higher yields.

^ McKenzie, Donald Francis (1985).

Oral Culture, Literacy & Print in early New Zealand: The Treaty of Waitangi . Wellington: Victoria University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 9780864730435 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

In the early 1830s we see the hesitant beginnings of letter writing in written requests for baptism [...]. The effective use of letters for political purposes was many years away. Nor did printing of itself become a re-expressive tool for the Maori until the late 1850s.

^ Crosby, Alfred W.

(1986).

Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900–1900 . Studies in Environment and History (2 ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (published 2004). p. 246.

ISBN 9781107394049 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

There were no Maori conversions up to 1825, and only a few - usually of the moribund - between 1825 and 1830.

^ King, Michael (2003).

The Penguin History of New Zealand . ReadHowYouWant.com (published 2011). p. 286.

ISBN 9781459623750 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

Traditional Maori clothing had gone out of general use by the 1850s (and much earlier in communities associated with whaling and trading and those close to European settlements), though it would still be donned, especially cloaks, for ceremonial occasions and cultural performances. As the European settler population had begun to swell in the 1840s, so European clothes, new and second-hand, had become widely available along with blankets, which had the advantage of being usable as clothing and/or bedding.

^ Petrie, Hazel (2015).

Outcasts of the Gods? The Struggle over Slavery in Maori New Zealand . Auckland University Press.

ISBN 9781775587859 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ Stoddart-Smith, Carrie (2016). "Radical kaupapa Maori politics". In Godfery, Morgan (ed.).

The Interregnum: Rethinking New Zealand . BWB Texts. Vol. 39. Bridget Williams Books. pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 9780947492656 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

[...] different western ideas may complement the diverse perspectives of kaupapa Māori frameworks, but it would be an error to construe such ideas as essential to them. Many Māori drive a socialist agenda, for example, and although there are commonalities with some aspects of tikanga Māori, socialism as a political philosophy should not be seen to be implied by Māori narratives.

^ Buick-Constable, John (2005). "Indigenous State Relations in Aotearoa/New Zealand: A Contractual Approach to Self-determination". In Hocking, Barbara Ann (ed.).

Unfinished Constitutional Business?: Rethinking Indigenous Self-determination . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press. p. 120.

ISBN 9780855754662 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

From the 1970s, [...] in the wake of a changed international climate of human rights and anti-colonialism, Indigenous peoples around the world sought a reinvigoration of their Indigenous identity and a renewal of their Indigenous self-determination. [...] Largely in tandem with these trends has been a renaissance of the theory and practice of contractualism [...]. The history of Maori-Crown relations in Aotearoa/New Zealand is exemplary of this contractual approach in the struggles of Maori for self-determination historically and contemporaneously.

^ O'Regan, Tipene (2014).

New Myths and Old Politics: The Waitangi Tribunal and the Challenge of Tradition . BWB Texts. Vol. 17. Wellington: Bridget Williams Books.

ISBN 9781927131992 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

[...] my Beaglehole Memorial Lecture of 1991 [...] was delivered at a time when hearings of the [Waitangi] Tribunal were becoming a battleground [...]. Māoridom itself was experiencing a remarkable efflorescence of freshly reconstructed group identities and New Age-style incorporations into Māori ethnic identity. The Waitaha movement emanating from within contemporary Ngāi Tahu was one of these.

^ For example: Ward, Alan (1974). "Myths and Realities".

A Show of Justice: Racial 'amalgamation' in Nineteenth Century New Zealand . Auckland University Press (published 2013).

ISBN 9781869405717 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

It is often said that Western individualism is in conflict with Polynesian communalism [...]. It is hardly surprising that today Maori attitudes to the law appear more ambivalent than they did in the 1870s and 1880s.

^ Hoxie, Frederick (1984).

A Final Promise: The Campaign to Assimilate the Indians, 1880–1920 . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

^ a b lon, Peter. " "The Reform Begins" ".

Bill Nye the Science Guy . p. 201.

ISBN 0-9650631-0-7 {{ isbn }} : Check isbn value: checksum ( help ) .

^ Perdue, Theda (2003). "Chapter 2 "Both White and Red" ".

Mixed Blood Indians: Racial Construction in the Early South . The University of Georgia Press. p. 51.

ISBN 0-8203-2731-X .

Bibliography [ edit ] Alba, Richard D.

; Nee, Victor (2003).

Remaking the American Mainstream. Assimilation and Contemporary Immigration . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-01813-6 .

Armitage, Andrew (1995).

Comparing the Policy of Aboriginal Assimilation: Australia, Canada, and New Zealand . UBC Press.

ISBN 978-0-7748-0459-2 .

Crispino, James A. (1980).

The Assimilation of Ethnic Groups: The Italian Case . Center for Migration Studies.

ISBN 978-0-913256-39-8 .

Drachsler, Julius (1920).

Democracy and Assimilation: The Blending of Immigrant Heritages in America . Macmillan.

Gordon, Milton M. Daedalus Yetman (ed.). "Assimilation in America: Theory and Reality".

Journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

90 (2). Boston, Mass.: 245– 258.

Gordon, Milton M. (1964).

Assimilation in American Life: The Role of Race, Religion, and National Origins . New York: Oxford University Press.

Grauman, Robert A. (1951).

Methods of studying the cultural assimilation of immigrants . University of London.

Kazal, R. A. (April 1995). "Revisiting Assimilation".

American Historical Society .

100 .

Murguía, Edward (1975).

Assimilation, Colonialism, and the Mexican American People . University of Texas at Austin: Center for Mexican American Studies.

ISBN 978-0-292-77520-6 .

Zhou, Min (Winter 1997). "Segmented Assimilation: Issues, Controversies, and Recent Research on the New Second Generation".

International Migration Review .

31 (4, Special Issue: Immigrant Adaptation and Native–Born Responses in the Making of Americans): 975– 1008.

doi : 10.1177/019791839703100408 .

PMID 12293212 .

S2CID 20588618 .

Zhou, Min ; Carl L. Bankston (1998).

Growing Up American: How Vietnamese Children Adapt to Life in the United States . Vol. III. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

ISBN 978-0-87154-995-2 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Cultural assimilation .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cultural assimilation .

Asian-Nation: Asian American Assimilation & Ethnic Identity From Paris to Cairo: Resistance of the Unacculturated Unity and Diversity in Multicultural Societies v t e Cultural assimilation Africanisation Albanisation Americanisation immigrants names Native Americans Anglicisation Arabisation Armenians Berbers Blacks Jews Araucanisation Azerbaijanisation surnames Talysh Belarusisation soft Bengalisation placenames Bosniakisation Bulgarisation Canadianisation Celticisation Chilenisation Colombianisation Creolisation Croatisation Czechisation Dutchification Estonianisation Europeanisation Westernisation Finnicisation Francisation Brussels Gaelicisation Georgification Germanisation Hawaiianisation Hellenisation Hispanicisation or Castilianisation Filipinos Indianisation placenames Indigenisation Indonesation Israelisation names Italianisation Japanisation Japanification Javanisation Jewish assimilation Kazakhisation Koreanisation Kurdification Latvianization Lithuanisation Magyarisation or Hungarianisation Macedonianisation Malayisation Mexicanisation Mongolisation Montenegrinisation Norwegianisation Pakistanisation Pashtunisation Northern Afghanistan Persianisation societies Polonisation Romanianisation Romanisation or Latinisation names Russification Finland Saffronisation Sanskritisation Serbianisation Sinhalisation Sinicisation Manchus Tibet Vietnam Slavicisation Slovakisation Sovietisation Swahilisation Swedification Talibanisation Taiwanisation Tamilisation Thaification Turkification placenames surnames Turkmenisation Ukrainisation Uzbekisation Vietnamisation Westernisation Wolofisation Zairianisation Assimilation by religions Christianisation Hinduisation Islamisation Judaisation Assimilation by writings Cyrillisation Soviet Union Romanisation of the writings Soviet Union Opposite trends De-arabisation De-communisation De-stalinisation Dehellenization of Christianity De-nazification De-russification Korenizatsiia Latinisation Ukraine De-sinicisation Negation of the Diaspora Vergangenheitsbewältigung Related concepts Cultural genocide Cultural globalisation Cultural imperialism Dominant culture Forced assimilation Forced religious conversion Globalisation Identity politics Internal colonialism Jewish assimilation Language shift Melting pot Monoculturalism v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category v t e Ethnicity Concepts Clan Ethnic group Ethnographic group Ethnolinguistic group Ethnonational group Ethnoreligious group Ethnographic realism Diaspora Immigration / Emigration Hyphenated ethnicity Indigenous peoples In-group and out-groups Meta-ethnicity Metroethnicity Minority group Influence Monoethnicity Nation Nationality Panethnicity Polyethnicity Population Race Supraethnicity Symbolic ethnicity Tribe Ethnology Anthropology Ethnic studies Ethnoarchaeology Ethnobiology Ethnobotany Ethnoecology Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnocinema Ethnogeology Ethnography Autoethnography Clinical Critical Institutional Netnography Online Person-centered Salvage Transidioethnography Video Ethnohistory Ethnolinguistics Ethnology Ethnomathematics Ethnostatistics Ethnomedicine Ethnomethodology Ethnomuseology Ethnomusicology Ethnophilosophy Ethnopoetics Ethnopsychopharmacology Ethnoscience Ethnosemiotics Ethnotaxonomy Groups by region World Contemporary ethnic groups Countries by ethnic groups Africa Americas Indigenous Canada Greenland Mexico United States Caribbean Central America South America Asia Central Asia East Asia Northern Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Australia Aboriginal groups Torres Strait Islanders Europe Oceania Indigenous European Identity and ethnogenesis Cross-race effect Cultural assimilation Cultural identity Demonym Development Endonym Ethnarch Ethnic flag Ethnic option Ethnic origin Ethnic religion Ethnicity in censuses Ethnofiction Ethnonym Folk religion Historical Imagined community Kinship Legendary progenitor Linguistic homeland Mores Mythomoteur Nation-building Nation state National language National myth Origin myth Pantribal sodality Statistext Tribal name Tribalism Detribalization Neotribalism White ethnic Multiethnic society Consociationalism Cultural appropriation Diaspora politics Dominant minority Ethnic democracy Ethnic enclave Ethnic interest group Ethnic majority Ethnic media Ethnic nationalism Ethnic pornography Ethnic theme park Ethnoburb Ethnocracy Ethnographic film Ethnographic village Ethnopluralism Indigenous rights Middleman minority Minority rights Model minority Model minority myth Multinational state Ideology and ethnic conflict Allophilia Ethnic bioweapon Ethnic cleansing Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnic party Ethnic penalty Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Ethnic violence Ethnic riots Ethnocentrism Ethnocide Ethnofuturism Ethnosymbolism Indigenism Indigenization Nativism Remigration Separatist movements Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenophobia Related Minzu (anthropology) v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_assimilation&oldid=1305583181 " Categories : Cultural assimilation Cultural concepts Ethnicity in politics Majority–minority relations Sociology of immigration Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) Pages with ISBN errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with excerpts All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2025 Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2025 All articles with style issues Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 23:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural assimilation 64 languages Add topic

