Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 List of Registraries 2 Subordinate posts 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Registrary 1 language বাংলা Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Registrary is the senior administrative officer of the University of Cambridge . The term is unique to Cambridge, [ 1 ] and uses an archaic spelling. Most universities in the United Kingdom and in North America have administrative offices entitled " registrar " or "the registry", although typically with substantially less official responsibility than the Cambridge post.

At Cambridge, the Registrary is also Secretary to the University Council.  As the head of the university's Unified Administrative Service, the Registrary is responsible for the central management and the non-academic services of the university.  The Registrary has control of the University Chest (formerly a physical chest in which the funds of the university were held secure, now a metaphor for the university's bank accounts ). The actual chest is still kept in the Registrary's office. It is over 600 years old and is locked with 17 locks. The previous chest was burned in the Cambridge Peasants' Revolt of 1381. Until the 14th century, the university's books were also kept in the chest.

[ 1 ] The office of the Registrary was established in 1506, to compile and maintain the records of the university.  The office has been held by only 26 persons in continuous succession since that date. Many early registraries held, or had held, the office of Esquire Bedell . The current Registrary is Emma Rampton, who took office in October 2017.

[ 2 ] List of Registraries [ edit ] 1506 Robert Hobbs (Hobys) 1543 John Mere 1558 Matthew Stokys (Stokes) 1591 Thomas Smith 1600 James Tabor 1645 Matthew Whinn 1683 James Halman 1701 Robert Grove 1725 Lancelot Newton 1734 John Taylor 1751 Lynford Caryl 1758 Henry Hubbard 1778 George Borlase 1809 William Augustus Pemberton 1816 William Hustler 1832 Joseph Romilly 1862 Henry Richards Luard 1891 John Willis Clark 1910 John Neville Keynes 1925 Ernest Harrison 1943 Walter Wyatt Grave 1953 Robert Mantle Rattenbury 1969 Roderick Ewen Macpherson 1983 Stephen George Fleet 1997 Timothy John Mead 2007 Jonathan Nicholls 2017 Emma Rampton Subordinate posts [ edit ] The office of Assistant Registrary was established in 1885, and was until 1926 was a fixed term appointment of three years. A Second Assistant Registrary was added in 1920, and a Third Assistant in 1921. In April 1961 the posts were renamed as Deputy Registrary and Deputy Secretary General, Senior Assistant Registrary, and Assistant Registrary.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Registrar of the University of Oxford References [ edit ] ^ a b "500th birthday for Registrary" .

University of Cambridge . 24 April 2006 . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

^ "The Registrary - Ms Emma Rampton" .

University of Cambridge . Retrieved 20 February 2019 .

^ "Lists of Officeholders" .

Cambridge University Library . 2004 . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

External links [ edit ] "Welcome to the Registrary" .

University of Cambridge . 2014 . Retrieved 7 October 2014 .

v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Registrary&oldid=1133785144 " Categories : 1506 establishments in England Registraries of the University of Cambridge This page was last edited on 15 January 2023, at 14:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Registrary 1 language Add topic

