Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Various definitions 3 Circuits 4 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 4.1 Domestic and commercial buildings 4.2 Automotive 4.3 Telecommunication 4.4 High-voltage power transmission 4.5 Other 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Direct current 87 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray Wolof 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unidirectional flow of electric charge This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Direct current" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "DC power" redirects here. For the association football club, see DC Power FC .

Direct current (DC) (red line). The vertical axis shows current or voltage and the horizontal 't' axis measures time and shows the zero value.

Direct current ( DC ) is one-directional flow of electric charge . An electrochemical cell is a prime example of  DC power. Direct current may flow through a conductor such as a wire, but can also flow through semiconductors , insulators , or even through a vacuum as in electron or ion beams . The electric current flows in a constant direction, distinguishing it from alternating current (AC). A term formerly used for this type of current was galvanic current .

[ 1 ] The abbreviations AC and DC are often used to mean simply alternating and direct , as when they modify current or voltage .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Direct current may be converted from an alternating current supply by use of a rectifier , which contains electronic elements (usually) or electromechanical elements (historically) that allow current to flow only in one direction. Direct current may be converted into alternating current via an inverter .

Direct current has many uses, from the charging of batteries to large power supplies for electronic systems, motors, and more. Very large quantities of electrical energy provided via direct-current  are used in smelting of aluminum and other electrochemical processes. It is also used for some railways , especially in urban areas .

High-voltage direct current is used to transmit large amounts of power from remote generation sites or to interconnect alternating current power grids.

Electromagnetism Electricity Magnetism Optics History Computational Textbooks Phenomena Electrostatics Charge density Conductor Coulomb law Electret Electric charge Electric dipole Electric field Electric flux Electric potential Electrostatic discharge Electrostatic induction Gauss's law Insulator Permittivity Polarization Potential energy Static electricity Triboelectricity Magnetostatics Ampère's law Biot–Savart law Gauss's law for magnetism Magnetic dipole Magnetic field Magnetic flux Magnetic scalar potential Magnetic vector potential Magnetization Permeability Right-hand rule Electrodynamics Bremsstrahlung Cyclotron radiation Displacement current Eddy current Electromagnetic field Electromagnetic induction Electromagnetic pulse Electromagnetic radiation Faraday's law Jefimenko equations Larmor formula Lenz's law Liénard–Wiechert potential London equations Lorentz force Maxwell's equations Maxwell tensor Poynting vector Synchrotron radiation Electrical network Alternating current Capacitance Current density Direct current Electric current Electric power Electrolysis Electromotive force Impedance Inductance Joule heating Kirchhoff's laws Network analysis Ohm's law Parallel circuit Resistance Resonant cavities Series circuit Voltage Watt Waveguides Magnetic circuit AC motor DC motor Electric machine Electric motor Gyrator–capacitor Induction motor Linear motor Magnetomotive force Permeance Reluctance (complex) Reluctance (real) Rotor Stator Transformer Covariant formulation Electromagnetic tensor Electromagnetism and special relativity Four-current Four-potential Mathematical descriptions Maxwell equations in curved spacetime Relativistic electromagnetism Stress–energy tensor Scientists Ampère Biot Coulomb Davy Einstein Faraday Fizeau Gauss Heaviside Helmholtz Henry Hertz Hopkinson Jefimenko Joule Kelvin Kirchhoff Larmor Lenz Liénard Lorentz Maxwell Neumann Ohm Ørsted Poisson Poynting Ritchie Savart Singer Steinmetz Tesla Thomson Volta Weber Wiechert v t e History [ edit ] Further information: History of electric power transmission Brush Electric Company's central power plant with dynamos generating direct current to power arc lamps for public lighting in New York. Beginning operation in December 1880 at 133 West Twenty-Fifth Street, the high voltages it operated at allowed it to power a 2-mile (3.2 km) long circuit.

[ 4 ] Direct current was produced in 1800 by Italian physicist Alessandro Volta 's battery, his Voltaic pile .

[ 5 ] The nature of how current flowed was not yet understood. French physicist André-Marie Ampère conjectured that current travelled in one direction from positive to negative.

[ 6 ] When French instrument maker Hippolyte Pixii built the first dynamo electric generator in 1832, he found that as the magnet used passed the loops of wire each half turn, it caused the flow of electricity to reverse, generating an alternating current .

[ 7 ] At Ampère's suggestion, Pixii later added a commutator , a type of "switch" where contacts on the shaft work with "brush" contacts to produce direct current.

The late 1870s and early 1880s saw electricity starting to be generated at power stations . These were initially set up to power arc lighting (a popular type of street lighting) running on very high voltage (usually higher than 3,000 volts) direct current or alternating current.

[ 8 ] This was followed by the widespread use of low voltage direct current for indoor electric lighting in business and homes after inventor Thomas Edison launched his incandescent bulb based electric " utility " in 1882. Because of the significant advantages of alternating current over direct current in using transformers to raise and lower voltages to allow much longer transmission distances, direct current was replaced over the next few decades by alternating current in power delivery. In the mid-1950s, high-voltage direct current transmission was developed, and is now an option instead of long-distance high voltage alternating current systems. For long distance undersea cables (e.g. between countries, such as NorNed ), this DC option is the only technically feasible option. For applications requiring direct current, such as third rail power systems, alternating current is distributed to a substation, which utilizes a rectifier to convert the power to direct current.

Various definitions [ edit ] Types of direct current The term DC is used to refer to power systems that use only one electrical polarity of voltage or current, and to refer to the constant, zero-frequency, or slowly varying local mean value of a voltage or current.

[ 9 ] For example, the voltage across a DC voltage source is constant as is the current through a direct current source . The DC solution of an electric circuit is the solution where all voltages and currents are constant. Any stationary voltage or current waveform can be decomposed into a sum of a DC component and a zero-mean time-varying AC component; the DC component is defined to be the expected value, or the average value of the voltage or current over all time.

Although DC stands for "direct current", DC often refers to "constant polarity". Under this definition, DC voltages can vary in time, as seen in the raw output of a rectifier or the fluctuating voice signal on a telephone line.

Some forms of DC (such as that produced by a voltage regulator ) have almost no variations in voltage , but may still have variations in output power and current.

Circuits [ edit ] A direct current circuit is an electrical circuit that consists of any combination of constant voltage sources, constant current sources, and resistors . In this case, the circuit voltages and currents are independent of time. A particular circuit voltage or current does not depend on the past value of any circuit voltage or current. This implies that the system of equations that represent a DC circuit do not involve integrals or derivatives with respect to time.

If a capacitor or inductor is added to a DC circuit, the resulting circuit is not, strictly speaking, a DC circuit. However, most such circuits have a DC solution. This solution gives the circuit voltages and currents when the circuit is in DC steady state . Such a circuit is represented by a system of differential equations . The solution to these equations usually contain a time varying or transient part as well as constant or steady state part. It is this steady state part that is the DC solution. There are some circuits that do not have a DC solution. Two simple examples are a constant current source connected to a capacitor and a constant voltage source connected to an inductor.

In electronics, it is common to refer to a circuit that is powered by a DC voltage source such as a battery or the output of a DC power supply as a DC circuit even though what is meant is that the circuit is DC powered.

In a DC circuit, a power source (e.g. a battery, capacitor, etc.) has a positive and negative terminal, and likewise, the load also has a positive and negative terminal. To complete the circuit, positive charges need to flow from the power source to the load. The charges will then return to the negative terminal of the load, which will then flow back to the negative terminal of the battery, completing the circuit. If either the positive or negative terminal is disconnected, the circuit will not be complete and the charges will not flow.

In some DC circuit applications, polarity does not matter, which means you can connect positive and negative backwards and the circuit will still be complete and the load will still function normally. However, in most DC applications, polarity does matter, and connecting the circuit backwards will result in the load not working properly.

Applications [ edit ] Domestic and commercial buildings [ edit ] This symbol which can be represented with Unicode character U+ 2393 (⎓) is found on many electronic devices that either require or produce direct current.

DC is commonly found in many extra-low voltage applications and some low-voltage applications, especially where these are powered by batteries or solar power systems (since both can produce only DC).

Most electronic circuits or devices require a DC power supply .

Domestic DC installations usually have different types of sockets , connectors , switches , and fixtures from those suitable for alternating current. This is mostly due to the lower voltages used, resulting in higher currents to produce the same amount of power .

It is usually important with a DC appliance to observe polarity, unless the device has a diode bridge to correct for this.

Automotive [ edit ] Most automotive applications use DC. An automotive battery provides power for engine starting, lighting, the ignition system, the climate controls, and the infotainment system among others.  The alternator is an AC device which uses a rectifier to produce DC for battery charging.  Most highway passenger vehicles use nominally  12 V systems.  Many heavy trucks, farm equipment,  or earth moving equipment with Diesel engines use 24 volt systems. In some older vehicles, 6 V was used, such as in the original classic Volkswagen Beetle . At one point a 42 V electrical system was considered for automobiles, but this found little use. To save weight and wire, often the metal frame of the vehicle is connected to one pole of the battery and used as the return conductor in a circuit.  Often the negative pole is the chassis "ground" connection, but positive ground may be used in some wheeled or marine vehicles.
In a battery electric vehicle , there are usually two separate DC systems. The "low voltage" DC system typically operates at 12V, and serves the same purpose as in an internal combustion engine vehicle.

[ 10 ] The "high voltage" system operates at 300-400V (depending on the vehicle), and provides the power for the traction motors .

[ 11 ] Increasing the voltage for the traction motors reduces the current flowing through them, increasing efficiency.

Telecommunication [ edit ] Telephone exchange communication equipment uses standard −48 V DC power supply. The negative polarity is achieved by grounding the positive terminal of power supply system and the battery bank. This is done to prevent electrolysis depositions. Telephone installations have a battery system to ensure power is maintained for subscriber lines during power interruptions.

Other devices may be powered from the telecommunications DC system using a DC-DC converter to provide any convenient voltage.

Many telephones connect to a twisted pair of wires, and use a bias tee to internally separate the AC component of the voltage between the two wires (the audio signal) from the DC component of the voltage between the two wires (used to power the phone).

High-voltage power transmission [ edit ] Main article: High-voltage direct current High-voltage direct current (HVDC) electric power transmission systems use DC for the bulk transmission of electrical power, in contrast with the more common alternating current systems. For long-distance transmission, HVDC systems may be less expensive and suffer lower electrical losses.

Other [ edit ] Applications using fuel cells (mixing hydrogen and oxygen together with a catalyst to produce electricity and water as byproducts) also produce only DC.

Light aircraft electrical systems are typically 12 V or 24 V DC similar to automobiles.

See also [ edit ] Electronics portal Energy portal CCS DC bias Electric current High-voltage direct current power transmission.

Microgrid Neutral direct-current telegraph system Polarity symbols Solar panel State of health State of charge Smart battery Battery management system References [ edit ] ^ Andrew J. Robinson, Lynn Snyder-Mackler (2007).

Clinical Electrophysiology: Electrotherapy and Electrophysiologic Testing (3rd ed.).

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins . p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-7817-4484-3 .

^ N. N. Bhargava and D. C. Kulshrishtha (1984).

Basic Electronics & Linear Circuits .

Tata McGraw-Hill Education . p. 90.

ISBN 978-0-07-451965-3 .

^ National Electric Light Association (1915).

Electrical meterman's handbook . Trow Press. p. 81.

^ Mel Gorman.

"Charles F. Brush and the First Public Electric Street Lighting System in America" .

Ohio History .

70 .

Kent State University Press : 142.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Alessandro Giuseppe Antonio Anastasio Volta – grants.hhp.coe.uh.edu" . Archived from the original on 2017-08-28 . Retrieved 2017-05-29 .

^ Breithaupt, Jim (2010).

Physics . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 175.

ISBN 9780230231924 .

^ "Pixii Machine invented by Hippolyte Pixii, National High Magnetic Field Laboratory" . Archived from the original on 2008-09-07 . Retrieved 2008-06-12 .

^ "The First Form of Electric Light History of the Carbon Arc Lamp (1800–1980s)" .

^ Roger S. Amos, Geoffrey William Arnold Dummer (1999).

Newnes Dictionary of Electronic (4th ed.). Newnes. p. 83.

ISBN 0-7506-4331-5 .

^ Pradhan, S. K.; Chakraborty, B. (2022-07-01).

"Battery management strategies: An essential review for battery state of health monitoring techniques" .

Journal of Energy Storage .

51 : 104427.

Bibcode : 2022JEnSt..5104427P .

doi : 10.1016/j.est.2022.104427 .

ISSN 2352-152X .

^ Arcus, Christopher (8 July 2018).

"Tesla Model 3 & Chevy Bolt Battery Packs Examined" .

CleanTechnica . Retrieved 6 June 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Look up direct current in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Direct current at Wikimedia Commons AC/DC: What's the Difference?

Archived 2017-08-26 at the Wayback Machine – PBS Learning Media DC And AC Supplies [ usurped ] – ITACA v t e Electric machines AC - Alternating current DC - Direct current PM - Permanent magnet Components Rotor Stator Winding Armature Field coil Damper winding Slip ring Commutator Brush Generators AC generator Alternator Flux switching alternator Linear alternator PM synchronous generator Magneto Induction generator Doubly fed induction generator Single-phase generator DC generator Dynamo Homopolar generator Motors AC motor Induction motor Shaded-pole motor Dahlander pole changing motor Wound rotor motor Linear induction motor Doubly fed electric machine Synchronous motor Repulsion motor DC motor Brushed DC electric motor Brushless DC electric motor Stepper motor Homopolar motor / Unipolar motor Universal motor Reluctance motor Switched reluctance motor Synchronous reluctance motor Axial flux motor Radial flux motor PM motor Dual-rotor motor Linear motor Ball bearing motor Electrostatic motor Piezoelectric motor Ultrasonic motor Servomotor Traction motor TEFC motor Motor controllers and other accessories AC-to-AC converter Cycloconverter Amplidyne Drives Variable-frequency drive Direct torque control Vector control Metadyne Motor soft starter Ward Leonard control Braking chopper DC injection brake module History, education, recreational use Timeline of the electric motor Barlow's wheel Lynch motor Mendocino motor Mouse mill motor Experimental, futuristic Coilgun Railgun Superconducting machine Related topics Blocked-rotor test Circle diagram Coil winding technology Electromagnetism Open-circuit test Open-loop controller Power-to-weight ratio Two-phase system Inchworm motor Starter Voltage controller People Arago Barlow Botto Davenport Davidson Dolivo-Dobrovolsky Faraday Ferraris Gramme Henry Jacobi Jedlik Lenz Maxwell Ørsted Park Pacinotti Pixii Saxton Siemens Sprague Steinmetz Sturgeon Tesla v t e DC power delivery USB based Common external power supply (for mobile phones) USB Power Delivery PoweredUSB Not USB based AC adapter Computer power supply ( ATX ) Universal Power Adapter for Mobile Devices (IEEE P1823) DC Power supply for notebook computer ( IEC 62700 ) Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Czech Republic Israel 2 Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐f9d2k
Cached time: 20250812013751
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.542 seconds
Real time usage: 0.660 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2028/1000000
Revision size: 16749/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 94494/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3080/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 76679/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.350/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9754152/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  541.966      1 -total
 29.44%  159.562      2 Template:Reflist
 19.11%  103.567      5 Template:Cite_book
 16.86%   91.380      1 Template:Electromagnetism
 16.51%   89.462      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.63%   52.198      1 Template:Short_description
  8.85%   47.988      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.24%   44.648      1 Template:Ambox
  5.80%   31.453      2 Template:Navbox
  5.80%   31.437      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47713:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812013751 and revision id 1302302838. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Direct_current&oldid=1302302838 " Categories : Electrical engineering Electric current Electric power Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2009 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 15:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Direct current 87 languages Add topic

