Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Mission 3 Short-term goals Toggle Short-term goals subsection 3.1 Complete adoption of the UPLR 3.2 Amendment of the FPLA 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents US Metric Association Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°29′22″N 104°54′59″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.4895°N 104.9164°W ﻿ / 40.4895; -104.9164 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-profit organisation based in Windsor, Colorado, USA This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article reads like a press release or a news article and may be largely based on routine coverage .

Please help improve it by adding independent secondary sources.

( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "US Metric Association" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) US Metric Association US Metric Association logo Abbreviation USMA Named after The metric system (now SI ) Formation 27 December 1916 ; 108 years ago ( 1916-12-27 ) Founder A group of businessmen, educators, and consumers.

[ 1 ] Founded at Columbia University , New York Type 501(c)(3) Legal status Nonprofit organization Purpose Advocate completing the US conversion to the International System of Units (SI) Headquarters Windsor, Colorado , United States Location CO 80550-0471 Coordinates 40°29′22″N 104°54′59″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.4895°N 104.9164°W ﻿ / 40.4895; -104.9164 Products " Metric Today ", the USMA newsletter Metric supplies and training aids Educational materials and guides to the Use of the Metric System Metrication resources for businesses Services Information campaigns Methods Volunteer-supported Fields Everyday life , Business , Science Affiliations American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Website usma .org Formerly called American Metric Association The US Metric Association ( USMA ), based in Windsor , Colorado , is a non-profit organization that advocates for total conversion of the United States to the International System of Units (SI). Founded on 27 December 1916 at Columbia University in New York City , it was originally called the American Metric Association .

[ 1 ] The USMA publishes a bi-monthly newsletter for its members on the state of the metric system in the United States called Metric Today .

Background [ edit ] The Metric Act of 1866 declared the metric system to be "lawful throughout the United States of America" and in all business dealings and court proceedings, in essence allowing metric units to be used in an official capacity throughout America.

At an international commercial congress, the Treaty of the Meter, also known as the Metre Convention ( Convention du Mètre ) of 1875, was signed by 17 countries, including the US, making the metric system the international system of weights and measures. Note that this was a meeting of international states to facilitate commerce. This treaty, then, falls under the overview of the United States Department of State , which has devolved oversight to the United States Department of Commerce .

The Mendenhall Order of 1893 scrapped the previously used standards and definitions for the yard, pound, gallon, and bushel. It adopted the standards of the metric system and redefined the yard, pound, gallon, and bushel in terms of metric units.

The Metric Conversion Act of 1975 started a voluntary metrication process in the US and, as amended by the Omnibus Foreign Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988, declared the metric system to be "the preferred system of weights and measures for United States trade and commerce".

Mission [ edit ] The US Metric Association (USMA) advocates US conversion to the metric system, officially known as the International System of Units (SI).

In support of this mission, the USMA provides a public medium for information and discussion, reports of metrication within the US, a history of the use of metric units in the US, a related bibliography including relevant laws, an answer source for industrial inquiries, a cadre of people knowledgeable about the metric system, training aids and supplies for educators and the public, a certification program that has been used in industry, and various citations and awards for those supporting this mission.

The USMA is in cooperative communication with various state and federal governments, both legislative and executive, and various industrial and professional societies, such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), many of whom are involved in standards development.

Short-term goals [ edit ] The labeling of some goods as to the amount included is regulated by the federal government, for example by means of the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (FPLA). Some goods are labeled by states or weight-and-measure districts, usually in a manner described by the Uniform Packaging and Labeling Regulation (published by the National Conference on Weights and Measures ). Some goods have no labeling guidance.

Complete adoption of the UPLR [ edit ] The National Conference on Weights and Measures (NCWM) published a revised model Uniform Packaging and Labeling Regulation (UPLR) which went into effect on January 1, 2001. This has been adopted legislatively or by regulation by all, but New York State . Once New York State adopts the UPLR, then goods sold in the US are not subject to federal regulations and laws, and may have their contents labeled solely in metric units if that is the desire of the producer or manufacturer. Other producers and manufacturers may continue to provide dual labeling (metric and non-metric) if they so desire. Metric-only labeling would be merely an option. USMA would like to see the UPLR completely adopted.

Amendment of the FPLA [ edit ] An amendment to the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (FPLA) has been proposed and is awaiting approval by Congress. This would permit goods sold in the US subject to federal regulations and laws to have their contents labeled solely in metric units if that is the desire of the producer or manufacturer. Other producers and manufacturers may continue to provide dual labeling (metric and non-metric) if they so desire. Metric-only labeling would be merely an option. USMA would like to see this FPLA amendment adopted.

See also [ edit ] Metric Martyrs – a group of English greengrocers who were convicted for using unapproved scales UK Metric Association United States Metric Board Metrication in New Zealand Metrication in Australia European units of measurement directives References [ edit ] ^ a b "A brief history of the USMA (1916 to the 2010s) – US Metric Association" .

usma.org . Retrieved 2020-10-06 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=US_Metric_Association&oldid=1275140886 " Categories : Metrication in the United States Organizations based in Colorado Organizations established in 1916 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use American English from September 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Coordinates not on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 08:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents US Metric Association Add languages Add topic

