Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Punishment 2 Rights when facing criminal charges Toggle Rights when facing criminal charges subsection 2.1 Europe 2.2 United States 2.3 India 3 Prosecution 4 Reckoning 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Criminal charge 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara Français 한국어 Íslenska עברית Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Formal accusation of wrongdoing in common law The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( April 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Criminal law Elements Actus reus Mens rea Causation Concurrence Scope of criminal liability Accessory Accomplice Complicity Corporate Mandated reporter Principal Use of force continuum Vicarious Severity of offense Felony (or Indictable offense ) Misdemeanor (or Summary offense ) Infraction (also called violation) Inchoate offenses Attempt Conspiracy Incitement Solicitation Offense against the person Assassination Assault Battery Child abuse Concealment of a corpse Criminal negligence Domestic violence False imprisonment Frameup Harassment Street Home invasion Hate crime Homicide Human trafficking Intimidation Kidnapping Manslaughter ( corporate ) Mayhem Murder felony Homicide Negligent homicide Reckless homicide Robbery Stalking Stabbing Torture Sexual offenses Adultery Bigamy Child sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Fornication Homosexuality Groping Incest Indecent exposure Masturbation Obscenity Prostitution Rape Pederasty Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual slavery Voyeurism Crimes against property Arson Arms trafficking Blackmail Bribery Burglary Cybercrime Embezzlement Extortion False pretenses Forgery Fraud Gambling Intellectual property violation Larceny Looting Payola Pickpocketing Possessing stolen property Robbery Smuggling Parallel import Tax evasion Theft Trespass to land Vandalism Mischief Crimes against justice Against public justice Justice delayed Compounding Contempt Malfeasance in office Miscarriage of justice Judicial misconduct Misprision Perjury Perverting the course of justice Crimes against the public Apostasy Corruption Censorship violation Dueling Genocide Ethnic cleansing Hostage-taking Illegal immigration People smuggling Insider trading Smuggling Illegal consumption (such as drugs , alcohol , and smoking ) Miscegenation Piracy Political corruption Regicide Terrorism Unreported employment Usurpation War crimes Crimes against animals Cruelty to animals Poaching Wildlife smuggling Bestiality Crimes against the state Lèse-majesté Treason Espionage Secession Sedition Subversion Defenses to liability Actual innocence Automatism Consent Defense of property Diminished responsibility Duress Entrapment Ignorantia juris non excusat Infancy Insanity Intoxication Justification Might makes right Mistake ( of law ) Necessity Possession is nine-tenths of the law Provocation Sanctuary Self-defense Statute of limitations Other common-law areas Contracts Defenses Evidence Property Torts Wills , trusts and estates Portals Law v t e A criminal charge is a formal accusation made by a governmental authority (usually a public prosecutor or the police ) asserting that somebody has committed a crime . A charging document, which contains one or more criminal charges or counts , can take several forms, including: complaint information indictment citation traffic ticket The charging document is what generally starts a criminal case in court . But the procedure by which somebody is charged with a crime and what happens when somebody has been charged varies from country to country and even sometimes within a country.

Before a person is found guilty of a crime, a criminal charge must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt .

[ 1 ] Punishment [ edit ] There can be multiple punishments due to certain criminal charges. Minor criminal charges such as misdemeanors , tickets, and infractions have less harsh punishments . The judge usually sentences the person accused of committing the charges right after the hearing. The punishments generally include fines, suspension, probation, a small amount of jail time, or alcohol and drug classes. If the criminal charges are considered more serious like a felony , then there is a lengthier process for determining the punishment. Felonies include the most serious crimes such as murder and treason . In addition to the trial that decides innocence or guilt, there is a separate trial (after one is convicted ) that determines the punishment(s) for the criminal charges committed.

[ 2 ] Rights when facing criminal charges [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights protects the right to a fair trial .

United States [ edit ] In the United States, people facing criminal charges in any situation enjoy certain rights under the Constitution .

[ 3 ] These rights include the right to remain silent , habeas corpus , the right to an attorney , and double jeopardy . It is important for someone who faces criminal charges to know their rights so they can take the proper action to exercise their rights. Among those rights are a criminal suspect's Miranda Rights which are read to a suspect prior to interrogation while in the custody of the police. If a suspect is not given a Miranda warning prior to interrogation it is possible that the suspect's statements will be excluded from evidence in a later criminal prosecution.

[ 4 ] India [ edit ] As per Article 21 of the Constitution of India, "No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law, nor shall any person be denied equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India". It also covers a just and fair trial without any arbitrary procedure, which confers that arrest should not only be legal but also justified. In this context, this article consists of the procedural and constitutional rights of the accused before and after the arrest in India. Except when exceptions are created, the accused person, unless and until provided otherwise, is considered innocent until proven guilty before the court of law.

[ 5 ] Prosecution [ edit ] Many people avoid criminal charges by staying out of the state where they committed the crime. A person facing state criminal charges is always prosecuted in the state where they committed the charges.

[ 6 ] A person may be able to get away with minor violations like a ticket, but they will not be able to hide from something like a misdemeanor or a felony. 
There are about sixty criminal charges that are considered more serious that people face every day. These charges can range from less serious actions such as shoplifting or vandalism to more serious crimes such as murder .

[ 7 ] Reckoning [ edit ] A person may be unaware that they have been charged. They can contact an attorney to ascertain if they have charged with any crime. A police officer may also charge someone after investigating the possible crime committed.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Clearance rate Conviction rate References [ edit ] ^ a b Lehman, Jeffrey; Phelps, Shirelle (2005).

West's Encyclopedia of American Law, Vol. 2 . Detroit: Thomson/Gale. p. 24.

ISBN 9780787663698 .

^ a b Larson, Aaron.

"Criminal Charges" .

Law Offices of Aaron Larson . Archived from the original on 20 October 2018 . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ Vinson, Carl.

"Your Basic Constitutional Rights in the Criminal Justice System" .

GeorgiaLegalAid.org . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

^ Stone, Geoffrey R. (1977).

"The Miranda Doctrine in the Burger Court" .

The Supreme Court Review .

99 : 169.

doi : 10.1086/scr.1977.3109510 .

S2CID 142338510 . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

^ "India: Arbitrary re-arrest of Ms. Irom Sharmila Chanu" .

Human Rights Documents online . Retrieved 2024-03-26 .

^ a b "Criminal Procedure" .

Wex . Cornell Law School. 6 August 2007 . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

^ a b Finley, Laura (2016).

Crime and Punishment in America: An Encyclopedia of Trends and Controversies . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1610699280 . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Criminal_charge&oldid=1306003426 " Categories : Criminal procedure Documents Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2011 United States-centric This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 10:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Criminal charge 35 languages Add topic

