Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Etymology 2.2 Origin 2.3 Colonial period 3 Current status Toggle Current status subsection 3.1 Overview 3.2 Tanzania 3.3 Kenya 3.4 Congo 3.5 Burundi 3.6 Uganda 3.7 Somalia 4 Religious and political identity Toggle Religious and political identity subsection 4.1 Religion 4.2 Politics 5 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 5.1 Vowels 5.2 Consonants 6 Orthography 7 Grammar Toggle Grammar subsection 7.1 Noun classes 7.1.1 Semantic motivation 7.1.2 Borrowing 7.2 Agreement 8 Dialects and closely related languages Toggle Dialects and closely related languages subsection 8.1 Dialects 8.1.1 Old dialects 8.2 Other regions 8.3 Pidgins and creoles 9 Swahili poets 10 Oral literature Toggle Oral literature subsection 10.1 19th-century collections 10.2 Additional proverbs 11 Sample text 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Sources 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Swahili language 179 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Batak Mandailing Jaku Iban Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikifunctions Wikivoyage Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bantu language Swahili Kiswahili كِسوَحِيلِ Pronunciation Swahili: [kiswɑˈhili] ⓘ Native to Tanzania , Kenya , Uganda , Mozambique , the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo , the Bajuni Islands and Brava , southern Somalia [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Speakers L1 : 5.3 million (2019–2023) [ 2 ] L2 : 92 million (2019–2021) [ 2 ] Language family Niger–Congo Atlantic–Congo Volta-Congo Benue–Congo Bantoid Southern Bantoid Bantu Northeast Bantu Northeast Coast Bantu Sabaki Swahili Early form Proto-Swahili [ 3 ] Dialects Bravanese Bajuni Congo Swahili Makwe Mwani Sidi Socotra † Writing system Latin script ( Swahili alphabet ) Arabic script ( Swahili Ajami ) Mandombe script Swahili Braille Official status Official language in 4 countries Tanzania Rwanda Kenya Uganda Organisations African Union East African Community SADC [ 4 ] Recognised minority language in Burundi DR Congo Mozambique Regulated by Baraza la Kiswahili la Taifa (Tanzania) Chama cha Kiswahili cha Taifa (Kenya) Baraza la Kiswahili la Afrika Mashariki (Uganda) Language codes ISO 639-1 sw ISO 639-2 swa ISO 639-3 swa – inclusive code Individual codes: swc – Congo Swahili swh – Coastal Swahili ymk – Makwe (?) wmw – Mwani (?) Glottolog swah1254 Guthrie code G.42–43; G.40.A–H (pidgins & creoles) [ 5 ] Linguasphere 99-AUS-m Geographic-administrative extent of Swahili. Dark: native range (the Swahili coast ). Medium green: Spoken by a majority alongside indigenous languages. Light green: Spoken by a minority.

This article contains IPA phonetic symbols.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA .

Person Mswahili People Waswahili Language Kiswahili Swahili , also known as Kiswahili as it is referred to in the Swahili language , is a Bantu language originally spoken by the Swahili people , who are found primarily in Tanzania , Kenya , and Mozambique (along the East African coast and adjacent littoral islands).

[ 6 ] Estimates of the number of Swahili speakers, including both native and second-language speakers, vary widely. They generally range from 150 million to 200 million; [ 7 ] with most of its native speakers residing in Tanzania and Kenya.

Swahili has a significant number of loanwords from other languages, mainly Arabic , as well as from Portuguese , English and German . Around 40% of Swahili vocabulary consists of Arabic loanwords, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] including the name of the language ( سَوَاحِلي sawāḥilī , a plural adjectival form of an Arabic word meaning 'of the coasts'). The loanwords date from the era of contact between Arab traders and the Bantu inhabitants of the east coast of Africa, which was also the time period when Swahili emerged as a lingua franca in the region.

[ 10 ] Due to concerted efforts by the governments of Kenya and Tanzania , Swahili is one of three official languages (the others being English and French) of the East African Community (EAC) countries, namely Burundi , Democratic Republic of the Congo , Kenya , Rwanda , Somalia , South Sudan , Tanzania , and Uganda . It is the lingua franca of other areas in the African Great Lakes region and East and Southern Africa .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Swahili is also one of the working languages of the African Union and of the Southern African Development Community . The East African Community created an institution called the East African Kiswahili Commission (EAKC) which began operations in 2015. The institution currently serves as the leading body for promoting the language in the East African region , as well as for coordinating its development and usage for regional integration and sustainable development.

[ 14 ] In recent years South Africa , [ 15 ] Botswana , [ 16 ] Namibia , [ 17 ] Ethiopia , [ 18 ] and South Sudan [ 19 ] have begun offering Swahili as a subject in schools or have developed plans to do so.

Shikomor (or Comorian ), an official language in Comoros and also spoken in Mayotte ( Shimaore ), is closely related to Swahili and is sometimes considered a dialect of Swahili, although other authorities consider it a distinct language.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In 2022, based on Swahili's growth as a prominent international language, the United Nations declared Swahili Language Day as 7 July to commemorate the date that Julius Nyerere adopted Swahili as a unifying language for African independence struggles.

[ 22 ] Classification [ edit ] Swahili is a Bantu language of the Sabaki branch .

[ 23 ] In Guthrie's geographic classification , Swahili is in Bantu zone G, whereas the other Sabaki languages are in zone E70, commonly under the name Nyika.

Historical linguists consider the Arabic influence on Swahili to be significant, since it takes around 40% of its vocabulary directly from Arabic , and was initially spread along the East African coast.

[ 8 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] History [ edit ] Swahili in Arabic script—memorial plate at the Askari Monument , Dar es Salaam (1927) Etymology [ edit ] The word "Swahili" comes from an Arabic name for the area, meaning "coasts": ‏ سَاحِل ‎ → ‏ سَوَاحِل ‎ → سَوَاحِلِيّ sāḥil sawāḥil sawāḥilī " coast " "coasts" ( broken plural ) "of coasts" Origin [ edit ] The core of the Swahili language originates in Bantu languages of the coast of East Africa. Much of Swahili's Bantu vocabulary has cognates in the Unguja , Pemba , and Mijikenda languages [ 26 ] and, to a lesser extent, other East African Bantu languages . While opinions vary on the specifics, it has been historically purported that around 16–20% of the Swahili vocabulary is derived from loan words, the vast majority Arabic , but also other contributing languages, including Persian , Hindustani , Portuguese , and Malay .

[ 27 ] Source languages for loanwords in Swahili [ 28 ] Source languages Percentage Arabic (mainly Omani Arabic ) 40% English 4.6% Portuguese 0.9–1.0% Hindustani 0.7–3.9% Persian (mainly Iranian Persian ) 0.4–3.4% Malagasy 0.2–0.4% Omani Arabic is the source of most Arabic loanwords in Swahili.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] In the text "Early Swahili History Reconsidered", however, Thomas Spear noted that Swahili retains a large amount of grammar, vocabulary, and sounds inherited from the Sabaki language . In fact, while taking account of daily vocabulary, using lists of one hundred words, 72–91% were inherited from the Sabaki language (which is reported as a parent language) whereas 4–17% were loan words from other African languages. Only 2–8% were from non-African languages, and Arabic loan words constituted a fraction of that.

[ 31 ] According to other sources, around 40% of the Swahili vocabulary comes from Arabic.

[ 8 ] [ 32 ] What also remained unconsidered was that a good number of the borrowed terms had Bantu equivalents. The preferred use of Arabic loan words is prevalent along the coast, where local people, in a cultural show of proximity to, or descent from, Arab culture, would rather use loan words, whereas the people in the interior tend to use the Bantu equivalents. It was originally written in Arabic script .

[ 33 ] The earliest known documents written in Swahili are letters written in Kilwa , Tanzania , in 1711 in the Arabic script that were sent to the Portuguese of Mozambique and their local allies. The original letters are preserved in the Historical Archives of Goa, India .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Colonial period [ edit ] Although originally written with the Arabic script, Swahili is now written in a Latin alphabet introduced by Christian missionaries and colonial administrators. The text shown here is the Catholic version of the Lord's Prayer .

[ 36 ] Various colonial powers that ruled on the coast of East Africa played a role in the growth and spread of Swahili. With the arrival of the Arabs in East Africa, they used Swahili as a language of trade as well as for teaching Islam to the local Bantu peoples . This resulted in Swahili first being written in the Arabic script. The later contact with the Portuguese resulted in the increase of vocabulary of the Swahili language. The language was formalised in an institutional level when the Germans took over after the Berlin conference . After seeing there was already a widespread language, the Germans formalised it as the official language to be used in schools. Thus schools in Swahili are called Shule (from German Schule ) in government, trade and the court system. With the Germans controlling the major Swahili-speaking region in East Africa, they changed the alphabet system from Arabic to Latin. After the First World War, Britain took over German East Africa, where they found Swahili rooted in most areas, not just the coastal regions. The British decided to formalise it as the language to be used across the East African region (although in British East Africa [Kenya and Uganda] most areas used English and various Nilotic and other Bantu languages while Swahili was mostly restricted to the coast). In June 1928, an inter-territorial conference attended by representatives of Kenya , Tanganyika , Uganda , and Zanzibar took place in Mombasa . The Zanzibar dialect was chosen as standard Swahili for those areas, [ 37 ] and the standard orthography for Swahili was adopted.

[ 38 ] Current status [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Estimates of the total number of first- and second-language Swahili speakers vary widely, from as low as 50 million to as high as 200 million, but generally range from 60 million to 150 million.

[ 7 ] Swahili has become a second language spoken by tens of millions of people in the five African Great Lakes countries ( Kenya , DRC , Rwanda , Uganda , and Tanzania ), where it is an official or national language. It is also the first language for many people in Tanzania, especially in the coastal regions of Tanga, Pwani, Dar es Salaam, Mtwara and Lindi. In the inner regions of Tanzania, Swahili is spoken with an accent influenced by other local languages and dialects. There, it is a first language for most of the people who are born in the cities, whilst being spoken as a second language in rural areas. Swahili and closely related languages are spoken by relatively small numbers of people in Burundi , Comoros , Malawi , Mozambique , Zambia and Rwanda .

[ 39 ] The language was still understood in the southern ports of the Red Sea in the 20th century.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] The East African Community created an institution called the East African Kiswahili Commission (EAKC) which began operations in 2015. The institution currently serves as the leading body for promoting the language in the East African region , as well as for coordinating its development and usage for regional integration and sustainable development.

[ 14 ] Swahili is among the first languages in Africa for which language technology applications have been developed.

Arvi Hurskainen is one of the early developers. The applications include a spelling checker , [ 42 ] part-of-speech tagging , [ 43 ] language learning software , [ 43 ] an analysed Swahili text corpus of 25 million words, [ 44 ] an electronic dictionary , [ 43 ] and machine translation [ 43 ] between Swahili and English. The development of language technology also strengthens the position of Swahili as a modern medium of communication.

[ 45 ] Swahili in East Africa Tanzania [ edit ] The widespread use of Swahili as a national language in Tanzania came after Tanganyika gained independence in 1961 and the government decided that it would be used as a language to unify the new nation. This saw the use of Swahili in all levels of government, trade, art as well as schools in which primary school children are taught in Swahili, before switching to English (medium of instruction) [ 46 ] in secondary schools (although Swahili is still taught as an independent subject). After Tanganyika and Zanzibar unification in 1964, Taasisi ya Uchunguzi wa Kiswahili (TUKI, Institute of Swahili Research) was created from the Interterritorial Language Committee. In 1970 TUKI was merged with the University of Dar es Salaam , while Baraza la Kiswahili la Taifa (BAKITA) was formed. BAKITA is an organisation dedicated to the development and advocacy of Swahili as a means of national integration in Tanzania. Key activities mandated for the organisation include creating a healthy atmosphere for the development of Swahili, encouraging use of the language in government and business functions, coordinating activities of other organisations involved with Swahili, standardising the language. BAKITA vision are: "1.To efficiently manage and coordinate the development and use of Kiswahili in Tanzania 2.To participate fully and effectively in promoting Swahili in East Africa, Africa and the entire world over".

[ 47 ] Although other bodies and agencies can propose new vocabularies, BAKITA is the only organisation that can approve its usage in the Swahili language. Tanzanians are highly credited for shaping the language to appear the way it is now.

Kenya [ edit ] In Kenya, Swahili (or Kiswahili as it is referred to in the Constitution and by the Kenya Law Reform Society [ 48 ] ) has been the national language since 1964 and is official since 2010.

[ 49 ] Chama cha Kiswahili cha Taifa (CHAKITA) was established in 1998 to research and promote Kiswahili language in Kenya.

[ 50 ] Kiswahili is a compulsory subject in all Kenyan primary and secondary schools.

[ 51 ] Congo [ edit ] Main article: Congo Swahili Swahili is recognized as a national language in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and is widely spoken in the eastern regions. The local dialects of Swahili in Congo are known as Congo Swahili and differ considerably from Standard Swahili.

[ 52 ] Burundi [ edit ] In order to strengthen political ties with other East African Community nations, both Kiswahili and English have been taught in Burundian elementary schools since the academic year 2005/2006. Kiswahili is now used widely in Burundi but is not recognised as an official language; only French, Kirundi, and English have this distinction.

[ 53 ] Since 2013, Swahili has been included in the all Burundian education system.

[ 54 ] Uganda [ edit ] Uganda adopted Kiswahili as one of its official languages (alongside English ) in 2022, and also made it compulsory across primary and secondary schools in the country.

[ 55 ] [ 49 ] Somalia [ edit ] The Somali language is the national and primary first language of Somalia.

[ 56 ] The Swahili language is not widespread in Somalia and has no official status nationally or regionally.

[ 56 ] Dialects of Swahili are spoken by some ethnic minorities on the Bajuni islands in the form of Kibajuni on the southern tip of the country and in the town of Brava in the form of Chimwiini ; both contain a significant amount of Somali and Italian loanwords.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Standard Swahili is generally only spoken by Somali nationals who have resided in Kenya and subsequently returned to Somalia.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Lastly, a closely related language Mushunguli (also known as Zigula, Zigua, or Chizigua) is spoken by some of the Somali Bantu ethnic minority mostly living in the Jubba Valley .

[ 61 ] It is classified as a Northeast Coast Bantu language as Swahili is [ 62 ] and has some intelligibility with Swahili.

In 2024, Somalia joined the East African Community and its inclusion may facilitate the spread of the Swahili language in Somalia.

[ 63 ] Nevertheless, in Somalia, Swahili, as a foreign language, will have to compete with English , the primary global lingua franca , and Arabic , the official second language of Somalia and a liturgical language for Muslims, [ 56 ] as popular secondary or tertiary languages. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty regarding the adoption of the Swahili language in Somalia compared to the situation in most other EAC member states.

Religious and political identity [ edit ] Religion [ edit ] Swahili played a major role in spreading both Christianity and Islam in East Africa . From their arrival in East Africa, Arabs brought Islam and set up madrasas , where they used Swahili to teach Islam to the natives. As the Arab population and influence expanded, a growing number of indigenous people converted to Islam and began receiving religious and cultural instruction in Swahili, which increasingly absorbed Arabic vocabulary.

[ 64 ] With the arrival of Europeans in East Africa, Christianity was introduced to the region, profoundly shaping the development of Swahili. While Arab influence remained concentrated along the coastal areas, European missionaries ventured further inland, establishing missions and promoting Christian teachings.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Early outposts were located along the coast, where they encountered Swahili as a widely spoken lingua franca . Recognizing its utility and structural similarities to other indigenous languages, the Europeans adopted Swahili as a medium for evangelization, religious and general educational instruction, and, eventually, colonization.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] Politics [ edit ] During the struggle for Tanganyika independence, the Tanganyika African National Union used Swahili as a language of mass organisation and political movement. This included publishing pamphlets and radio broadcasts to rally the people to fight for independence. After gaining independence, Swahili was adopted as the national language. To this day, Tanzanians carry a sense of pride when it comes to Swahili, especially when it is used to unite over 120 tribes across Tanzania. Swahili was used to strengthen solidarity within the nation, and remains to be a key identity of the Tanzanian people.

Phonology [ edit ] For assistance with IPA transcriptions of Swahili for Wikipedia articles, see Help:IPA/Swahili .

Example of spoken Swahili Vowels [ edit ] Standard Swahili has five vowel phonemes : /ɑ/ , /ɛ/ , /i/ , /ɔ/ , and /u/ . According to Ellen Contini-Morava , vowels are never reduced , regardless of stress .

[ 70 ] However, according to Edgar Polomé , these five phonemes can vary in pronunciation. Polomé claims that /ɛ/ , /i/ , /ɔ/ , and /u/ are pronounced as such only in stressed syllables. In unstressed syllables, as well as before a prenasalized consonant , they are pronounced as [e] , [ɪ] , [o] , and [ʊ] .

E is also commonly pronounced as mid-position after w . Polomé claims that /ɑ/ is pronounced as such only after w and is pronounced as [a] in other situations, especially after /j/ ( y ).

A can be pronounced as [ə] in word-final position.

[ 71 ] Long vowels in Swahili are written as doubled vowels (for example, kondoo , "sheep") due to a historical process in which /l/ became elided between the second last and last vowels of a word (for example, kondoo , "sheep" was originally kondolo , which survives in certain dialects [ which?

] ). As a consequence, long vowels are not considered phonemic . A similar process exists in Zulu .

Consonants [ edit ] Swahili consonant phonemes [ 70 ] [ 72 ] Labial Dental Alveolar Postalveolar / Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ɲ ⟨ny⟩ ŋ ⟨ng'⟩ Stop prenasalized ᵐb̥ ⟨mb⟩ ⁿd̥ ⟨nd⟩ ⁿd̥ʒ̊ ⟨nj⟩ ᵑɡ̊ ⟨ng⟩ implosive / voiced ɓ ~ b ⟨b⟩ ɗ ~ d ⟨d⟩ ʄ ~ dʒ ⟨j⟩ ɠ ~ ɡ ⟨g⟩ voiceless p t tʃ ⟨ch⟩ k aspirated ( pʰ ⟨p⟩ ) ( tʰ ⟨t⟩ ) ( tʃʰ ⟨ch⟩ ) ( kʰ ⟨k⟩ ) Fricative prenasalized ᶬv̥ ⟨mv⟩ ⁿz̥ ⟨nz⟩ voiced v ( ð ⟨dh⟩ ) z ( ɣ ⟨gh⟩ ) voiceless f ( θ ⟨th⟩ ) s ʃ ⟨sh⟩ ( x ⟨kh⟩ ) h Approximant l j ⟨y⟩ w Rhotic r Where not shown, the orthography is the same as IPA.

Some dialects of Swahili may also have the aspirated phonemes /pʰ tʰ tʃʰ kʰ bʱ dʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ/ though they are unmarked in Swahili's orthography.

[ 73 ] Multiple studies favour classifying prenasalization as consonant clusters, not as separate phonemes. Historically, nasalization has been lost before voiceless consonants, and subsequently the voiced consonants have devoiced, [ citation needed ] though they are still written mb, nd etc. The /r/ phoneme is realised as either a short trill [ r ] or more commonly as a single tap [ ɾ ] by most speakers.

[x] exists in free variation with h, and is only distinguished by some speakers.

[ 71 ] In some Arabic loans (nouns, verbs, adjectives), emphasis or intensity is expressed by reproducing the original emphatic consonants /dˤ, sˤ, tˤ, ðˤ/ and the uvular /q/ , or lengthening a vowel, where aspiration would be used in inherited Bantu words.

[ 73 ] Orthography [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2024 ) See also: Swahili Ajami Swahili in Arabic script on the clothes of a girl in German East Africa ( c.

early 1900s) Swahili is now written in the Latin alphabet. There are a few digraphs for native sounds, ch , sh , ng ' and ny ; q and x are not used, [ 74 ] c is not used apart from the digraph ch , unassimilated English loans and, occasionally, as a substitute for k in advertisements. There are also several digraphs for Arabic sounds, which many speakers outside of ethnic Swahili areas have trouble differentiating.

The language used to be primarily written in the Ajami script , which is an Arabic script. Much literature was produced in this script. With the introduction of Latin, the use of Ajami script has been diminished significantly. However, the language continues to have a tradition of being written in Arabic script.

[ 75 ] Starting from the later half of the 19th century, continuing into the 20th century, and going on in the 21st century, a process of "Swahilization" of the Arabic Script has been underway by Swahili scribes and scholars. The first of such attempts was done by Mwalimu Sikujua , a scholar and poet from Mombasa .

[ 76 ] However, the spread of a standardized indigenous variation of Arabic script for Swahili was hampered by the colonial takeover of East Africa by the United Kingdom and Germany . The usage of Arabic script was suppressed in German East Africa and to a lesser extent in British East Africa . Nevertheless, well into the 1930s and 1940s, rural literacy rate in Arabic script as well as a local preference to write Swahili in the Arabic script (an unmodified version as opposed to proposals such as that of Mwalimu Sikujua) was relatively high.

[ 76 ] There were also differences in orthographic conventions between cities and authors and over the centuries, some quite precise but others different enough to cause difficulties with intelligibility. Thus despite a lack of official governmental backing, attempts at standardization and Swahilization of the Arabic script continued into the 20th century.

Grammar [ edit ] Main article: Swahili grammar Noun classes [ edit ] Swahili nouns are separable into classes , which are roughly analogous to genders in other languages. In Swahili, prefixes mark groups of similar objects: ⟨m-⟩ marks single human beings ( mtoto 'child'), ⟨wa-⟩ marks multiple humans ( watoto 'children'), ⟨u-⟩ marks abstract nouns ( utoto 'childhood'), and so on. And just as adjectives and pronouns must agree with the gender of nouns in some languages with grammatical gender, so in Swahili adjectives, pronouns and even verbs must agree with nouns. This is a characteristic feature of all the Bantu languages .

Semantic motivation [ edit ] The ki-/vi- class historically consisted of two separate genders, artefacts (Bantu class 7/8, utensils and hand tools mostly) and diminutives (Bantu class 12/13), which were conflated at a stage ancestral to Swahili. Examples of the former are kisu "knife", kiti "chair" (from mti "tree, wood"), chombo "vessel" (a contraction of ki-ombo ). Examples of the latter are kitoto "infant", from mtoto "child"; kitawi "frond", from tawi "branch"; and chumba ( ki-umba ) "room", from nyumba "house". It is the diminutive sense that has been furthest extended. An extension common to diminutives in many languages is approximation and resemblance (having a 'little bit' of some characteristic, like -y or -ish in English). For example, there is kijani "green", from jani "leaf" (compare English 'leafy'), kichaka "bush" from chaka "clump", and kivuli "shadow" from uvuli "shade". A 'little bit' of a verb would be an instance of an action, and such instantiations (usually not very active ones) are found: kifo "death", from the verb -fa "to die"; kiota "nest" from -ota "to brood"; chakula "food" from kula "to eat"; kivuko "a ford, a pass" from -vuka "to cross"; and kilimia "the Pleiades ", from -limia "to farm with", from its role in guiding planting. A resemblance, or being a bit like something, implies marginal status in a category, so things that are marginal examples of their class may take the ki-/vi- prefixes. One example is chura ( ki-ura ) "frog", which is only half terrestrial and therefore is marginal as an animal. This extension may account for disabilities as well: kilema "a cripple", kipofu "a blind person", kiziwi "a deaf person". Finally, diminutives often denote contempt, and contempt is sometimes expressed against things that are dangerous. This might be the historical explanation for kifaru " rhinoceros ", kingugwa " spotted hyena ", and kiboko " hippopotamus " (perhaps originally meaning "stubby legs").

[ 77 ] Another class with broad semantic extension is the m-/mi- class (Bantu classes 3/4). This is often called the 'tree' class, because mti, miti "tree(s)" is the prototypical example. However, it seems to cover vital entities neither human nor typical animals: trees and other plants, such as mwitu 'forest' and mtama 'millet' (and from there, things made from plants, like mkeka 'mat'); supernatural and natural forces, such as mwezi 'moon', mlima 'mountain', mto 'river'; active things, such as moto 'fire', including active body parts ( moyo 'heart', mkono 'hand, arm'); and human groups, which are vital but not themselves human, such as mji 'village', and, by analogy, mzinga 'beehive/cannon'. From the central idea of tree , which is thin, tall, and spreading, comes an extension to other long or extended things or parts of things, such as mwavuli 'umbrella', moshi 'smoke', msumari 'nail'; and from activity there even come active instantiations of verbs, such as mfuo "metal forging", from -fua "to forge", or mlio "a sound", from -lia "to make a sound". Words may be connected to their class by more than one metaphor. For example, mkono is an active body part, and mto is an active natural force, but they are also both long and thin. Things with a trajectory, such as mpaka 'border' and mwendo 'journey', are classified with long thin things, as in many other languages with noun classes. This may be further extended to anything dealing with time, such as mwaka 'year' and perhaps mshahara 'wages'. Animals exceptional in some way and so not easily fitting in the other classes may be placed in this class.

The other classes have foundations that may at first seem similarly counterintuitive.

[ 78 ] In short, Classes 1–2 include most words for people: kin terms, professions, ethnicities, etc., including translations of most English words ending in -er.

They include a couple of generic words for animals: mnyama 'beast', mdudu 'bug'.

Classes 5–6 have a broad semantic range of groups, expanses, and augmentatives. Although interrelated, it is easier to illustrate if broken down: Augmentatives, such as joka 'serpent' from nyoka 'snake', lead to titles and other terms of respect (the opposite of diminutives, which lead to terms of contempt): Bwana 'Sir', shangazi 'aunt', fundi 'craftsman', kadhi 'judge' Expanses: ziwa 'lake', bonde 'valley', taifa 'country', anga 'sky' from this, mass nouns: maji 'water', vumbi 'dust' (and other liquids and fine particulates that may cover broad expanses), kaa 'charcoal', mali 'wealth', maridhawa 'abundance' Collectives: kundi 'group', kabila 'language/ethnic group', jeshi 'army', daraja ' stairs', manyoya 'fur, feathers', mapesa 'small change', manyasi 'weeds', jongoo 'millipede' (large set of legs), marimba 'xylophone' (large set of keys) from this, individual things found in groups: jiwe 'stone', tawi 'branch', ua 'flower', tunda 'fruit' (also the names of most fruits), yai 'egg', mapacha 'twins', jino 'tooth', tumbo 'stomach' (cf. English "guts"), and paired body parts such as jicho 'eye', bawa 'wing', etc.

also collective or dialogic actions, which occur among groups of people: neno 'a word', from kunena 'to speak' (and by extension, mental verbal processes: wazo 'thought', maana 'meaning'); pigo 'a stroke, blow', from kupiga 'to hit'; gomvi 'a quarrel', shauri 'advice, plan', kosa 'mistake', jambo 'affair', penzi 'love', jibu 'answer', agano 'promise', malipo 'payment' From pairing, reproduction is suggested as another extension (fruit, egg, testicle, flower, twins, etc.), but these generally duplicate one or more of the subcategories above Classes 9–10 are used for most typical animals: ndege 'bird', samaki 'fish', and the specific names of typical beasts, birds, and bugs. However, this is the 'other' class, for words not fitting well elsewhere, and about half of the class 9–10 nouns are foreign loanwords. Loans may be classified as 9–10 because they lack the prefixes inherent in other classes, and most native class 9–10 nouns have no prefix. Thus they do not form a coherent semantic class, though there are still semantic extensions from individual words.

Class 11 (which takes class 10 for the plural) are mostly nouns with an "extended outline shape", in either one dimension or two: mass nouns that are generally localized rather than covering vast expanses: uji 'porridge', wali 'cooked rice' broad: ukuta 'wall', ukucha 'fingernail', upande 'side' (≈ ubavu 'rib'), wavu 'net', wayo 'sole, footprint', ua 'fence, yard', uteo 'winnowing basket' long: utambi 'wick', utepe 'stripe', uta 'bow', ubavu 'rib', ufa 'crack', unywele 'a hair' from 'a hair', singulatives of nouns, which are often class 6 ('collectives') in the plural: unyoya 'a feather', uvumbi 'a mote of dust', ushanga 'a bead'.

Class 14 are abstractions, such as utoto 'childhood' (from mtoto 'a child') and have no plural. They have the same prefixes and concord as class 11, except optionally for adjectival concord.

Class 15 are verbal infinitives.

Classes 16–18 are locatives. The Bantu nouns of these classes have been lost; the only permanent member is the Arabic loan mahali 'place(s)', but in Mombasa Swahili, the old prefixes survive: pahali 'place', mwahali 'places'. However, any noun with the locative suffix -ni takes class 16–18 agreement. The distinction between them is that class 16 agreement is used if the location is intended to be definite ("at"), class 17 if indefinite ("around") or involves motion ("to, toward"), and class 18 if it involves containment ("within"): mahali pazuri 'a good spot', mahali kuzuri 'a nice area', mahali muzuri (it's nice in there).

Borrowing [ edit ] Borrowings may or may not be given a prefix corresponding to the semantic class they fall in. For example, Arabic دود dūd ("bug, insect") was borrowed as mdudu , plural wadudu , with the class 1/2 prefixes m- and wa- , but Arabic فلوس fulūs ("fish scales", plural of فلس fals ) and English sloth were borrowed as simply fulusi (" mahi-mahi " fish) and slothi (" sloth "), with no prefix associated with animals (whether those of class 9/10 or 1/2).

In the process of naturalization [ 79 ] of borrowings within Swahili, loanwords are often reinterpreted, or reanalysed, [ 80 ] as if they already contain a Swahili class prefix. In such cases the interpreted prefix is changed with the usual rules. Consider the following loanwords from Arabic: The Swahili word for "book", kitabu , is borrowed from Arabic كتاب kitāb(un) "book" (plural كتب kutub ; from the Arabic root k.t.b.

"write"). However, the Swahili plural form of this word ("books") is vi tabu , following Bantu grammar in which the ki- of ki tabu is reanalysed (reinterpreted) as a nominal class prefix whose plural is vi- (class 7/8).

[ 80 ] Arabic معلم muʿallim(un) ("teacher", plural معلمين muʿallimīna ) was interpreted as having the mw- prefix of class 1, and so became mwalimu , plural walimu .

Arabic مدرسة madrasa school, even though it is singular in Arabic (with plural مدارس madāris ), was reinterpreted as a class 6 plural madarasa , receiving the singular form darasa .

Similarly, English wire and Arabic وقت waqt ("time") were interpreted as having the class 11 prevocalic prefix w- , and became waya and wakati with plural nyaya and nyakati respectively.

Agreement [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Swahili phrases agree with nouns in a system of concord but, if the noun refers to a human, they accord with noun classes 1–2 regardless of their noun class. Verbs agree with the noun class of their subjects and objects; adjectives, prepositions and demonstratives agree with the noun class of their nouns. In Standard Swahili (Kiswahili sanifu) , based on the dialect spoken in Zanzibar, the system is rather complex; however, it is drastically simplified in many local variants where Swahili is not a native language, such as in Nairobi. In non-native Swahili, concord reflects only animacy: human subjects and objects trigger a-, wa- and m-, wa- in verbal concord, while non-human subjects and objects of whatever class trigger i-, zi- . Infinitives vary between standard ku- and reduced i-.

[ 81 ] ("Of" is animate wa and inanimate ya, za.

) In Standard Swahili, human subjects and objects of whatever class trigger animacy concord in a-, wa- and m-, wa-, and non-human subjects and objects trigger a variety of gender-concord prefixes.

Swahili noun-class concord NC Semantic field Noun -C, -V Subj.

Obj.

-a Adjective -C, -i, -e [ * 1 ] – I (mimi) ni- – we (sisi) tu- – thou (wewe) u- ku- – you (ninyi) m- wa- 1 person m-, mw- a- m- wa m-, mwi-, mwe- 2 people wa-, w- wa- wa wa-, we-, we- 3 tree m-, mw- u- wa m-, mwi-, mwe- 4 trees mi- i- ya mi-, mi-, mye- 5 group, AUG ji-/Ø, j- li- la ji-/Ø, ji-, je- 6 groups, AUG ma- ya- ya ma-, me-, me- 7 tool, DIM ki-, ch- ki- cha ki-, ki-, che- 8 tools, DIM vi-, vy- vi- vya vi-, vi-, vye- 9 animals, 'other', loanwords N- i- ya N-, nyi-, nye- 10 zi- za 11 'extension' u-, w-/uw- u- wa m-, mwi-, mwe- 10 (plural of 11) N- zi- za N-, nyi-, nye- 14 abstraction u-, w-/uw- u- wa m-, mwi-, mwe- or u-, wi-, we- 15 infinitives ku-, kw- [ * 2 ] ku- kwa- ku-, kwi-, kwe- 16 precise position -ni, mahali pa- pa pa-, pe-, pe- 17 imprecise position -ni ku- kwa ku-, kwi-, kwe- 18 internal position -ni m(u)- mwa mu-, mwi-, mwe- ^ Most Swahili adjectives begin with either a consonant or the vowels i- or e- , listed separately above. The few adjectives beginning with other vowels do not agree with all noun classes since some are restricted to humans. NC 1 m(w)- is mw- before a and o, and reduces to m- before u ; wa- does not change; and ki-, vi-, mi- become ch-, vy-, my- before o but not before u : mwanana, waanana "gentle", mwororo, waororo, myororo, chororo, vyororo "mild, yielding", mume, waume, kiume, viume "male".

^ In a few verbs: kwenda, kwisha Dialects and closely related languages [ edit ] This list is based on Swahili and Sabaki: a linguistic history .

Dialects [ edit ] Modern standard Swahili, written in Latin, is based on Kiunguja, the dialect spoken in Zanzibar City .

[ 82 ] Swahili literature and poetry, traditionally written in Swahili Ajami , is based on Kiamu , the dialect of Lamu on the Kenyan Coast.

[ 83 ] [ 75 ] But there are numerous other dialects of Swahili, some of which are mutually unintelligible, such as the following: [ 82 ] Old dialects [ edit ] Maho (2009) considers these to be distinct languages: Kimwani is spoken in the Kerimba Islands and northern coastal Mozambique.

Chimwiini is spoken by the ethnic minorities in and around the town of Barawa on the southern coast of Somalia.

Kibajuni is spoken by the Bajuni minority ethnic group on the coast and islands on both sides of the Somali–Kenyan border and in the Bajuni Islands (the northern part of the Lamu archipelago) and is also called Kitikuu and Kigunya .

Socotra Swahili (extinct) Sidi , in Gujarat, India (possibly extinct) The rest of the dialects are divided by him [ citation needed ] into two groups: Mombasa–Lamu Swahili Lamu The dialects of the Lamu group (especially Kiamu, Kipate, Kingozi) are the linguistic base of the oldest ( c.

1600 CE ) Swahili manuscripts and poems that reached us.

[ 83 ] They are sometimes described as "literary" dialects but they were also used for everyday life and are still spoken today except Kingozi.

Kiamu [ 84 ] is spoken in and around the island of Lamu (Amu) and have an important corpus [ 85 ] of classical poems of the 18th and 19th centuries written in Arabic script (Kiajemi).

Kipate is a local dialect of Pate Island , considered [ by whom?

] to be closest to the original dialect of Kingozi [ citation needed ] . It has also an important classical corpus [ 85 ] of poems from the 18th and 19th centuries.

Kingozi is an extinct dialect spoken on the Indian Ocean coast between Lamu and Somalia and is sometimes still [ citation needed ] used in poetry. It is often considered [ by whom?

] the source of Swahili [ citation needed ] . Academic theories about Kingozi as an old literary dialect are conflicting. It is sometimes linked to the epics of Liongo . For Sacleux, [ 86 ] it's and old and "an exclusively literary, arcane dialect". It varies depending on the authors whose will to return to a pure form of the old language make them use Kigunya mainly (Kipate is a subdialect of Kigunya) and secondarily Kiamu and Kimvita. Knappert, [ 87 ] on the contrary, states the existence of a literary koine in the 18th century based on the Kingozi as a prestigious and widespread dialect. The 2009 New Updated Guthrie List, a referential classification of the Bantu languages, considers kiOzi as a dialect in itself.

[ 88 ] It is not the ancestor language of Kiswahili but a member of the Lamu group (code G42a) with Kiamu, Kipate and Kisiu. This brief overview indicates that the state of research is fragmented and uncertain on the history of the kingozi.

Mombasa Chijomvu is a subdialect of the Mombasa area.

Kimvita is the major dialect of Mombasa (also known as "Mvita", which means "war", in reference [ citation needed ] to the many wars which were fought over it, the other major dialect alongside Kiunguja. It has an important classical corpus written in Arabic script from the 18st and 19st century.

[ 89 ] Kingare is the subdialect of the Mombasa area.

Kimrima is spoken around Pangani , Vanga , Dar es Salaam , Rufiji and Mafia Island .

Kiunguja is spoken in Zanzibar City and environs on Unguja (Zanzibar) Island . Kitumbatu (Pemba) dialects occupy the bulk of the island.

Mambrui, Malindi Chichifundi , a dialect of the southern Kenya coast.

Chwaka Kivumba , a dialect of the southern Kenya coast.

Nosse Be (Madagascar) Pemba Swahili Kipemba is a local dialect of the Pemba Island .

Kitumbatu and Kimakunduchi are the countryside dialects of the island of Zanzibar. Kimakunduchi is a recent renaming of "Kihadimu"; the old name means "serf" and so is considered pejorative.

Makunduchi Mafia, Mbwera Kilwa (extinct) Kimgao used to be spoken around Kilwa District and to the south.

Maho includes the various Comorian dialects as a third group. Most other authorities consider Comorian to be a Sabaki language, distinct from Swahili.

[ 90 ] Other regions [ edit ] In Somalia , where the Afroasiatic Somali language predominates, a variant of Swahili referred to as Chimwiini (also known as Chimbalazi) is spoken along the Benadir coast by the Bravanese people .

[ 91 ] Another Swahili dialect known as Kibajuni also serves as the mother tongue of the Bajuni minority ethnic group, which lives in the tiny Bajuni Islands as well as the southern Kismayo region.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] In Oman , there are an estimated 52,000 people who speak Swahili as of 2020.

[ 94 ] Most are descendants of those repatriated after the fall of the Sultanate of Zanzibar .

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Pidgins and creoles [ edit ] There are Swahili-based slangs, pidgins and creoles: Kitaa – Dar es Salaam Engsh – Cant from the rich neighbourhoods of Nairobi, Kenya KiKAR – Swahili pidgin spoken in British colonial East Africa Kutchi-Swahili – Creole derived from Kutchi and Swahili languages Settler Swahili – Swahili pidgin from Kenya and Zambia Sheng slang – Nairobi urban-based youth slang Swahili poets [ edit ] Dada Masiti (c. 1810s–15 July 1919), Kenyan poet Shaaban bin Robert (1909–1962), Tanzanian poet, author, and essayist Euphrase Kezilahabi (1944–2020), Tanzanian novelist, poet, and scholar Mathias E. Mnyampala (1917–1969), Tanzanian writer, lawyer, and poet Tumi Molekane (b. 1981), South African rapper and poet Fadhy Mtanga (b. 1981), Tanzanian creative writer, photographer, graphic designer Christopher Mwashinga (b. 1965), Tanzanian author and poet Abdilatif Abdalla (b. 1946), Kenyan poet and political activist.

[ a ] Mwana Kupona (d.

c.

1865 ), Kenyan poet.

Ebrahim Hussein (b. 1943) , Tanzanian playwright and poet Haji Gora Haji (1933–2021), Tanzanian poet Alamin Mazrui (b. 1948), Kenyan poet [ 97 ] Kithaka wa Mberia (b. 1955), Poet [ 98 ] Ahmed Sheikh Nabhany (1927–2017), Kenyan poet Oral literature [ edit ] 19th-century collections [ edit ] In 1870, Edward Steere published Swahili Tales as Told by Natives of Zanzibar , a collection of 23 Swahili tales with facing-text English translation, along with a selection of proverbs and riddles.

[ 99 ] Some of the tales included are: " Kisa cha Punda wa Dobi, " [ 100 ] "The Story of the Washerman's Donkey," also known as " The Heart of a Monkey ;" " Mwalimu Goso, " [ 101 ] "Goso the Teacher," a cumulative tale ; and
" Sungura na Simba, " [ 102 ] "The Hare and the Lion," a story about the trickster hare .

Here are some of the proverbs that Steere recorded in Swahili: [ 103 ] " Mbio za sakafuni hwishia ukingoni ." "Running on a roof ends at the edge of it." " Angurumapo simba, mteza nani ?" "Who will dance to a lion's roaring?" " Mlevi wa mvinyo hulevuka, mlevi wa mali halevuki ." "He that is drunk with wine gets sober, he that is drunk with wealth does not." " Kikulacho kinguoni mwako ." "What bites is in your own clothes." Here are some of the riddles that Steere recorded in Swahili: [ 104 ] " Nyumba yangu kubwa, haina mlango (yayi).

" "My house is large; it has no door (egg)." " Kuku wangu akazalia miibani (nanasi).

" "My hen has laid among thorns (pineapple)." " Popo mbili zavuka mto (macho).

" "Two nuts cross a river (eyes)." Steere also includes the formulaic announcement of a riddle: " Kitendawili! — Tega.

" "An enigma! — Set your trap." An anonymous publication from 1881, Swahili Stories from Arab Sources with an English Translation , includes 15 stories in Swahili with English translations, plus an additional 14 Swahili stories that are not translated. There is also a selection of proverbs and riddles with English translations.

[ 105 ] Here are some of the proverbs: [ 106 ] " Tulingane sawasawa, kama sahani na kawa ." "We match together, like a dish and a cover." " Samaki mmoja akioza, wameoza wote ." "If one fish is bad, they are all bad." " Wa kuume haukati wa kushoto ." "The right hand does not cut the left." " Paka akiondoka, panya hutawala ." "When the cat goes away, the rat is king." Here are some of the riddles: [ 107 ] " Gumugumu huzaa teketeke, gumugumu teketeke huzaa (mahindi) ." "The hard is the parent of the soft, and the soft of the hard (maize)." " Mtoto wangu killa mwaka hulala chini (boga) ." "My child each year lies on the ground (pumpkin)." " Nyumba vangu kubwa haina taa (kaburi).

" "My great house has no lamp (grave)." " Nimetupa mshale wangu, mchana kwenda mbali nikitupa usiku hauendi mbali (macho).

" "I cast my arrow in the day time, it went far off; it I cast it at night, it does not go far (eyes)." For additional collections of Swahili prose from the 19th century, see the inventory in J. D. Rollins's A History of Swahili Prose from Earliest Times to the End of the Nineteenth Century.

[ 108 ] Additional proverbs [ edit ] Fuata nyuki ule asali.

[ 109 ] : 478 Fuata nyuki ule asali.

Follow the bee so that you may eat honey.

Baada ya dhiki faraja.

[1] Baada ya dhiki faraja.

After hardship comes relief.

Mgaagaa na upwa hali wali mkavu.

[ 109 ] : 482 Mgaagaa na upwa hali wali mkavu.

The one who busies himself with work will not miss a meal.

Mwacha mila ni mtumwa.

Mwacha mila ni mtumwa.

The person who abandons his culture is a slave.

Loxodonta africana elephants frolic in Amboseli National Park , Kenya, 2012.

Two sayings with the same literal meaning of Where elephants fight, the grass is trampled or figuratively speaking, when those with power fight, it is those below them who suffer: [ 110 ] [ 111 ] Wapiganapo tembo nyasi huumia.

[ 112 ] Wapiganapo tembo nyasi huumia.

Fighting elephants damage the grass.

Ndovu wawili wakisongana, ziumiazo ni nyika.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] Ndovu wawili wakisongana, ziumiazo ni nyika.

Where two elephants argue, the grassland is damaged.

Sample text [ edit ] Swahili [ 115 ] English [ 115 ] Kifungu cha 26.

1) Kila mtu ana haki ya kuelimishwa. Elimu yapasa itolewe bure hasa ile ya madarasa ya chini. Elimu ya madarasa ya chini ihudhuriwe kwa lazima. Elimu ya ufundi na ustadi iwe wazi kwa wote. Na elimu ya juu iwe wazi kwa wote kwa kutegemea sifa ya mtu.

2) Elimu itolewe kwa madhumuni ya kuendeleza barabara hali ya binadamu, na kwa shabaha ya kukuza haki za binadamu na uhuru wake wa asili. Elimu ni wajibu ikuze hali ya kueleana, kuvumiliana na ya urafiki kati ya mataifa na kati ya watu wa rangi na dini mbali-mbali. Kadhalika ni wajibu iendeleze shughuli za Umoja wa Mataifa za kudumisha amani.

3) Ni haki ya wazazi kuchagua aina ya elimu ya kufunzwa watoto wao.

Article 26 1. Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.

2. Education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations, racial or religious groups, and shall further the activities of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace.

3. Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that shall be given to their children.

See also [ edit ] Africa portal Languages portal Mandombe script Swahili literature Settler Swahili GLOCALangs UCLA Language Materials Project Languages of Africa Notes [ edit ] ^ He was imprisoned for his support of the Kenya People's Union, and wrote the poetry collection Sauti ya Dhiki while in solitary confinement, which was subsequently awarded the Jomo Kenyatta Prize for Literature .

References [ edit ] ^ Thomas J. Hinnebusch, 1992, "Swahili", International Encyclopedia of Linguistics , Oxford, pp. 99–106 David Dalby, 1999/2000, The Linguasphere Register of the World's Languages and Speech Communities , Linguasphere Press, Volume Two, pp. 733–735 Benji Wald, 1994, "Sub-Saharan Africa", Atlas of the World's Languages , Routledge, pp. 289–346, maps 80, 81, 85 ^ a b c Swahili at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Congo Swahili at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Coastal Swahili at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Makwe (?) at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Mwani (?) at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) ^ Nurse, Derek; Spear, Thomas (10 June 2017).

The Swahili: Reconstructing the History and Language of an African Society, 800–1500 . University of Pennsylvania Press. p.

50 .

ISBN 9781512821666 .

^ "Sadc Adopts Kiswahili as 4th Working Language" .

European Commission . 30 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2021 .

^ Jouni Filip Maho, 2009.

New Updated Guthrie List Online ^ Mugane, John (21 June 2022).

"The Story of Swahili" (PDF) .

Center for International Studies, Ohio University . Retrieved 21 June 2022 .

^ a b The Encyclopedia of the World's Minorities (ed. Carl Skutsch; publ. Taylor & Francis; 2013), pages 183–184: "The most important single [Bantu language] is Swahili as a primary or secondary language (50 million speakers)." John M. Mugane, The Story of Swahili (2015), page 1: "In terms of speakers, [Swahili] is peer to the dozen or so languages of the world that boast close to 100 million users" [footnoted to page 287:] "The World Bank estimates that 120 to 150 million people speak Swahili as a second language; William J. Frawley (2003, 181) puts the number at a minimum of 75 million, and Ethnologue has it as 40 million. This book takes the higher number as closer to the reality, given that Swahili is well known as a lingua franca in countries whose populations far exceed 150 million." (Page 227: "Africa's Swahili-speaking region, in which 100 million people who speak it as a second language have created a diverse array of [varieties]".) University of Arizona Critical Languages Program : "[estimates] vary widely, from 60 million to over 150 million".

"World Kiswahili Language Day" . UNESCO. 5 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2022 . Retrieved 4 November 2023 .

Kiswahili is one of the most widely used languages of the African family, and the most widely spoken in sub-Saharan Africa. It is among the 10 most widely spoken languages in the world, with more than 200 million speakers.

^ a b c " 'It's time we move from the coloniser's language' " .

BBC News . 17 February 2022.

^ Schadeberg, Thilo C. (12 December 2009), "1. Loanwords in Swahili" , Loanwords in the World's Languages , Walter de Gruyter, pp.

76– 102, doi : 10.1515/9783110218442.76 , ISBN 978-3-11-021843-5 , retrieved 7 March 2025 ^ "Swahili language" . Encyclopaedia Britannica.

Archived from the original on 23 July 2019 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 .

^ Mazrui, Ali Al'Amin. (1995).

Swahili state and society : the political economy of an African language . East African Educational Publishers.

ISBN 0-85255-729-9 .

OCLC 441402890 .

^ Prins 1961 ^ "Development and Promotion of Extractive Industries and Mineral Value Addition" .

East African Community .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2016 . Retrieved 20 July 2016 .

^ a b Press Release on EAKC ^ Sobuwa, Yoliswa (17 September 2018).

"Kiswahili gets minister's stamp to be taught in SA schools" .

The Sowetan .

Archived from the original on 18 September 2018 . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Botswana to Introduce Swahili Language in Local Schools" . 12 October 2020.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2021 . Retrieved 21 February 2021 .

^ "Pandemic disrupts Kiswahili adoption plans" . 3 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2021 .

^ "AAU to Start Teaching Kiswahili Language – Ethiopian Monitor" . 9 February 2022 . Retrieved 8 April 2022 .

^ Mbamalu, Socrates (13 March 2019).

"Tanzania to send Kiswahili teachers to South Sudan" .

This is africa . Retrieved 8 April 2022 .

^ Nurse and Hinnebusch, 1993, p.18 ^ Nurse and Hinnebusch, 1993 ^ "UNESCO declares July 7 World Kiswahili Language Day" .

unesco.org . 24 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2022 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 .

^ Derek Nurse, Thomas J. Hinnebusch, Gérard Philippson. 1993.

Swahili and Sabaki: A Linguistic History . University of California Press ^ Derek Nurse, Thomas T. Spear. 1985. Arabic loan words make up to 40% of the language.

The Swahili: Reconstructing the History and Language of an African Society , 800–1500. University of Pennsylvania Press ^ Thomas Spear. 2000. "Early Swahili History Reconsidered".

The International Journal of African Historical Studies , Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 257–290 ^ Polomé, Edgar (1967).

Swahili Language Handbook (PDF) . Centre for Applied Linguistics. p. 28.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 12 September 2019 .

^ Ali, Hassan O.

"A Brief History of the Swahili Language" .

Swahili Language & Culture .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2017 . Retrieved 30 September 2017 .

^ "1. Loanwords in Swahili", T. Schadeberg, in Tadmor, Uri. Loanwords in the World's Languages: A Comparative Handbook. Germany: De Gruyter, 2009.

^ Baldi, Sergio, Arabic Loans in East African Languages through Swahili: A Survey Archived 30 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Folia Orientalia, 2012, PAS Journals Repository ^ Nurse and Hinnebusch, 1993, p. 321 ^ Spear, Thomas (2000). "Early Swahili History Reconsidered".

The International Journal of African Historical Studies .

33 (2): 257– 290.

doi : 10.2307/220649 .

JSTOR 220649 .

^ "A Guide to Swahili - 10 facts about the Swahili language" .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2017 . Retrieved 30 September 2017 .

^ Juma, Abdurahman.

"Swahili history" . glcom.com.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2017 . Retrieved 30 September 2017 .

^ Alpers, E. A. (1975).

Ivory and Slaves in East Central Africa . London: Heinemann. pp.

98– 99.

^ Vernet, T. (2002). "Les cités-Etats swahili et la puissance omanaise (1650–1720)".

Journal des Africanistes .

72 (2): 102– 05.

doi : 10.3406/jafr.2002.1308 .

^ "Baba yetu" . Wikisource.

Archived from the original on 8 October 2011 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 .

^ "Swahili" . About World Languages.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2017 . Retrieved 30 September 2017 .

^ Mdee, James S. (1999).

"Dictionaries and the Standardization of Spelling in Swahili" . Lexikos. pp.

126– 27.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2019 . Retrieved 2 June 2017 .

^ Nurse & Thomas Spear (1985) The Swahili ^ Kharusi, N. S. (2012). "The Ethnic Label Zinjibari: Politics and Language Choice Implications Among Swahili Speakers in Oman".

Ethnicities .

12 (3): 335– 353.

doi : 10.1177/1468796811432681 .

S2CID 145808915 .

^ Adriaan Hendrik Johan Prins (1961) The Swahili-speaking Peoples of Zanzibar and the East African Coast.

Ethnologue ^ "Zana za Uhakiki za Microsoft Office 2016 – Kiingereza" .

Microsoft Download Center .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2019 .

^ a b c d "Salama" .

77.240.23.241 . Retrieved 23 October 2019 .

^ "Helsinki Corpus of Swahili 2.0 (HCS 2.0) – META-SHARE" .

metashare.csc.fi .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2019 .

^ Hurskainen, Arvi. 2018. Sustainable language technology for African languages. In Agwuele, Augustine and Bodomo, Adams (eds), The Routledge Handbook of African Linguistics, 359–375. London: Routledge Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-138-22829-0 ^ "The Failure of Language Policy in Tanzanian Schools" .

Archived from the original on 16 July 2020 . Retrieved 13 October 2020 .

^ "Vision and Mission of The National Kiswahili Council" .

The United Republic of Tanzania National Kiswahili Council .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2020 . Retrieved 13 October 2020 .

^ "7. National, official and other languages - Kenya Law Reform Commission (KLRC)" .

^ a b "Uganda finally adopts Kiswahili as official language" .

The East African . 5 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

^ "CHAKITA:Chama Cha Kiswahili Cha Taifa" .

chakita.org . Retrieved 21 June 2022 .

^ "CS Matiangi: Kiswahili to remain compulsory in new curriculum" .

Kenya Broadcasting Corporation(KBC) . Retrieved 21 June 2022 .

^ Okamura, Toru; Kai, Masumi (2020).

Indigenous Language Acquisition, Maintenance, and Loss and Current Language Policies . IGI Global. p. 58.

ISBN 9781799829614 .

^ "The variability of Kiswahili In Bujumbura" . Retrieved 4 September 2023 .

^ "Burundi : l'apprentissage du français en perte de vitesse" . 22 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 November 2024 .

^ "Kiswahili language compulsory in primary, secondary schools – Cabinet" .

The Monitor . 5 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

^ a b c "The Federal Republic of Somalia Provisional Constitution of 2012" .

^ Henderson, Brent.

Chimwiini: Endangered Status and Syntactic Distinctiveness (PDF) (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2022.

^ Nurse, Derek.

"When northern Swahili met southern Somali" (PDF) .

Contemporary African Linguistics .

^ Scharrer, Tabea (16 June 2018).

" "Ambiguous citizens": Kenyan Somalis and the question of belonging" .

Journal of Eastern African Studies .

12 (3): 494– 513.

doi : 10.1080/17531055.2018.1483864 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0001-F64C-5 .

ISSN 1753-1055 .

S2CID 149655820 .

^ Weitzberg, Keren (25 July 2017), We Do Not Have Borders: Greater Somalia and the Predicaments of Belonging in Kenya , Ohio University Press, pp.

181– 182, doi : 10.2307/j.ctv224txv2.16 , S2CID 240478166 , retrieved 19 January 2022 ^ Mushungulu at Ethnologue (25th ed., 2022) ^ "Glottolog 4.5 – Northeast Coastal Bantu" .

glottolog.org . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "Somalia finally joins EAC as the bloc's 8th Partner State" .

www.eac.int . Archived from the original on 4 March 2024 . Retrieved 15 January 2025 .

^ Mukuthuria, Mwenda (March 2009).

"Islam and the Development of Kiswahili" (PDF) .

The Journal of Pan African Studies .

2 (8): 36– 45 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 .

^ Whiteley, Wilfred H. (October 1956).

"The Changing Position of Swahili in East Africa" .

Africa: Journal of the International African Institute .

26 (4). Cambridge University Press: 323– 331.

doi : 10.2307/1156672 .

JSTOR 1156672 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 .

^ Heugh, Kathleen (2006). "Language Education Policies in Africa".

Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics . Vol. 6 (2nd ed.). Elsevier. pp.

414– 422.

doi : 10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00664-7 .

ISBN 978-0-08-044854-1 .

^ Simpson, Andrew (2009).

"German Colonial Administrators, Swahili Lecturers and the Promotion of Swahili at the Seminar für Orientalische Sprachen in Berlin" .

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society .

19 (1). Cambridge University Press: 53– 66.

doi : 10.1017/S1356186308008815 (inactive 1 July 2025).

JSTOR 25653412 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Pawliková-Vilhanová, Viera (2006).

"Biblical Translations of Early Missionaries in East and Central Africa" (PDF) .

Asian and African Studies .

15 (1): 80– 89 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 .

^ Dzahene-Quarshie, Josephine (2014). "The Development of Kiswahili as an Academic Discipline".

Journeys through the Modern Languages at the University of Ghana . Ayebia Clarke Publishing Ltd. pp.

63– 72 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 .

^ a b Contini-Morava, Ellen. 1997. Swahili Phonology. In Kaye, Alan S. (ed.), Phonologies of Asia and Africa 2, 841–860. Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns.

^ a b Swahili Language Handbook (PDF) (Report), archived (PDF) from the original on 27 November 2020 , retrieved 12 September 2019 ^ Modern Swahili Grammar East African Publishers, 2001 Mohamed Abdulla Mohamed p. 4 ^ a b Lodhi, Abdulaziz Y. (2003).

"Aspiration in Swahili Adjectives and Verbs" (PDF) .

Africa & Asia .

3 : 157. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 July 2020.

^ "A Guide to Swahili – The Swahili alphabet" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 12 February 2020 . Retrieved 25 December 2019 .

^ a b Mutiua, Chapane. “Swahili Ajami: An Introduction.” Hypotheses, October 7, 2020.

https://ajami.hypotheses.org/1089 ( Archive .

^ a b Omar, Y. A., & Frankl, P. J. L. (1997). An Historical Review of the Arabic Rendering of Swahili Together with Proposals for the Development of a Swahili Writing System in Arabic Script (Based on the Swahili of Mombasa). Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 7(01), 55–71. doi: https://doi.org/10.1017/S1356186300008312 ^ Ellen Contini-Morava (1994) Noun Classification in Swahili.

^ See Contini-Morava for details.

^ See pp. 83–84 in Ghil'ad Zuckermann (2020), Revivalistics: From the Genesis of Israeli to Language Reclamation in Australia and Beyond , Oxford University Press Archived 25 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 9780199812790 / ISBN 9780199812776 .

^ a b See pp. 11 and 52 in Ghil'ad Zuckermann (2003), Language Contact and Lexical Enrichment in Israeli Hebrew , Palgrave Macmillan Archived 12 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 9781403917232 / ISBN 9781403938695 .

^ Kamil Ud Deen, 2005.

The acquisition of Swahili .

^ a b H.E.Lambert 1956, 1957, 1958 ^ a b Mulokozi, Mugyabuso M.; Sengo, Tigiti S. Y. (1995).

History of Kiswahili Poetry, A.D. 1000–2000: A Report . Institute of Kiswahili Research, University of Dar es Salaam.

ISBN 9789976911220 . Retrieved 11 November 2022 .

^ Mathieu Roy (2013).

KIAMU, archipel de Lamu (Kenya): Analyse phonétique et morphologique d'un corpus linguistique et poétique (French ed.).

^ a b "SOAS Swahili manuscripts" .

SOAS Swahili manuscripts . varia . Retrieved 11 November 2022 .

^ SACLEUX, Charles (1909).

Grammaire des dialectes swahilis . Paris: Procure des PP. du Saint-Esprit. p. IX.

^ KNAPPERT, Jan (1979).

Four centuries of Swahili verses . London: DARF PUBLISHERS.

^ Maho, Jouni Filip.

"The online version of the New Updated Guthrie List, a referential classification of the Bantu languages" (PDF) .

brill.com . Brill . Retrieved 11 November 2022 .

^ "SOAS Swahili manuscripts" .

SOAS Swahili manuscripts . varia . Retrieved 11 November 2022 .

^ Derek Nurse; Thomas Spear; Thomas T. Spear (1985).

The Swahili: Reconstructing the History and Language of an African Society, 800–1500 . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 65.

ISBN 9780812212075 .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 June 2016 .

^ Swahili language at Ethnologue (25th ed., 2022) ^ Swahili language at Ethnologue (25th ed., 2022) ^ Mwakikagile, Godfrey (2007).

Kenya: identity of a nation . New Africa Press. p. 102.

ISBN 978-0-9802587-9-0 .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2017 .

^ Swahili language at Ethnologue (25th ed., 2022) ^ Fuchs, Martina (5 October 2011).

"African Swahili music lives on in Oman" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 .

^ Beate Ursula Josephi, Journalism education in countries with limited media freedom , Volume 1 of Mass Communication and Journalism, (Peter Lang: 2010), p.96.

^ "Alamin Mazrui" .

Poetry Translation Centre . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ "Kithaka wa Mberia" .

Poetry Translation Centre . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ Steere, Edward (1870).

Swahili Tales as Told by Natives of Zanzibar . London: Bell and Daldy.

^ Steere 1870 , pp. 2-10.

^ Steere 1870 , pp. 286-294.

^ Steere 1870 , pp. 370-378.

^ Steere 1870 , pp. 192-195.

^ Steere 1870 , pp. 418-421.

^ anonymous (1881).

Swahili Stories from Arab Sources . Zanzibar.

^ Swahili Stories 1881 . pp. 34-35.

^ Swahili Stories 1881 . pp. 35-36.

^ Rollins, Jack D. (1983) A History of Swahili Prose from Earliest Times to the End of the Nineteenth Century . Leiden: Brill. pp. 55-56.

^ a b Baraza la Kiswahili la Zanzibar (2010).

Kamusi la Kiswahili Fasaha (in Swahili). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-573618-2 .

OCLC 800802371 .

^ www.oxfordreference.com When elephants fight, it is the grass that suffers . Consulted on 13 June 2021.

^ New York Times 26 March 1936 ^ howafrica.com Animals – 27 Fascinating African Proverbs About Elephants, One of the Big 5 Animals 17. When elephants fight it is the grass that suffers. ~ Kikuyu Proverb . Consulted on 13 June 2021.

^ afriprov.org Nov. 2001 Proverb: ” When elephants fight the grass (reeds) gets hurt.” – Swahili ( Eastern and Central Africa ), Also Gikuyu ( Kenya), Kuria ( Kenya/Tanzania), Ngoreme (Tanzania) . Consulted on 13 June 2021.

^ Steere 1870 , p. 193 ^ a b "Swahili Reading" .

mylanguages.org . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

Sources [ edit ] Ashton, E. O. (1947).

Swahili Grammar: Including intonation . Essex: Longman House.

ISBN 0-582-62701-X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Blommaert, Jan (2003).

"Situating Language Rights: English and Swahili in Tanzania Revisited" (PDF) .

Working Papers in Urban Language & Literacies 23. Ghent University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2007.

Brock-Utne, Birgit (2001). "Education for All – in Whose Language?".

Oxford Review of Education .

27 (1): 115– 134.

doi : 10.1080/03054980125577 .

S2CID 144457326 .

Chiraghdin, Shihabuddin; Mnyampala, Mathias E.

(1977).

Historia ya Kiswahili . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-572367-8 .

Contini-Morava, Ellen (1994).

"Noun Classification in Swahili" .

Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities . University of Virginia. Archived from the original on 1 February 2024.

Irele, Abiola; Jeyifo, Biodun, eds. (2010).

The Oxford encyclopedia of African thought . Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-533473-9 .

Lambert, H. E. (1957).

Ki-Vumba: A Dialect of the Southern Kenya Coast . Studies in Swahili dialect. Vol. 2. Kampala: East African Swahili Committee, Makerere College.

LCCN 93243012 .

Lambert, H. E. (1958).

Chi-Jomvu and ki-Ngare: Subdialects of the Mombasa Area . Studies in Swahili dialect. Vol. 3. Kampala: East African Swahili Committee, Makerere College.

OCLC 11680805 .

Lambert, H. E. (1958).

Chi-Chifundi: A Dialect of the Southern Kenya Coast . Studies in Swahili dialect. Vol. 5. Kampala: East African Swahili Committee, Makerere College.

LCCN 60032150 .

Marshad, Hassan A. (1993).

Kiswahili au Kiingereza? (Nchini Kenya) (in Swahili). Nairobi: Jomo Kenyatta Foundation.

ISBN 9966-22-098-4 .

Mugane, John A. (2015).

The Story of Swahili . Athens, OH: Ohio University Press.

ISBN 978-0-89680-293-3 .

Nurse, Derek; Hinnebusch, Thomas J. (1993).

Swahili and Sabaki: a linguistic history . University of California Publications in Linguistics. Vol. 121.

ISBN 0520097750 .

LCCN 93004560 .

Ogechi, Nathan Oyori (2003).

"On language rights in Kenya" (PDF) .

Nordic Journal of African Studies .

12 (3): 277– 295. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2011.

Prins, A. H. J. (1961). "The Swahili-Speaking Peoples of Zanzibar and the East African Coast (Arabs, Shirazi and Swahili)". In Forde, Daryll (ed.).

Ethnographic Survey of Africa . London: International African Institute.

Prins, A. H. J. (1970).

A Swahili Nautical Dictionary . Preliminary studies in Swahili lexicon. Vol. 1. Dar es Salaam: Chuo cha Uchunguzi wa Lugha ya Kiswahili.

LCCN 79981848 .

Sakai, Yuko (2020).

Swahili Syntax Tree Diagram: Based on Universal Sentence Structure . Createspace.

ISBN 978-1696306461 .

Whiteley, Wilfred (1969).

Swahili: the rise of a national language . Studies in African History. London: Methuen.

External links [ edit ] UCLA report on Swahili John Ogwana (2001) Swahili Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow: Factors of Its Development and Expansion List of Swahili Dictionaries Arthur Cornwallis Madan (1902).

English-Swahili dictionary .

Clarendon Press . p. 555.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2018 – via archive.org .

Erickson, Helen; Gustafsson, Marianne (1989).

Kiswahili Grammar Notes . Retrieved 21 December 2021 .

"Proposal to add Arabic letter for Swahili" at the Unicode Website Nasema , a method of writing Swahili with the N'Ko script Articles related to Swahili language v t e Languages of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Official language French National languages Kongo Kituba Lingala Swahili ( Congo Swahili ) Tshiluba Indigenous languages (by province ) Bandundu Boma Chokwe Ding Hungana Kwese Lia-Ntomba Mbala Mpuono Nzadi Pende Sakata Sengele Shinji Sonde Suku Tiene Yaka Yansi Équateur Bala Bangi Bango Budza Central Banda Furu Losengo Mbaka Mbandja Mongo Mono Ndolo Ndunga Ngbaka Minagende Ngbandi Ngbinda Ngbundu Ngombe Pagibete Sango South Banda Yangere Kasai-Occidental Binji Bushong Chokwe Lele Lwalu Wongo Kasai-Oriental Budya Dengese Luna Nkutu Salampasu Songe Tetela Katanga Bangubangu Bemba Bwile Chokwe Hemba Kaonde Kebwe Luba-Katanga Lunda Ruund Sanga Tabwa Zela Yazi Kinshasa Mfinu Maniema Hendo Zimba Nord-Kivu Amba Havu Hunde Kinyarwanda Kirundi Nande Nyanga Talinga Tembo Vanuma Yaka Orientale Alur Asoa Avokaya Bangala Bangba Barambu Beeke Bila Budu Bwa Bwela Dongo Guru Hema Kaliko Kango (Bas-Uélé District) Kango (Tshopo District) Kari Kele Lendu Lese Lika Likile Linga Loki Logo Lombo Lugbara Ma Mangbetu Mangbutu Mayogo Mba Mbo Ndaka Ngbee Ngelima Nyali Nyanga-li Nzakara Omi Pambia Poke Soko Tagbo Zande Sud-Kivu Buyu Fuliiru Havu Kabwari Rwanda Nyindu Rundi Shi Tembo Sign languages French African Sign v t e Languages of Kenya Official languages English Swahili Indigenous languages Bantu Bajuni Digo Embu Gusii Idaxo-Isuxa-Tiriki Ilwana Kamba Khayo Kikuyu Kuria Logoli Luhya Marachi Mijikenda Meru Nyole Pokomo Samia Suba Taita West Nyala Cushitic Aweer Burji Daasanach Dahalo El Molo Orma Oromo Rendille Somali Southern Oromo Waata Yaaku Nilo-Saharan Kipsigis Luo Maasai Naandi Ogiek Omotik Pökoot Samburu Tugen Turkana Immigrant languages English French Punjabi Spanish German Italian Hindi Hebrew Arabic Chinese Portuguese Japanese Romani Russian Danish Dutch Sign languages Kenyan Sign Language Urban languages Sheng Engsh v t e Languages of Mozambique Official language Portuguese Indigenous languages Barwe Chewa Chichopi Chitonga Chuwabu Dema Gitonga Kimwani Koti Kunda Lomwe Maindo Makhuwa Makonde Makwe Manyika Nathembo Ndau Ngoni Nsenga Nyungwe Phimbi Ronga Sena Shona Swahili Swati Tawara Tewe Tsonga Tswa Yao Immigrant languages English Punjabi Hindi Sign languages Mozambican Sign Language v t e Languages of Oman Official language Arabic Oman portal Main foreign language English Minority languages Balochi Baṭḥari Ḥarsusi Hobyót Kumzari Luwati Mehri Shehri Swahili Varieties of Arabic Bahrani Arabic Omani Arabic Dhofari Shihhi Sign languages Omani Sign Language v t e Languages of Tanzania Official languages Swahili English Indigenous languages Bantu Northeast Bantu Bena–Kinga Bena Hehe Kinga Kisi Manda Pangwa Sangu Vwanji Chaga Central Kilimanjaro Mochi Gweno Rombo Rusa West Kilimanjaro Great Lakes Ha Hangaza Ikizu Ikoma Jita Kabwa Kara Kerewe Kuria Kwaya Ngoreme Nyambo Suba-Simbiti Sumbwa Vinza Zanaki Zinza Kikuyu–Kamba Sonjo Northeast Coast Digo Doe Gogo Kagulu Kami Kutu Kwere Luguru Ngulu Sagara Shambala Vidunda Zaramo Takama Holoholo Iramba Isanzu Kimbu Nyamwezi Sukuma Turu Kilombero Mbunga Ndamba Pogolo Rufiji–Ruvuma Matengo Matumbi Mpoto Mwera Ndendeule Ndengereko Ndonde Ngindo Ngoni Nindi Yao Rukwa Bungu Fipa Lambya Malila Mambwe-Lungu Mwanga Nyakyusa Nyiha Nyika Safwa Wanda Other Bantu Bemba Makhuwa Mbamba Bay Mbugwe Rangi Cushitic Alagwa Asa Burunge Gorowa Iraqw Kwʼadza Nilotic Datooga Kisankasa Kwavi Maasai Mediak Mosiro Ngasa Luo Ogiek Isolates/unclassified Hadza Sandawe Omaio "Serengeti-Dorobo" Sign languages 7 school sign languages v t e Languages of Uganda Official languages English Swahili Ugandan Sign Language Indigenous languages Bantu Amba Gungu Gwere Khayo Kiga Kinyarwanda Luganda Luhya Marachi Masaba Nkore Nkore-Kiga Nyole Nyoro Nyoro-Tooro Ruuli Samia Singa Soga Talinga Tooro Nilo-Saharan Acholi Adhola Alur Aringa Bari Elgon Ik Karamojong Kuku Lango Lugbara Nyang'i Pökoot Soo Southern Luo Teso Others Runyakitara Nubi Oropom Immigrant languages English French Punjabi Spanish German Italian Hindi Hebrew Arabic Chinese Portuguese Japanese Russian Danish Dutch v t e Narrow Bantu languages (Zones E–H) (by Guthrie classification ) Zone E [J]E10 [J]E11 Nyoro [J]E12 Tooro [J]E13 Nyankore [J]E14 Ciga [J]E15 Ganda [J]E16 Soga [J]E17 Gwere [J]E18 Nyala [JE101 Gungu JE102 Talinga-Bwisi JE103 Ruli JE121 Hema [J]E20 [J]E21 Nyambo [J]E22 Ziba [J]E23 Dzindza [J]E24 Kerebe [J]E25 Jita [JE221 Rashi JE251 Kwaya JE252 Kara JE253 Ruri [J]E30 [J]E31a Gisu [J]E31b Kisu [J]E31c Bukusu [J]E32a Hanga [J]E32b Tsotso [J]E33 Nyore [J]E34 Saamia [J]E35 Nyuli [JE341 Xaayo JE342 Marachi JE343 Songa [J]E40 [J]E41 Logooli [J]E42 Gusii [J]E43 Koria [J]E44 Zanaki [J]E45 Nata E46 Sonjo [JE401 Nguruimi JE402 Ikizu JE403 Suba / Suba-Simbiti JE404 Shashi JE405 Kabwa JE406 Singa JE407 Ware JE411 Idaxo JE412 Isuxa JE413 Tiriki JE431 Simbiti JE432 Hacha JE433 Surwa JE434 Sweta E50 E51 Kikuyu E52 Embu E53 Meru E54 Saraka E55 Kamba E56 Daiso [E531 Mwimbi-Muthambi E541 Cuka E60 E61[621a] Rwo E62a[621b,622a] Hai E62b[622c] Wunjo E62c[623] Rombo E63 Rusa E64 Kahe E65 Gweno E70 E71 Pokomo E72a Gyriama E72b Kauma E72c Conyi E72d Duruma E72e Rabai E73 Digo E74a Dabida E74b[741] Sagala [E701 Elwana E731 Segeju E732 Degere E74 Taita Zone F F10 F11 Tongwe F12 Bende [J]F20 [J]F21 Sukuma [J]F22 Nyamwezi [J]F23 Sumbwa [J]F24 Kimbu [J]F25 Bungu F30 F31 Nilamba F32 Remi F33 Langi F34 Mbugwe Zone G G10 G11 Gogo G12 Kaguru G20 G21 Tubeta G22 Asu G23 Shambala G24 Bondei [G221 Mbugu G30 G31 Zigula G32 Ngwele G33 Zaramo G34 Ngulu G35 Ruguru G36 Kami G37 Kutu G38 Vidunda G39 Sagala [G301 Doe G311 Mushungulu G40 G41 Tikuu G42a Amu G42b Mvita G42c Mrima G42d Unguja G43a Phemba G43b Tumbatu G43c Hadimu G44a Ngazija G44b Njuani [G402 Makwe G403 Mwani G404 Sidi G411 Socotra Swahili G412 Mwiini G50 G51 Pogolo G52 Ndamba G60 G61 Sango G62 Hehe G63 Bena G64 Pangwa G65 Kinga G66 Wanji G67 Kisi [G651 Magoma Zone H H10 H11 Beembe H12 Vili H13 Kunyi H14 Ndingi H15 Mboka H16a South Kongo H16b Central Kongo H16c Yombe H16d Fiote H16e Bwende H16f Laadi H16g East Kongo H16h Southeast Kongo [H111 Hangala H112 Kamba - Doondo H131 Suundi H20 H21a Kimbundu H21b Mbamba H22 Sama H23 Bolo H24 Songo H30 H31 Yaka H32 Suku H33 [L12b] Hungu H34 Mbangala H35 Sinji [H321 Soonde H40 H41 Mbala H42 Hunganna Italics indicate extinct languages .

Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left.

The Guthrie classification is geographic and its groupings do not imply a relationship between the languages within them.

Narrow Bantu languages by Guthrie classification zone templates Template:Narrow Bantu languages (Zones A–B) Template:Narrow Bantu languages (Zones C–D) Template:Narrow Bantu languages (Zones E–H) Template:Narrow Bantu languages (Zones J–M) Template:Narrow Bantu languages (Zones N–S) Swahili language at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Textbooks from Wikibooks Phrasebook from Wikivoyage Swahili edition of Wikipedia Data from Wikidata Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Spain Israel Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bfjw7
Cached time: 20250817181603
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.013 seconds
Real time usage: 2.322 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15948/1000000
Revision size: 92751/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 609251/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 110377/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 411763/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.197/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22243071/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1927.745      1 -total
 32.92%  634.631      2 Template:Reflist
 17.33%  334.041      1 Template:Infobox_language
 16.46%  317.301      2 Template:Infobox
 12.80%  246.782     28 Template:Cite_book
 12.39%  238.832     39 Template:Cite_web
  8.16%  157.255     17 Template:Navbox
  7.68%  148.104      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.61%  146.689     25 Template:Lang
  5.37%  103.512     13 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:28450:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817181603 and revision id 1302987666. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swahili_language&oldid=1302987666 " Categories : Swahili language Swahili culture Northeast Coast Bantu languages Non-tonal languages in tonal families Agglutinative languages Languages of Kenya Languages of Burundi Languages of Uganda Languages of Tanzania Languages of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Languages of Rwanda Languages of Mozambique Languages of Malawi Languages of the African diaspora Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Language articles citing Ethnologue 27 Webarchive template wayback links Language articles citing Ethnologue 25 CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 Swahili-language sources (sw) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2019 Articles containing Swahili (macrolanguage)-language text Pages with Swahili (macrolanguage) IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Language articles with Linguasphere code Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing German-language text Pages with plain IPA All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles to be expanded from July 2024 All articles to be expanded Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2022 Pages with interlinear glosses using two unnamed parameters CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 13:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Swahili language 179 languages Add topic

