Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Elements Toggle Elements subsection 2.1 Levels of style 2.2 Virtues of style 2.3 Figures of style 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Elocutio 5 languages Galego 한국어 Italiano Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Third canon of classical rhetoric This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Elocutio" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Elocutio (l exis or phrasis in Greek) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a Latin term for the mastery of rhetorical devices and figures of speech in Western classical rhetoric .

[ 2 ] Elocutio or style is the third of the five canons of classical rhetoric (the others being inventio , dispositio , memoria , and pronuntiatio ) that concern the craft and delivery of speeches and writing.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word elocutio comes from the Latin word loquor , "to speak".

[ 3 ] Elocutio typically refers to rhetorical style.  Similar terms are eloquence and elocution .

Elements [ edit ] An orator or writer had a number of things to decide in developing a style for a particular discourse.

Levels of style [ edit ] First, there was the level of style; plain ( attenuata or subtile ), middle ( mediocris or robusta ), or high ( florida or gravis ).

[ 4 ] Writers were instructed to match the basic style to their subject matter and audience. For instance, Quintilian in his Institutio Oratoria deemed the plain style suitable for instruction, the middle for moving oration, and the high for charming discourse. Today, elocution and rhetoric are associated with the last of the styles, but for rhetoricians, each style was useful in rhetoric.

Virtues of style [ edit ] The ancient authors agreed that the four ingredients necessary to achieve good style included correctness, clearness, appropriateness, and ornament.

[ 5 ] Sometimes translated as "purity", correctness meant that rhetors should use words that were current and adhered to the grammatical rules of whatever language they wrote. Correctness rules are standards of grammar and usage drawn from traditional grammar.

In regard to clarity, most ancient teachers felt that clarity meant that rhetors should use words in their ordinary or everyday senses. The object of clarity was to allow meaning to "shine through" like light through a window.

Appropriateness probably derives from the Greek rhetorical notion to prepon , meaning to say or do whatever is fitting in a given situation. Ancient teachers taught that close attention to Kairos will help to determine the appropriate style.

The last and most important of the excellences of style is ornament, which is defined as extraordinary or unusual use of language.

Figures of style [ edit ] Ornamentation was divided into three broad categories: figures of speech, figures of thought, and tropes . Figures of speech are any artful patterning or arrangement of language. Figures of thought are artful presentations of ideas, feelings, concepts and figures of thought that depart from the ordinary patterns of argument. Tropes are any artful substitution of one term for another.

A great amount of attention was paid to figures of speech , which were classified into various types and subtypes. One Renaissance writer, Henry Peacham , enumerated 184 different figures of speech, but it could be argued that it was a manifestation of the increasing overemphasis on style that began in the Renaissance.

Also important to elocutio were subjects that would now be generally regarded as grammatical: the proper use of punctuation and conjunctions; the desirable order of words in a sentence (unlike English, many languages are not as dependent on word order to establish relationships between words and so choices of word order may revolve more around form than function); and the length of sentences.

See also [ edit ] Writing style Figure of speech Rhetoric References [ edit ] ^ a b Lanham, Richard (1991).

A Handlist of Rhetorical Terms . Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 144.

ISBN 9780520076693 .

^ a b Crowley, Sharon (1999).

Ancient rhetorics for contemporary students . Debra Hawhee (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. p. 229.

ISBN 0-205-26903-6 .

OCLC 38390395 .

^ "Elocutio" .

Wiktionary .

Archived from the original on 2013-05-26.

^ Burton, Gideon.

"Style: Levels of Style" .

Archived from the original on 2003-05-29.

^ Burton, Gideon.

"Virtues of Style" .

Archived from the original on 2003-03-16.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elocutio&oldid=1301053704 " Category : Rhetoric Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 21:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elocutio 5 languages Add topic

