Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In religious tradition 2 See also 3 Appendix Toggle Appendix subsection 3.1 Notes 3.2 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Israfil 29 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса الدارجة Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kurdî مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Русский Shqip سنڌي کوردی తెలుగు Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Archangel in Islam; sometimes identified with Raphael For the angel by this name in the anime Neon Genesis Evangelion , see List of Angels in Neon Genesis Evangelion § Israfel .

For the poem by Edgar Allan Poe , see Poems by Edgar Allan Poe § Israfel (1831) .

Israfel blows a nafir in Zakariya al-Qazwini 's The Wonders of Creation (1570s).

Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian Biblical texts Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats Major figures Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist Different views Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Other events Events of Revelation ( Apocalypse ) Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Pralaya Shiva Islamic Figures Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj Events Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Biblical texts Book of Isaiah Book of Ezekiel Book of Zechariah Book of Daniel Other sources Rabbinic literature ( Mishnah , Talmud , Midrash ) Medieval Jewish scholars Kabbalah Figures Elijah the Prophet , Messiah ( Mashiach Ben David , Mashiach Ben Yosef ), Gog and Magog , Armilus Events and terms Atchalta De'Geulah , Kibbutz Galuyot , Third Temple , War of Gog and Magog , Resurrection of the dead , Olam Haba Norse Figures and items Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar Events Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Divine Incantations Scripture Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious 2012 phenomenon Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Gog and Magog Last Judgment Messianism ( Messiah / Age ) Millenarianism Universal resurrection v t e Part of a series on Islam Beliefs Oneness of God Angels Holy books Prophets Judgement Day Predestination Practices Profession of faith Prayer Almsgiving Fasting Pilgrimage Texts Foundations Quran Sunnah ( Hadith , Sirah ) Tafsir (exegesis) Ijtihad Aqidah (creed) Qisas al-Anbiya ( Stories of the Prophets ) Mathnawi (poems) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) History Timeline Jahiliyyah Muhammad Ahl al-Bayt Sahabah Rashidun Caliphate Imamate Spread of Islam Succession to Muhammad Abbasid Caliphate Al-Andalus Golden Age Seljuk Empire Ilkhanate Timurid Renaissance Gunpowder empires Ottoman Empire Saudi Arabia Culture and society Academics Animals Art Association football Calendar Cats Censorship Children Circumcision Democracy Demographics Diaspora Denominations Sunni Shia Ibadi Economics Education Ethics Exorcism Feminism Festivals Finance Liberalism Madrasa Moral teachings Mosque Music Mysticism Philosophy Poetry Politics Proselytizing Science Sexuality LGBTQ Slavery Concubinage Social welfare Women Related topics Arabic language Apostasy Criticism Muhammad Quran Hadith Other religions Islamism Violence terrorism war Islamophobia Jihad Jihadism Salafi jihadism Deobandi jihadism Military laws Peace Pacifism Glossary Islam portal v t e Israfil ( Arabic : إِسْـرَافِـيْـل , ʾIsrāfīl) o r Israfel [ 1 ] is the angel who will blow the trumpet to signal Qiyamah (the Day of Judgment ) in Islam .

[ 2 ] Though unnamed in the Quran , he is one of the four archangels in Islamic tradition, along with Michael , Gabriel , and Azrael .

[ 1 ] The "Book of Dead" described Israfil as the oldest of all archangels.

[ 3 ] He is commonly thought of as the counterpart of the Judeo-Christian archangel Raphael .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Israfil is portrayed as writing the destiny of humans and all commands of God to the (other) archangels with the pen ( qalam ), which he carries with one wing; with the other wing, Israfil covers his face, unable to look at God.

[ 6 ] In religious tradition [ edit ] Israfil is mentioned in a hadith as the angel nearest to God, mediating the commands of God to the other archangels.

[ 7 ] Although the name Israfil does not appear in the Quran, a figure blowing a trumpet is repeatedly alluded to, and is assumed to be this figure: And the trumpet shall be blown, so all those that are in the heavens and all those that are in the earth shall swoon, except him whom Allah will ; then it shall be blown again, then they shall stand up awaiting.

— Quran 39:68 Kitab Aḥwāl al-Qiyāma , states: Know that Israfil is the master of the horn [al-qarn]. God created the preserved tablet [al-lawḥ al-maḥfuz] of white pearl. Its length is seven times the distance between the heaven and the earth and it is connected to the Throne. All that exists until the day of resurrection is written on it. Israfil has four wings--one in the East, one in the West, one covering his legs and one shielding his head and face in fear of God. His head is inclined toward the Throne .... No angel is nearer to the throne than Israfil. Seven veils are between him and the Throne, each veil five hundred years distance from the next; seventy veils are between Jibril and Israfil. While he is standing the trumpet [ṣur] is placed on his right · thigh and the head of the trumpet on his mouth. He awaits the command of God, and when God commands he will blow. And when the period of the world is completed, the trumpet will be brought near the face of Israfil and he will fold his four wings and blow the trumpet.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Due to his beautiful voice, he is also the Muezzin of those in Heaven.

[ 10 ] Kitab Aḥwāl al-Qiyāma states he has four wings, however, another tradition mentions that he has twelve.

[ 11 ] Israfil is also said to have been sent along with the other three Islamic archangels to collect dust from the four corners of the earth, [ 9 ] though only Azrael succeeded in this mission.

[ 12 ] It was from this dust that Adam , the first man and Prophet was formed.

[ 13 ] A few reports assume that Israfil had visited Muhammad before Gabriel did.

[ 14 ] Israfil has been identified as with angels of Christian tradition, including Uriel [ 4 ] and Raphael .

[ 5 ] Angel not named in source for image; matches other images that name the angel Israfel Israfil, the Angel of Resurrection, Blows the Seven-Fold Trumpet, Ottoman miniature Israfel blows the trumpet Israfel blows the trumpet of Sur See also [ edit ] Angels in Islam List of angels in theology Eschatology Judgement (tarot card) Resurrection Seraph Seraphiel Seven trumpets Appendix [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Lewis, James R.

, Evelyn Dorothy Oliver, and S. Sisung Kelle, eds. 1996.

Angels A to Z . Visible Ink Press.

ISBN 0-7876-0652-9 . p. 224.

^ Webster, Richard (2009).

Encyclopedia of angels (1st ed.). Woodbury, he will blow the trumpet when the day comes to the end Minn.: Llewellyn Publications. p. 97.

ISBN 9780738714622 .

^ Shaikh Muhammad ibn Habib translated by Aisha Abd- ar Rahman at-Tarjumana Islamic Book of Dead Hadith Concerning the Fire and the Garden , Diwan Press, 1977, ISBN 0950444618 , pp. 33–34 ^ a b " Gabriel ." Jewish Encyclopedia .

^ a b " Israfil " (revised).

Encyclopædia Britannica . [1998] 2020.

^ Abilkhamitkyzy, R., and L. B. Begalieva. "Түркі әлеміндегі періштенің көркем бейнесі: кеше және бүгін." Keruen 75.2 (2022): 104-116.

^ Burge, Stephen. 2015.

Angels in Islam: Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti's al-Haba'ik fi akhbar al-mala'ik . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-136-50473-0 . p. 92.

^ Kitab aḥwāl al-qiyāma , pp. 49-50 quoted in Smith, Jane I.; Haddad, Yvonne Y. (1981).

The Islamic Understanding of Death and Resurrection . Albany, N Y: SUNY Press. pp.

70– 71.

^ a b Davidson, Gustav . 1967.  " Israfel ." Pp. 151–52 in A Dictionary of Angels, Including The Fallen Angels . New York: Free Press.

ISBN 9780029070505 .

LCCN 66-19757 .

^ Tottoli, Roberto.

"Isrāfīl" . In Fleet, Kate; Krämer, Gudrun ; Matringe, Denis; Nawas, John; Rowson, Everett (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam (3rd ed.). Brill Online.

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_32620 .

ISSN 1873-9830 .

^ Al-Suyuti (2021). Muhammad as Said Basyuni, Abu Hajir; Yasir, Muhammad (eds.).

Misteri Alam Malaikat (Religion / Islam / General) (in Indonesian). Translated by Mishabul Munir. Pustaka al-Kautsar. pp. 17, 30– 32.

ISBN 978-979-592-951-2 . Retrieved 6 February 2022 .

Quoting Ibnul Mubarak from a book of az-Zuhd ; ad Durr al-Manshur, chain narration from Ibnul Mubarak to Ibn SHihab (1/92) ^ Weil, Gustav . 1863. " Adam ." Pp. 19 in The Bible, the Koran, and the Talmud or Biblical Legends of the Mussulmans . via Internet Sacred Text Archive .

^ Noegel, Scott B., and Brannon M. Wheeler. 2010.

The A to Z of Prophets in Islam and Judaism . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-1-461-71895-6 . p. 13.

^ Kraemer, Joel L. 1993.

Israel Oriental Studies, Band 13 . Brill.

ISBN 9789004099012 . p. 219.

Bibliography [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Israfel .

Abasoomar, Moulana Muhammad; Abasoomar, Moulana Haroon (2016).

"Virtue of Sayyiduna Zubayr (radiyallahu 'anhu)" .

Hadith Answers . Darul Hadith . Retrieved 9 November 2021 .

Bin Al-Hassan, Abi Al-Qasim Ali; Al-Dimashqi, Ibn Asaker (2012).

تاريخ مدينة دمشق 1-37 ج10 [ History of the city of Damascus ]. Dar Al Kotob Al Ilmiyah دار الكتب العلمية.

Rizqullah, Ahmad Mahdi (2005).

A Biography of the Prophet of Islam In the Light of the Original Sources, an Analytical Study · Volume 1 .

Darussalam Publishers . p. 410.

ISBN 9789960969022 . Retrieved 9 November 2021 .

Campo, Juan E. (2009).

Encyclopedia of Islam . New York, NY: Facts On File. p. 750.

ISBN 978-1438126968 .

Oliver, Evelyn Dorothy; Lewis, James R. (2008).

Angels A to Z (2nd ed.). Canton, MI: Visible Ink Press. p. 202.

ISBN 9781578592128 .

Schwebel, Rosemary Ellen Guiley; foreword by Lisa (2004).

The encyclopedia of angels (2nd ed.). New York: Facts on File. p. 193.

ISBN 9781438130026 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Webster, Richard (2009).

Encyclopedia of angels (1st ed.). Woodbury, Minn.: Llewellyn Publications. p. 97.

ISBN 9780738714622 .

Student's Britannica: India . New Delhi: Encyclopædia Britannica (India). 2000. p. 92.

ISBN 9780852297605 .

v t e Angels in Abrahamic religions Angels in Judaism Individuals Michael Gabriel Raphael Uriel Angel of the Lord Angel of the Presence Destroying Angel Azrael Ariel Arariel Azazel Camael Cassiel Dobiel Dumah Eisheth Hadraniel Haniel Jerahmeel Jophiel Kushiel Lailah Mastema Metatron Nuriel Pravuil Raziel Sachiel Samael Samyaza Sandalphon Senoy, Sansenoy and Semangelof Tzaphqiel Yahoel Zadkiel Zerachiel Groups Seraphim Chayot Ophanim Cherubim Hashmallim Ishim Sons of God Recording angels Angels in Christianity Individuals Michael Gabriel Abaddon Raphael Uriel Ariel Azazel Sariel Sandalphon Raguel Ramiel Selaphiel Barachiel Jegudiel Camael Guardian Angel of Portugal Jerahmeel Jophiel Metatron Samyaza Pravuil Sachiel Zadkiel Sarathiel Zerachiel Phanuel Aker Gabuthelon Arphugitonos Beburos Zebuleon Daniel Kerubiel Kokabiel Kushiel Leliel Muriel Pahaliah Seraphiel Shamsiel Chazaqiel Groups Seraphim Cherubim Ophanim / Thrones Dominions / Lordships Virtues Powers / Authorities Principalities / Rulers Archangels Watchers / Guardian angels Angels in Islam Individuals Mikha'il Jibra'il Israfil Azra'il ar-Rūḥ ʿAzāzīl Iblis Artiya'il Darda'il Dumah Kalqa'il Futrus Ḥabīb Harut and Marut Mālik Munkar and Nakir Riḍwan Groups Mu'qarrabun ( Cherubim and Seraphim ) Archangels Angels of Hell Hafaza ( Guardian angel ) Recording angels Nāzi'āt and Nāshiṭāt Uthras (angels) in Mandaeism Individuals Yushamin Abatur Ptahil Hibil Shitil Anush Sam Ziwa Manda d-Hayyi Shilmai Nidbai Adathan and Yadathan Yufin-Yufafin Urfeil and Marfeil Tar and Tarwan Bihram Zihrun Etinsib Ziwa Nbat Nsab Gubran Shihlun Yurba Yukabar Yukashar Yawar Ziwa Simat Hayyi Saureil Groups Niṭufta Gupna Ziwa Related Angel Moroni Mormonism Hierarchy of angels Heavenly host Seven Archangels Three Angels' Messages Watcher Fallen angels List of angels in theology List of angels in Ars Paulina Ambiguous Chalkydri Elioud Nephilim Teraphim In culture Art List of angels in fiction List of films about angels v t e People and things in the Quran Characters Non-humans Allāh ('The God ') Names of Allah found in the Quran, such as Karīm (Generous) Animals Related The baqara (cow) of Israelites The dhiʾb (wolf) that Jacob feared could attack Joseph The fīl ( elephant ) of the Abyssinians Ḥimār ( Domesticated donkey ) The hud-hud ( hoopoe ) of Solomon The kalb (dog) of the sleepers of the cave The namlah (female ant) of Solomon The nūn (fish or whale) of Jonah The nāqat (she-camel) of Ṣāliḥ Non-related ʿAnkabūt (Female spider ) Dābbat al-Arḍ ( Beast of the Earth ) Ḥimār ( Wild ass ) Naḥl ( Honey bee ) Qaswarah (' Lion ', 'beast of prey' or 'hunter') Malāʾikah ( Angels ) Angels of Hell Mālik Zabāniyah Bearers of the Throne Harut and Marut Jundallah Kirāman Kātibīn (Honourable Scribes) Raqib Atid Muqarrabun Jibrīl (Gabriel, chief) Ar-Rūḥ ('The Spirit') Ar-Rūḥ al-Amīn ('The Trustworthy Spirit') Ar-Rūḥ al-Qudus ('The Holy Spirit ') Angel of the Trumpet ( Isrāfīl or Raphael ) Malakul-Mawt (Angel of Death, Azrael) Mīkāil (Michael) Jinn (Genies) Jann ʿIfrīt Sakhr (Asmodeus) Qarīn Shayāṭīn ( Demons ) Iblīs ash-Shayṭān (the (chief) Devil ) Mārid ('Rebellious one') Others Ghilmān or Wildān Ḥūr Prophets Mentioned Ādam ( Adam ) Al-Yasa ʿ ( Elisha ) Ayyūb ( Job ) Dāwūd ( David ) Dhūl-Kifl (Ezekiel?) Hārūn (Aaron) Hūd (Eber?) Idrīs ( Enoch ?) Ilyās (Elijah) ʿImrān (Joachim the father of Maryam) Isḥāq ( Isaac ) Ismāʿīl ( Ishmael ) Dhabih Ullah Lūṭ ( Lot ) Ṣāliḥ Shuʿayb (Jethro, Reuel or Hobab ?) Sulaymān ibn Dāwūd ( Solomon son of David) ʿ Uzair ( Ezra ?) Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā ( John the Baptist the son of Zechariah) Yaʿqūb ( Jacob ) Isrāʾīl (Israel) Yūnus ( Jonah ) Dhūn-Nūn ('He of the Fish (or Whale )' or 'Owner of the Fish (or Whale)') Ṣāḥib al-Ḥūt ('Companion of the Whale') Yūsuf ibn Ya‘qūb ( Joseph son of Jacob) Zakariyyā ( Zechariah ) Ulul-ʿAzm ('Those of the Perseverance and Strong Will') Muḥammad Aḥmad Other names and titles of Muhammad ʿĪsā ( Jesus ) Al-Masīḥ (The Messiah ) Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary) Mūsā Kalīmullāh ( Moses He who spoke to God) Ibrāhīm Khalīlullāh ( Abraham Friend of God) Nūḥ ( Noah ) Debatable ones Dhūl-Qarnain Luqmān Maryam ( Mary ) Ṭālūt ( Saul or Gideon ?) Implied Irmiyā (Jeremiah) Ṣamūʾīl ( Samuel ) Yūshaʿ ibn Nūn (Joshua, companion and successor of Moses) People of Prophets Good ones Adam's immediate relatives Martyred son Wife Believer of Ya-Sin Family of Noah Father Lamech Mother Shamkhah bint Anush or Betenos Luqman's son People of Abraham Mother Abiona or Amtelai the daughter of Karnebo Ishmael's mother Isaac's mother People of Jesus Disciples (including Peter ) Mary's mother Zechariah's wife People of Solomon Mother Queen of Sheba Vizier Zayd (Muhammad's adopted son) People of Joseph Brothers (including Binyāmin (Benjamin) and Simeon ) Egyptians ʿAzīz ( Potiphar , Qatafir or Qittin) Malik (King Ar-Rayyān ibn Al-Walīd)) Wife of ʿAzīz ( Zulaykhah ) Mother People of Aaron and Moses Egyptians Believer (Hizbil or Hizqil ibn Sabura) Imraʾat Firʿawn ( Āsiyá bint Muzāḥim the Wife of Pharaoh , who adopted Moses) Magicians of the Pharaoh Wise, pious man Moses' wife Moses' sister-in-law Mother Sister Evil ones Āzar (possibly Terah ) Firʿawn ( Pharaoh of Moses' time) Hāmān Jālūt (Goliath) Qārūn (Korah, cousin of Moses) As-Sāmirī Abū Lahab Slayers of Ṣāliḥ's she-camel (Qaddar ibn Salif and Musda' ibn Dahr) Implied or not specified Abraha Abu Bakr Bal'am/Balaam Barṣīṣā Caleb or Kaleb the companion of Joshua Luqman's son Nebuchadnezzar II Nimrod Rahmah the wife of Ayyub Shaddad Groups Mentioned Aṣḥāb al-Jannah People of Paradise People of the Burnt Garden Aṣḥāb as-Sabt (Companions of the Sabbath ) Jesus' apostles Ḥawāriyyūn ( Disciples of Jesus ) Companions of Noah's Ark Aṣḥāb al-Kahf war-Raqīm ( Companions of the Cave and Al-Raqaim?

Companions of the Elephant People of al-Ukhdūd People of a township in Surah Ya-Sin People of Yathrib or Medina Qawm Lūṭ (People of Sodom and Gomorrah) Nation of Noah Tribes, ethnicities or families ‘ Ajam Ar-Rūm (literally 'The Romans') Banī Isrāʾīl (Children of Israel) Muʾtafikāt (Sodom and Gomorrah) People of Ibrahim People of Ilyas People of Nuh People of Shuaib Ahl Madyan People of Madyan ) Aṣḥāb al-Aykah ('Companions of the Wood') Qawm Yūnus (People of Jonah) Ya'juj and Ma'juj/Gog and Magog People of Fir'aun Current Ummah of Islam (Ummah of Muhammad) Aṣḥāb Muḥammad ( Companions of Muhammad ) Anṣār (literally 'Helpers') Muhajirun (Emigrants from Mecca to Medina) People of Mecca Wife of Abu Lahab Children of Ayyub Sons of Adam Wife of Nuh Wife of Lut Yaʾjūj wa Maʾjūj (Gog and Magog) Son of Nuh Aʿrāb ( Arabs or Bedouins ) ʿĀd (people of Hud) Companions of the Rass Qawm Tubbaʿ (People of Tubba ) People of Sabaʾ or Sheba Quraysh Thamūd (people of Ṣāliḥ) Aṣḥāb al-Ḥijr ('Companions of the Stoneland ') Ahl al-Bayt ('People of the Household') Household of Abraham Brothers of Yūsuf Lot's daughters Progeny of Imran Household of Moses Household of Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim Daughters of Muhammad Muhammad's wives Household of Salih Implicitly mentioned Amalek Ahl as-Suffa (People of the Verandah) Banu Nadir Banu Qaynuqa Banu Qurayza Iranian people Umayyad Dynasty Aus and Khazraj People of Quba Religious groups Ahl al-Dhimmah Kāfirūn disbelievers Majūs Zoroastrians Munāfiqūn ( Hypocrites ) Muslims Believers Ahl al-Kitāb ( People of the Book ) Naṣārā ( Christian (s) or People of the Injil) Ruhban (Christian monks) Qissis (Christian priest) Yahūd ( Jews ) Ahbār (Jewish scholars) Rabbani/Rabbi Sabians Polytheists Meccan polytheists at the time of Muhammad Mesopotamian polytheists at the time of Abraham and Lot Locations Mentioned Al-Arḍ Al-Muqaddasah ('The Holy Land') 'Blessed' Land' Al- Jannah ( Paradise , literally 'The Garden') Jahannam ( Hell ) Door of Hittah Madyan ( Midian ) Majmaʿ al-Baḥrayn Miṣr (Mainland Egypt ) Salsabīl (A river in Paradise) In the Arabian Peninsula (excluding Madyan) Al-Aḥqāf ('The Sandy Plains,' or 'the Wind-curved Sand-hills') Iram dhāt al-ʿImād ( Iram of the Pillars ) Al- Madīnah (formerly Yathrib ) ʿArafāt and Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām Al-Ḥijr (Hegra) Badr Ḥunayn Makkah ( Mecca ) Bakkah Ḥaraman Āminan ('Sanctuary (which is) Secure') Kaʿbah ( Kaaba ) Maqām Ibrāhīm (Station of Abraham) Safa and Marwa Sabaʾ ( Sheba ) ʿArim Sabaʾ ( Dam of Sheba ) Rass Sinai Region or Tīh Desert Al- Wād Al-Muqaddas Ṭuwan (The Holy Valley of Tuwa ) Al-Wādil-Ayman (The valley on the 'righthand' side of the Valley of Tuwa and Mount Sinai ) Al-Buqʿah Al-Mubārakah ('The Blessed Place') Mount Sinai or Mount Tabor In Mesopotamia Al-Jūdiyy Munzalanm-Mubārakan ('Place-of-Landing Blessed') Bābil ( Babylon ) Qaryat Yūnus ('Township of Jonah ,' that is Nineveh ) Religious locations Bayʿa (Church) Miḥrāb Monastery Masjid ( Mosque , literally 'Place of Prostration ') Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām ('The Sacred Grove') Al-Masjid Al-Aqṣā ( Al-Aqsa , literally 'The Farthest Place-of-Prostration') Al-Masjid Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred Mosque of Mecca) Masjid al-Dirar A Mosque in the area of Medina, possibly: Masjid Qubāʾ ( Quba Mosque ) The Prophet's Mosque Salat (Synagogue) Implied Antioch Antakya Arabia Al- Ḥijāz (literally 'The Barrier') Al-Ḥajar al-Aswad (Black Stone)  & Al-Hijr of Isma'il Cave of Hira Ghār ath-Thawr (Cave of the Bull) Hudaybiyyah Ta'if Ayla Barrier of Dhul-Qarnayn Bayt al-Muqaddas & 'Ariha Bilād ar-Rāfidayn (Mesopotamia) Canaan Cave of Seven Sleepers Dār an-Nadwa Jordan River Nile River Palestine River Paradise of Shaddad Events, incidents, occasions or times Incident of Ifk Laylat al-Qadr (Night of Decree) Event of Mubahala Sayl al-ʿArim (Flood of the Great Dam of Ma'rib in Sheba) The Farewell Pilgrimage Treaty of Hudaybiyyah Battles or military expeditions Battle of al-Aḥzāb ('the Confederates') Battle of Badr Battle of Hunayn Battle of Khaybar Battle of Uhud Expedition of Tabuk Conquest of Mecca Days Al- Jumuʿah (The Friday) As- Sabt (The Sabbath or Saturday) Days of battles Days of Hajj Doomsday Months of the Islamic calendar 12 months: Four holy months Ash-Shahr Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred or Forbidden Month) Ramaḍān Pilgrimages Al- Ḥajj (literally 'The Pilgrimage', the Greater Pilgrimage) Al-ʿ Umrah (The Lesser Pilgrimage) Times for prayer or remembrance Times for Duʿāʾ (' Invocation '), Ṣalāh and Dhikr ('Remembrance', including Taḥmīd ('Praising'), Takbīr and Tasbīḥ ): Al-ʿAshiyy (The Afternoon or the Night) Al-Ghuduww ('The Mornings') Al-Bukrah ('The Morning') Aṣ-Ṣabāḥ ('The Morning') Al-Layl ('The Night') Al- ʿIshāʾ ('The Late-Night') Aẓ- Ẓuhr ('The Noon') Dulūk ash-Shams ('Decline of the Sun') Al- Masāʾ ('The Evening') Qabl al- Ghurūb ('Before the Setting (of the Sun)') Al-Aṣīl ('The Afternoon') Al- ʿAṣr ('The Afternoon') Qabl ṭulūʿ ash-Shams ('Before the rising of the Sun') Al- Fajr ('The Dawn') Implied Ghadir Khumm Laylat al-Mabit First Pilgrimage Other Holy books Al- Injīl (The Gospel of Jesus) Al- Qurʾān (The Book of Muhammad) Ṣuḥuf-i Ibrāhīm (Scroll(s) of Abraham) At- Tawrāt (The Torah ) Ṣuḥuf-i-Mūsā (Scroll(s) of Moses) Tablets of Stone Az- Zabūr (The Psalms of David) Umm al-Kitāb ('Mother of the Book(s)') Objects of people or beings Heavenly food of Jesus' apostles Noah's Ark Staff of Musa Tābūt as-Sakīnah (Casket of Shekhinah) Throne of Bilqis Trumpet of Israfil Mentioned idols (cult images) 'Ansāb Jibt and Ṭāghūt ( False god ) Of Israelites Baʿal The ʿijl ( golden calf statue) of Israelites Of Noah's people Nasr Suwāʿ Wadd Yaghūth Yaʿūq Of Quraysh Al-Lāt Al-ʿUzzā Manāt Celestial bodies Maṣābīḥ (literally 'lamps'): Al-Qamar (The Moon) Kawākib (Planets) Al-Arḍ (The Earth) Nujūm (Stars) Ash-Shams (The Sun) Plant matter Baṣal (Onion) Fūm (Garlic or wheat) Shaṭʾ (Shoot) Sūq (Plant stem) Zarʿ (Seed) Fruits ʿAdas ( Lentil ) Baql (Herb) Qith-thāʾ ( Cucumber ) Rummān ( Pomegranate ) Tīn ( Fig ) Zaytūn ( Olive ) In Paradise Forbidden fruit of Adam Bushes, trees or plants Plants of Sheba Athl ( Tamarisk ) Sidr ( Lote-tree ) Līnah (Tender Palm tree ) Nakhl ( Date palm ) Sidrat al-Muntahā Zaqqūm Liquids Māʾ (Water or fluid) Nahr (River) Yamm (River or sea) Sharāb (Drink) Note: Names are sorted alphabetically. Standard form: Islamic name / Biblical name (title or relationship) v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Israfil&oldid=1303801816 " Categories : Individual angels Archangels in Islam Islamic eschatology Quranic figures Supernatural beings identified with Christian saints Hidden categories: CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Israfil 29 languages Add topic

