Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1960s 1.2 Reliance on foreign countries 1.3 Proposal for Israeli satellite 1.4 Establishment of a Space Agency 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents National Committee for Space Research Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National Committee for Space Research Committee overview Formed 1960 Superseding Committee Israel Space Agency (1983) Headquarters Jerusalem , Israel Minister responsible Daniel Weihs [ 1 ] , Chairman The National Committee for Space Research ( NCSR ) was a committee established in 1960 by the Israeli Government in affiliation with the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities [ 2 ] to explorer the feasibility of space launches and satellites development, and to formulate the Israel Space Agency .

[ 3 ] The committee was made of a group of dedicated to the research and development of space-related sciences, and to demonstrate Israeli capabilities to its antagonistic neighbors at the time, especially Egypt.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Shavit launcher being operated by the Israel Space Agency 1960s [ edit ] The Israeli Space Agency originated as university-based research project from Tel-Aviv University in the early 1960s.

[ 5 ] In 1960, the National Committee for Space Research (NCSR) was formed by the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities . The committee was formed to increase research activities across the academic communities in Israel. While at the time, establishing a space program was not particularly one of its goals, during the '60s through the late '70s, the committee developed the infrastructure needed for research and development in space exploration and sciences. One of the NCSR's earliest achievements took place in 1961 with the launch of its first two-stage rocket.

[ 6 ] Reliance on foreign countries [ edit ] At the same time, Israel's missile program was also established. As with other countries, the ballistic and other missile development took precedence over space. The Israeli Space Launch Vehicle (SLVs) was developed as an off-shot of its Ballistic Missile (BM) program.

[ 6 ] This interdependency resulted in a blurry line between civilian and military developments in Israel. Contractors, such as IAI , that were responsible for building defense missiles were also the main contractors for the Shavit space rocket.

[ 6 ] Due to the stressed relationship between Israel and its neighbors, Israel has always attempted to acquire intelligence from various sources. During the late 60s it was thought that the IDF received satellite imagery from the US; [ 6 ] however the resolution was degraded, the coverage was limited, and it was not in real-time.

[ 6 ] Following the Yom Kippur War , Israel started changing their focus to developing an independent source of space-based intelligence. This opinion was strengthen after it became known that the US withheld critical intelligence information during the war, obtained by reconnaissance satellites , on Arab offensive formation.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Despite the close defense corporation with the US, Israel did not have routine access to real-time satellite intelligence data.

[ 6 ] The Defense Ministry was quoted saying "For years we have been begging the Americans for more detailed pictures from their satellites and often got refusals - even when Iraqi Scud missiles were falling on Tel Aviv..." [ 6 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Proposal for Israeli satellite [ edit ] Following the political tension by Egypt and Syria, reconnaissance flights became evermore difficult. In 1979, then, Israel's DMI , Major General Yehoshua Sagi told the defense ministry that the only solution was overhead photography satellite which would bypass the political obstacles and take imagery of points of interests without generating diplomatic problems.

[ 6 ] The idea was met with great resistance; nevertheless a feasibility study projects was initiated on the production of satellite launcher, satellites, and telescope cameras by the Israel Aerospace Industries , the Rafael Advanced Defense Systems , and Electro-Optics industries . The three contractors were asked to complete their study in ten months.

[ 6 ] The study was completed by late 1980; Saguy requested from prime minister Menachem Begin that the project proceed to its next phase. While the project received the go-ahead, Israel's defense industries suffered significant budget shortage following the Iranian Revolution when military corporation between the two countries ended. The financial constraint were slowly resolved by IAI tying up with South Africa for budgetary support.

[ 6 ] In 1982, a new recommendation called "Ofeq Program" was submitted for developing an observation satellite. The program included timelines, planning for a ground station, budget estimates, and personnel requirements. The primary goals was to develop a satellite program without relying on any foreign know-how, to allow flexibility and creativity.

[ 6 ] The launcher would be developed by Malam, the two engines by the Israel Military Industries (IMI), and the third by Rafael.

Establishment of a Space Agency [ edit ] Main article: Israel Space Agency At the end of 1982 it was decided during a closed-door meeting to establish and Israeli space agency. The decision was made by PM Menachem Begin , Defense minister Ariel Sharon , and former director Aharon Beit Halahmi . The initial goal was to pursue the program to develop to Ofeq and the Shavit launchers.

[ 6 ] In January 1983, the Israeli government authorized the Minister of Science and Technology Prof.

[ 6 ] [ 10 ] Yuval Ne'eman to establish an Israeli Space Agency with the goal of advancing Israel's space program, unlike the NCSR which was primarily used for feasibility and infrastructure studies. In July 1983, the ISA was official founded in Tel Aviv to coordinate the nation's space program in affiliation to the Ministry of Science, Culture & Sport .

See also [ edit ] Israel Space Agency Science and technology in Israel Economy of Israel List of multinationals with research and development centres in Israel Science and technology in Asia Science and Technology Minister of Israel Israel portal v t e Israeli space program Reconnaissance satellites Ofeq Ofeq-5 Ofeq-7 TecSAR-1 Ofeq-9 Ofeq-10 Ofeq-11 Earth observation EROS EROS A EROS B EROS C VENµS Communications satellites Amos Amos-1 Amos-2 Amos-3 Amos-4 Amos-5 Amos-6 ( destroyed ) Amos-7 Amos-8 Amos-17 Research satellites TechSat-Gurwin Sloshsat-FLEVO BGUSAT DIDO-2 SAMSON Satellites in development TAUVEX (cancelled) OPsat [ he ] INSAT ULTRASAT SHALOM Inklajn 1 Launch vehicle Shavit 2 Sounding rocket Shavit 2 Moon exploration INLSE SpaceIL Beresheet Beresheet 2 Observatories Wise Observatory Givatayim Observatory Ilan Ramon Youth Physics Center Primary spaceports Palmachim Airbase People Isaac Ben-Israel Yuval Ne'eman Aby Har Even Haim Eshed Moshe Bar-Lev [ he ] Noah Brosch Astronauts Ilan Ramon Eytan Stibbe ( commercial astronaut ) v t e Science and technology in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal References [ edit ] ^ "iCBBE2012_OrganizingCommittee Information" . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

^ "Space Research in Israel 2006/2007" (PDF) . The Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2013 . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

^ "Israel Celebrates Space" (PDF) . Israel Space Agency. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

^ Harding, Robert C. (2013).

Space policy in developing countries : the search for security and development on the final frontier . Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. p. 135.

ISBN 9780415538459 .

^ "Israel Space Agency: Current and Future Programs" (PDF) .

From Modest Beginnings to a Vibrant State . RESOURCEs: Israel Space Agency. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2014 . Retrieved 19 November 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Kiran Krishan Nair (2006).

Space: The Frontiers of Modern Defence . KnowledgeWorld. pp.

155– 165.

ISBN 9788187966449 .

^ Gerald M. Steinberg (October 1995).

"Middle East Space Race Gathers Pace" .

International Defense Review .

8 . Retrieved 31 January 2014 .

^ Rotem, Michael (November 19, 1992). "Spy Satellite for Arab Emirates 'Serious Threat' ".

Jerusalem Post .

^ Sergey Koulik; Richard Kokoski (1994).

Conventional Arms Control: Perspectives on Verification .

Oxford University Press . p. 199.

ISBN 0-19-829149-3 .

^ E. L. Zorn (Winter–Spring 2001), "Israel's Quest for Satellite Intelligence" (PDF) , Studies in Intelligence (10): 33– 38, archived from the original (PDF) on June 13, 2007 , retrieved 2009-09-11 Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Committee_for_Space_Research&oldid=1100462215 " Categories : Space program of Israel Scientific organizations based in Israel 1960 establishments in Israel This page was last edited on 26 July 2022, at 01:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Committee for Space Research Add languages Add topic

