Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 20th century 1.2 21st century 2 Editors 3 Contributors 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Modern Age (periodical) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American academic journal Modern Age Editor Daniel McCarthy Categories Traditionalist conservatism , regionalism Frequency Quarterly Founded 1957 ; 68 years ago ( 1957 ) Company Intercollegiate Studies Institute Country United States Language English Website modernagejournal .com ISSN 0026-7457 Modern Age is an American conservative academic quarterly journal. It was founded in 1957 by Russell Kirk in collaboration with Henry Regnery . Between 1957 and 1976, the journal was published independently in Chicago . In 1976, it was acquired by the Intercollegiate Studies Institute , its current publisher.

History [ edit ] 20th century [ edit ] In founding Modern Age in 1957, Russell Kirk hoped for "a dignified forum for reflective, traditionalist conservatism " and the magazine has remained one of the voices of intellectual, small-"c" conservatism to the present day.

[ citation needed ] Reflecting the ideals of its founder, in its politics it is traditionalist , localist, against most military interventions, not libertarian, anti-Straussian, and generally critical of neoconservatism . In its religious sympathies it adheres to orthodoxy , whether Roman Catholic , Jewish , Eastern Orthodox , or Protestant .

[ citation needed ] Modern Age has been described by historian George H. Nash as "the principal quarterly of the intellectual right." [ citation needed ] Paul Gottfried , a professor at Elizabethtown College , has said that " Modern Age represents humanistic learning, reverence for the eternal, and the sense of human finiteness, values that (alas) have less and less to do with the academic presentation of the liberal arts." [ citation needed ] Kirk edited the publication from 1957 to 1959. Eugene Davidson edited it from 1960 to 1969. David S. Collier was its third editor from 1970 to 1983. Its fourth editor, from 1094 to 2007, was George A. Panichas.

21st century [ edit ] Panichas was succeeded as editor by R. V. Young .

Peter Lawler replaced Young in 2017.

[ 1 ] Lawler died later in 2017 and he was replaced by the current editor, Daniel McCarthy.

[ 2 ] Editors [ edit ] The journal's executive editor is Mark Henrie. Its managing editor is Arthur Bloom, and its poetry editor is James Matthew Wilson. Associate editors include George W. Carey, Jude P. Dougherty, Jeffrey Hart, Marion Montgomery, Mordecai Roshwald, and Stephen J. Tonsor.

Contributors [ edit ] Contributors to Modern Age have included: [ citation needed ] Paul Gottfried Jeffrey Hart Paul Hollander Irving Louis Horowitz Russell Kirk Włodzimierz Julian Korab-Karpowicz E. Christian Kopff Peter Lawler Thomas Molnar Revilo P. Oliver Mordecai Roshwald Claes G. Ryn Ellis Sandoz R. J. Stove Carol Iannone R. V. Young See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Paleoconservatism References [ edit ] ^ "Introducing MODERN AGE's New Editor" .

Intercollegiate Studies Institute: Educating for Liberty . January 9, 2017 . Retrieved April 21, 2018 .

^ The Editors (November 1, 2017).

"Meet the New Editor of MODERN AGE: Daniel McCarthy" .

Intercollegiate Studies Institute: Educating for Liberty . Retrieved April 21, 2018 .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) External links [ edit ] Official website Russell Kirk's lead editorial from the first issue, Summer, 1957.

Apology for a New Review The Modern Age Archive courtesy of the Intercollegiate Studies Institute's First Principles web log Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Modern_Age_(periodical)&oldid=1284639765 " Categories : Conservative magazines published in the United States Conservative media in the United States Magazines established in 1957 Magazines published in Chicago Paleoconservatism Political magazines published in the United States Quarterly magazines published in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 20:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Modern Age (periodical) Add languages Add topic

