Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Discovery 2 Role of melanin 3 Comparisons with non-melanized fungi 4 Use in human spaceflight 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Radiotrophic fungus 9 languages Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Русский Slovenščina Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Radiotrophic ) Fungus capable of radiosynthesis Cryptococcus neoformans stained with light India ink Radiotrophic fungi are fungi that can perform the biological process called radiosynthesis , which means using ionizing radiation as a main energy source to drive metabolization. It has been claimed that radiotrophic fungi have been found in extreme environments such as in the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Most radiotrophic fungi use melanin in some capacity to survive.

[ 3 ] The process of using radiation and melanin for energy has been termed radiosynthesis , and is thought to be analogous to anaerobic respiration .

[ 4 ] However, it is not known if multi-step processes such as photosynthesis or chemosynthesis are used in radiosynthesis.

[ citation needed ] Discovery [ edit ] Many fungi have been isolated from the area around the destroyed Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant , some of which have been observed directing their growth of hyphae toward radioactive graphite from the disaster, a phenomenon called “radiotropism”.

[ 5 ] [ 1 ] Study has ruled out the presence of carbon as the resource attracting the fungal colonies, and in fact concluded that some fungi will preferentially grow in the direction of the source of beta and gamma ionizing radiation, but were not able to identify the biological mechanism behind this effect.

[ 1 ] It has also been observed that other melanin -rich fungi were discovered in the cooling water from some other working nuclear reactors. The light-absorbing compound in the fungus cell membranes had the effect of turning the water black.

[ 6 ] While there are many cases of extremophiles (organisms that can live in severe conditions such as that of the radioactive power plant), a hypothetical radiotrophic fungus would grow because of the radiation, rather than in spite of it.

[ 7 ] Further research conducted at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine showed that three melanin-containing fungi— Cladosporium sphaerospermum , Wangiella dermatitidis , and Cryptococcus neoformans —increased in biomass and accumulated acetate faster in an environment in which the radiation level was 500 times higher than in the normal environment.

C. sphaerospermum in particular was chosen due to this species being found in the reactor at Chernobyl. Dadachova et al found that by exposing C. neoformans cells to these radiation levels, the organisms rapidly (within 20–40 minutes of exposure) altered the chemical properties of their melanin , and increased melanin-mediated rates of electron transfer (measured as reduction of ferricyanide by NADH ) three- to four-fold compared with unexposed organisms. However, each culture was performed with at least limited nutrients provided to each fungus. The increase in biomass and other effects could be caused either by the cells directly deriving energy from ionizing radiation, or by the radiation allowing the cells to utilize traditional nutrients either more efficiently or more rapidly.

[ 7 ] Outside of the laboratory studies, similar effects on melanin electron-transport capability were observed by the authors after organism exposure to non-ionizing radiation. The authors did not conclude whether light or heat radiation would have a similar effect on the fungi.

[ 7 ] Role of melanin [ edit ] Melanins are a family of dark-colored, naturally occurring pigments with radiation-shielding properties. These pigments can absorb electromagnetic radiation due to their molecular structure, which results in their dark color; this quality suggests that melanin could help protect radiotropic fungi from ionizing radiation. It has been suggested that melanin's radiation-shielding properties are due to its ability to trap free radicals formed during radiolysis of water.

[ 8 ] Melanin production is also advantageous to the fungus in that it can aid survival in many extreme environments. Examples of these environments include the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant , [ 2 ] the International Space Station , [ 4 ] and the Transantarctic Mountains .

[ citation needed ] Melanin may also be able to help the fungus metabolize radiation , but more evidence and research is still needed.

[ 3 ] Comparisons with non-melanized fungi [ edit ] Melanization may come at some metabolic cost to the fungal cells. In the absence of radiation, some non-melanized fungi (that had been mutated in the melanin pathway) grew faster than their melanized counterparts. Limited uptake of nutrients due to the melanin molecules in the fungal cell wall or toxic intermediates formed in melanin biosynthesis have been suggested to contribute to this phenomenon.

[ 7 ] It is consistent with the observation that despite being capable of producing melanin, many fungi do not synthesize melanin constitutively (i.e., all the time), but often only in response to external stimuli or at different stages of their development.

[ 9 ] The exact biochemical processes in the suggested melanin-based synthesis of organic compounds or other metabolites for fungal growth, including the chemical intermediates (such as native electron donor and acceptor molecules) in the fungal cell and the location and chemical products of this process, are unknown.

[ citation needed ] Use in human spaceflight [ edit ] It is hypothesized that radiotrophic fungi could potentially be used as a shield to protect against radiation , [ 4 ] specifically in relation to the use of astronauts in space or other atmospheres. An experiment taking place at the International Space Station in December 2018 through January 2019 was conducted in order to test whether radiotrophic fungi could provide protection from ionizing radiation in space, as part of research efforts preceding a possible trip to Mars . This experiment used the radiotrophic strain of the fungus Cladosporium sphaerospermum .

[ 4 ] The growth of this fungus and its ability to deflect the effects of ionizing radiation were studied for 30 days aboard the International Space Station . This experimental trial yielded very promising results.

The amount of radiation deflected was found to directly correlate with the amount of fungus. There was no difference in the reduction of ionizing radiation between the experimental and control group within the first 24 hour period; however, once the fungus had reached an adequate maturation, and with a 180° protection radius, amounts of ionizing radiation were significantly reduced as compared to the control group. With a 1.7 mm thick shield of melanized radiotrophic Cladosporium sphaerospermum , measurements of radiation nearing the end of the experimental trial were found to be 2.42% lower, demonstrating radiation deflecting capabilities five times that of the control group. Under circumstances in which the fungi would fully encompass an entity, radiation levels would be reduced by an estimated 4.34±0.7%.

[ 4 ] Estimations indicate that approximately a 21 cm thick layer could significantly deflect the annual amount of radiation received on Mars’ surface. Limitations to the use of a radiotrophic fungi based shield include increased mass on missions. However as a viable substitute to reduce overall mass on potential Mars missions, a mixture with equal mole concentration of Martian soil , melanin , and a layer of fungi roughly 9 cm thick, could be used.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Fungi portal Chernobyl disaster § Flora, fauna, and funga Nylon-eating bacteria Plastivore References [ edit ] ^ a b c Zhdanova, Nelli N.; Tugay, Tatyana; Dighton, John; Zheltonozhsky, Victor; McDermott, Patrick (September 2004). "Ionizing radiation attracts soil fungi".

Mycological Research . Vol. 108, no. Pt 9. pp.

1089– 1096.

doi : 10.1017/s0953756204000966 .

ISSN 0953-7562 .

PMID 15506020 .

^ a b Vember, V. V., and N. N. Zhdanova. "Peculiarities of linear growth of the melanin-containing fungi Cladosporium sphaerospermum Penz. and Alternaria alternata (Fr.) Keissler." Mikrobiolohichnyi Zhurnal (Kiev, Ukraine: 1993) 63.3 (2001): 3-12.

^ a b Dadachova, Ekaterina; Casadevall, Arturo (December 2008).

"Ionizing Radiation: how fungi cope, adapt, and exploit with the help of melanin" .

Current Opinion in Microbiology .

11 (6): 525– 531.

doi : 10.1016/j.mib.2008.09.013 .

ISSN 1369-5274 .

PMC 2677413 .

PMID 18848901 .

^ a b c d e f Shunk, Graham K.; Gomez, Xavier R.; Averesch, Nils J. H. (2020-07-17). "A Self-Replicating Radiation-Shield for Human Deep-Space Exploration: Radiotrophic Fungi can Attenuate Ionizing Radiation aboard the International Space Station".

bioRxiv 10.1101/2020.07.16.205534 .

^ Bland, J.; Gribble, L. A.; Hamel, M. C.; Wright, J. B.; Moormann, G.; Bachand, M.; Wright, G.; Bachand, G. D. (2022).

"Evaluating changes in growth and pigmentation of Cladosporium cladosporioides and Paecilomyces variotii in response to gamma and ultraviolet irradiation" .

Scientific Reports .

12 (1): 12142.

Bibcode : 2022NatSR..1212142B .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-022-16063-z .

PMC 9287308 .

PMID 35840596 .

^ Castelvecchi, Davide (May 26, 2007).

"Dark Power: Pigment seems to put radiation to good use" .

Science News . Vol. 171, no. 21. p. 325. Archived from the original on 2008-04-24.

^ a b c d Dadachova E, Bryan RA, Huang X, Moadel T, Schweitzer AD, Aisen P, Nosanchuk JD, Casadevall A (2007). Rutherford J (ed.).

"Ionizing radiation changes the electronic properties of melanin and enhances the growth of melanized fungi" .

PLOS ONE .

2 (5): e457.

Bibcode : 2007PLoSO...2..457D .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0000457 .

PMC 1866175 .

PMID 17520016 .

^ Gessler, N. N.; Egorova, A. S.; Belozerskaya, T. A. (2014).

"Melanin pigments of fungi under extreme environmental conditions (Review)" .

Applied Biochemistry and Microbiology .

50 (2): 105– 113.

doi : 10.1134/S0003683814020094 .

ISSN 0003-6838 .

^ Calvo AM, Wilson RA, Bok JW, Keller NP (2002).

"Relationship between secondary metabolism and fungal development" .

Microbiol Mol Biol Rev .

66 (3): 447– 459.

doi : 10.1128/MMBR.66.3.447-459.2002 .

PMC 120793 .

PMID 12208999 .

External links [ edit ] Einstein College of Medicine on radiotrophic fungi The blacker the better… especially in Chernobyl at Earthling Nature.

[1] "This black fungus might be healing chernobyl by "drinking radiation" a biologist explains.

v t e Metabolism , catabolism , anabolism General Metabolic pathway Metabolic network Primary nutritional groups Energy metabolism Aerobic respiration Glycolysis → Pyruvate decarboxylation → Citric acid cycle → Oxidative phosphorylation ( electron transport chain + ATP synthase ) Anaerobic respiration Electron acceptors other than oxygen Fermentation Glycolysis → Substrate-level phosphorylation ABE Ethanol Lactic acid Specific paths Protein metabolism Protein synthesis Catabolism (protein→peptide→amino acid) Amino acid Amino acid synthesis Amino acid degradation (amino acid→pyruvate, acetyl CoA, or TCA intermediate) Urea cycle Nucleotide metabolism Purine metabolism Nucleotide salvage Pyrimidine metabolism Purine nucleotide cycle Carbohydrate metabolism ( carbohydrate catabolism and anabolism ) Human Glycolysis ⇄ Gluconeogenesis Glycogenolysis ⇄ Glycogenesis Pentose phosphate pathway Fructolysis Polyol pathway Galactolysis Leloir pathway Glycosylation N-linked O-linked Nonhuman Photosynthesis Anoxygenic photosynthesis Chemosynthesis Carbon fixation DeLey-Doudoroff pathway Entner-Doudoroff pathway Xylose metabolism Radiotrophism Lipid metabolism ( lipolysis , lipogenesis ) Fatty acid metabolism Fatty acid degradation ( Beta oxidation ) Fatty acid synthesis Other Steroid metabolism Sphingolipid metabolism Eicosanoid metabolism Ketosis Reverse cholesterol transport Other Metal metabolism Iron metabolism Ethanol metabolism Phospagen system (ATP-PCr) Chlororespiration Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radiotrophic_fungus&oldid=1303653662 " Categories : Fungi by adaptation Evolution by taxon Radiation effects Radiobiology Gamma rays Extremophiles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 08:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Radiotrophic fungus 9 languages Add topic

