Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Location and description 2 Flora and fauna 3 Threats and preservation 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents East Antarctica 41 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 80°S 80°E ﻿ / ﻿ 80°S 80°E ﻿ / -80; 80 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 80°S 80°E ﻿ / ﻿ 80°S 80°E ﻿ / -80; 80 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "East Antarctica" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of Antarctica that lies within the Eastern Hemisphere Map of Antarctica with Eastern Antarctica seen to the right.

Image of a variety of ice types off the coast of East Antarctica.

East Antarctica , also called Greater Antarctica , constitutes the majority (two-thirds) of the Antarctic continent , lying primarily in the Eastern Hemisphere south of the Indian Ocean , and separated from West Antarctica by the Transantarctic Mountains . It is generally greater in elevation than West Antarctica, and includes the Gamburtsev Mountain Range in the center. The geographic South Pole is located within East Antarctica.

Apart from small areas of the coast, East Antarctica is permanently covered by ice and it has relatively low biodiversity , with only a small number of species of terrestrial plants, animals, algae , and lichens . The coasts are the breeding ground for various seabirds and penguins, and the leopard seal , Weddell seal , elephant seal , crabeater seal and Ross seal breed on the surrounding pack ice in summer.

Location and description [ edit ] Geographical map of Antarctica Almost completely covered in thick, permanent ice, East Antarctica comprises Coats Land , Queen Maud Land , Enderby Land , Kemp Land , Mac. Robertson Land , Princess Elizabeth Land , Wilhelm II Land , Queen Mary Land , Wilkes Land , Adélie Land , George V Land , Oates Land and Victoria Land . All but a small portion of this region lies within the Eastern Hemisphere , a fact that has suggested the name. The name has been in existence for more than 110 years (Balch, 1902; Nordenskjöld, 1904), but its greatest use followed the International Geophysical Year (1957–58) and explorations disclosing that the Transantarctic Mountains provide a useful regional separation of East Antarctica and West Antarctica . The name was approved in the United States by the Advisory Committee on Antarctic Names (US-ACAN) in 1962. East Antarctica is generally higher than West Antarctica, and is considered the coldest place on Earth .

The subglacial Gamburtsev Mountain Range , about the size of the European Alps, in the center of East Antarctica, are believed to have been the nucleation site for the East Antarctic Ice Sheet , just underneath Dome A .

Flora and fauna [ edit ] Very little of East Antarctica is not covered with ice . The small areas that remain free of ice ( Antarctic oasis ), including the McMurdo Dry Valleys inland, constitute a tundra-type biodiversity region known as Maudlandia Antarctic desert , after Queen Maud Land . There are no trees or shrubs, as only very limited plant life can survive here; the flora consists of lichens , moss , and algae that are adapted to the cold and wind, and cling to rocks.

The coasts are home to seabirds , penguins , and seals ( Pinnipeds ), which feed in the surrounding ocean , including the emperor penguin , which famously breeds in the cold, dark Antarctic winter.

Seabirds of the coast include southern fulmar ( Fulmarus glacialoides ) , the scavenging southern giant petrel ( Macronectes giganteus ) , Cape petrel ( Daption capense ) , snow petrel ( Pagodroma nivea ) , the small Wilson's storm-petrel ( Oceanites oceanicus ) , the large south polar skua ( Catharacta maccormicki ) , and Antarctic petrel ( Thalassoica antarctica ) .

The seals of the Antarctic Ocean include leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx) , Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddellii) , the huge southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) , crabeater seal (Lobodon carcinophagus) and Ross seal ( Ommatophoca rossii ).

There are no large land animals but bacteria , nematodes , springtails , mites , and midges live on the mosses and lichens.

[ 1 ] Macronectes giganteus Hydrurga leptonyx Mirounga leonina Threats and preservation [ edit ] The remote and extremely cold bulk of Antarctica remains almost entirely untouched by human intervention. The area is protected by the Antarctic Treaty System which bans industrial development, waste disposal and nuclear testing, while the Barwick Valley , one of the Dry Valleys, Mount Rittmann , and Cryptogam Ridge on Mount Melbourne are specially protected areas for their undisturbed plant life.

See also [ edit ] East Antarctic craton Polar plateau References [ edit ] ^ "Maudlandia Antarctic desert" .

Terrestrial Ecoregions . World Wildlife Fund.

This article incorporates public domain material from "East Antarctica" .

Geographic Names Information System .

United States Geological Survey .

External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for East Antarctica .

World Wildlife Fund, C. M. Hogan, S. Draggan. (2011) Marielandia Antarctic tundra.

in C. J. Cleveland, ed., Encyclopedia of Earth . National Council for Science and the Environment, Washington, DC v t e Antarctica Geography South Pole Antarctic sea ice Climate Climate change Heat waves Ice shelves Geology Glaciers Mountains Tundra Volcanoes Regions Biogeographic realm Antarctic Peninsula East Antarctica ice sheet shield Extreme points Floristic kingdom Islands Ridge A South Pole (region) South magnetic pole West Antarctica ice sheet Bodies of water Antarctic/Southern Ocean Lake CECs Lake Mercer Lake Vostok List of rivers McMurdo Sound Ross Sea Weddell Sea Life Flora Microorganisms Wildlife Birds Mammals Krill History Expeditions Heroic Age World War II Colonization COVID-19 pandemic Years Politics Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs Military activity National programs Territorial claims Treaty System Society Antarctica Day Antarctic English Crime Demographics Economy Field camps Firefighting Flags Food Gateway cities Midwinter Day Protected areas Religion Research stations Telecommunications Time Tourism Transport Women Antarctica Weather Danger Classification Famous explorers Roald Amundsen Richard E. Byrd Douglas Mawson Ui-te-Rangiora (legendary) James Clark Ross Robert Falcon Scott Ernest Shackleton Category Commons Index v t e Geography of East Antarctica Areas Adélie Land Coats Land Enderby Land George V Land George V Coast Zélée Subglacial Trench Kemp Land Mac. Robertson Land Oates Land Princess Elizabeth Land Queen Mary Land Queen Maud Land Princess Martha Coast Princess Astrid Coast Princess Ragnhild Coast Prince Harald Coast Prince Olav Coast Victoria Land Wilhelm II Land Wilkes Land Major ice shelves Amery Ice Shelf Ekstrom Ice Shelf Riiser-Larsen Ice Shelf Shackleton Ice Shelf Voyeykov Ice Shelf West Ice Shelf Seas and major islands Davis Sea Mill Island D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Mawson Sea Masson Island Ross Sea Carney Island Scotia Sea Southern Ocean Sturge Island Weddell Sea v t e Earth 's polar regions Antarctic Antarctic Peninsula East Antarctica West Antarctica Eklund Islands Ecozone Extreme points Islands Arctic Arctic Alaska British Arctic Territories Canadian Arctic Archipelago Finnmark Greenland Northern Canada Northwest Territories Nunavik Nunavut Russian Arctic Sakha Sápmi Yukon North American Arctic Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=East_Antarctica&oldid=1249144218 " Categories : East Antarctica Regions of Antarctica Antarctic ecoregions Tundra Geography of Antarctica Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Coordinates on Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the USGS Geographic Names Information System This page was last edited on 3 October 2024, at 12:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents East Antarctica 41 languages Add topic

