Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Schütz, Durkheim, and Spencer 2 Searle 3 Objective/subjective 4 Socialisation and the Capital Other 5 Measuring trust 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Social reality 14 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Русский Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Distinct from biological reality or individual cognitive reality Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Social reality [ 1 ] refers to a socially constructed perspective of the world, consisting of the accepted social tenets of a community involving laws and social representations .

[ 2 ] It is distinct from biological reality or individual cognitive reality, representing as it does on a subjective level created through social interaction and thereby transcending individual motives and actions.

[ 3 ] Radical constructivism would cautiously describe social reality as the product of uniformities among observers (whether or not including the current observer themselves).

[ 4 ] Schütz, Durkheim, and Spencer [ edit ] The problem of social reality has been treated exhaustively by philosophers in the phenomenological tradition, particularly Alfred Schütz , who used the term "social world" to designate this distinct level of reality. Within the social world, Schütz distinguished between social reality that could be experienced directly ( umwelt ) and a social reality beyond the immediate horizon, which could yet be experienced if sought out.

[ 5 ] In his wake, ethnomethodology explored further the unarticulated structure of our everyday competence and ability with social reality.

[ 6 ] Previously, the subject had been addressed in sociology as well as other disciplines. For example, Émile Durkheim stressed the distinct nature of "the social kingdom. Here more than anywhere else the idea is the reality".

[ 7 ] Herbert Spencer had coined the term super-organic to distinguish the social level of reality above the biological and psychological.

[ 8 ] Searle [ edit ] John Searle has used the theory of speech acts to explore the nature of social/institutional reality, so as to describe such aspects of social reality which he instances under the rubrics of "marriage, property, hiring, firing, war, revolutions, cocktail parties, governments, meetings, unions, parliaments, corporations, laws, restaurants, vacations, lawyers, professors, doctors, medieval knights, and taxes, for example".

[ 9 ] Searle argued that such institutional realities interact with each other in what he called "systematic relationships (e.g., governments, marriages, corporations, universities, armies, churches)" [ 10 ] to create a multi-layered social reality.

For Searle, language was the key to the formation of social reality because "language is precisely designed to be a self-identifying category of institutional facts"; i.e., a system of publicly and widely accepted symbols which "persist through time independently of the urges and inclinations of the participants." [ 11 ] Objective/subjective [ edit ] There is a debate in social theory about whether social reality exists independently of people's involvement with it, or whether (as in social constructionism ) it is only created by the human process of ongoing interaction.

[ 12 ] Peter L. Berger argued for a new concern with the basic process of the social construction of reality.

[ 13 ] Berger stated that the social construction of reality was a process made up of three steps: externalization, objectivation and internalization. In similar fashion, post- Sartrians like R. D. Laing stress that, "once certain fundamental structures of experience are shared, they come to be experienced as objective entities...they take on the force and character of partial autonomous realities, with their own way of life".

[ 14 ] Yet at the same time, Laing insisted that such a socially real grouping "can be nothing else than the multiplicity of the points of view and actions of its members...even where, through the interiorization of this multiplicity as synthesized by each, this synthesized multiplicity becomes ubiquitous in space and enduring in time".

[ 15 ] The existence of a social reality independent of individuals or the ecology would seem at odds with the views of perceptual psychology , including those of J. J. Gibson , and those of most ecological economics theories.

[ 16 ] Scholars such as John Searle argue on the one hand that "a socially constructed reality presupposes a reality independent of all social constructions".

[ 17 ] At the same time, he accepts that social realities are humanly created, and that "the secret to understanding the continued existence of institutional facts is simply that the individuals directly involved and a sufficient number of members of the relevant communities must continue to recognize and accept the existence of such facts".

[ 18 ] Socialisation and the Capital Other [ edit ] Freud saw a child's induction into social reality as consolidated with the passing of the Oedipus complex and the internalisation of the parents: "the same figures who continue to operate in the super-ego as the agency we know as conscience...also belong to the real external world. It is from there that they were drawn; their power, behind which lie hidden all the influences of the past and of tradition, was one of the most strongly-felt manifestations of reality".

[ 19 ] Lacan clarified the point by stressing that this was "a highly significant moment in the transfer of powers from the subject to the Other, what I call the Capital Other...the field of the Other – which, strictly speaking, is the Oedipus complex".

[ 20 ] Lacan considered that "the Oedipus complex...superimposes the kingdom of culture on that of nature", [ 21 ] bringing the child into the Symbolic Order .

Within that order, Lacanians consider that "institutions, as signifying practices , are much more extensive structures than romantic notions allow and they thus implicate us in ways which narrower definitions cannot recognize...exceed any intersubjective intention or effect".

[ 22 ] In similar fashion, Searle asserts that "institutional power – massive, pervasive, and typically invisible – permeates every nook and cranny of our social lives...the invisible structure of social reality".

[ 23 ] Measuring trust [ edit ] This section may contain material unrelated to the topic of the article .

Please help improve this section or discuss this issue on the talk page .

( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) If one accepts the validity of the idea of social reality, scientifically, it must be amenable to measurement, something which has been explored particularly in relation to trust . "Trust is...part of a community's social capital , as Francis Fukuyama argues, and has deep historical and cultural roots".

[ 24 ] Theories of the measurement of trust in the sociological community are usually called theories of social capital, to emphasize the connection to economics .

See also [ edit ] Belief Ideology Consensus Reality , a notion of reality based on consensus view Sociology of gender Social identity theory Social construction of gender Social ontology Sociology of human consciousness References [ edit ] ^ Berger, Peter (1967).

The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory of Religion . Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Company, Inc. pp.

3– 28.

^ Ireke Bockting, Character and Personality in the Novels of William Faulkner (1995) p. 25 ^ MacKinnon, N. J; Heise, D. R. (2010).

reality and human subjectivity . Palgrave. pp.

219– 234.

^ Niklas Luhmann , Theories of Distinction (2002) p. 136 ^ George Walsh, "Introduction", Alfred Schütz, The Phenomenology of the Social World (1997)p. xxvii ^ John O'Neill, Sociology as a Skin Trade (London 1972) p. 217 ^ Quoted in T. van der Eyden, Public Management of Society (2003) p. 487 ^ Herbert Spencer, The Principles of Sociology , Vol. 1, Part 1. "The Data of Sociology"(1876) ^ John R. Searle, The Construction of Social Reality (Penguin 1996) p. 79 ^ Searle, p. 97 ^ Searle, p. 73 and p. 78 ^ Antony Giddens, Sociology (2006) p. 152 ^ John O'Neill, Sociology as a Skin Trade (London 1972) p. 168 ^ R. D. Laing, The Politics of Experience (Penguin 1984) p. 65 ^ Laing, p. 81 ^ Lawson, Tony (March 2012).

"Ontology and the study of social reality: emergence, organisation, community, power, social relations, corporations, artefacts and money" .

Cambridge Journal of Economics .

36 (2): 345– 385.

doi : 10.1093/cje/ber050 .

JSTOR 24232451 .

[Features classified as social are] "those, if any, that could not exist in the absence of human beings and their doings." ^ Searle, p. 190 ^ Searle, p. 190 and p. 117 ^ Sigmund Freud, On Metapsychology (PFL 11) p. 422 ^ Jacques Lacan, The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psycho-Analysis (Penguin 1994) p. 129 and p. 205 ^ Jacques Lacan, Écrits: A Selection (1997) p. 66 ^ Joan Copjec, in Jacques Lacan, Television (London 1990) p. 51-2 ^ Searle, p. 94 and p. 4 ^ Will Hutton, The State to Come (London 1997) p. 31 Further reading [ edit ] Alfred Schutz, The Problem of Social Reality (1973).

Berger, P. L. and Luckmann, T. 1966 .

The Social Construction of Reality : A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge , New York: Penguin Books.

External links [ edit ] Introduction to Durkheim's Sociology: Social facts v t e Gender and sexual identities Gender identities Genders Man Woman Male Female Androgyne Boi Cisgender Cross-dresser Femboy Gender bender Gender fluidity Gender neutrality Gender variance Masculine of center Non-binary / genderqueer Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transsexual Third genders and sexes Androgynos Apwint Bakla Binabinaaine Bugis genders Bissu Calabai Calalai Chibados Enaree Eunuch Galli Fa'afafine Fakafifine Femminiello Güevedoce Hijra Kathoey Köçek Koekchuch Lhamana Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Nádleehi Nullo Palopa Sipiniq Sworn virgin Travesti Tumtum Two-spirit Vakasalewalewa Winkte X-gender Sexual orientation identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Heterosexual Homosexual Alternative labels Banjee Bi-curious Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Down-low Fictosexual Gay Gay men Gray asexual Demisexual Aegosexual Heteroflexible Khanith Lesbian women Non-heterosexual Pansexual Polysexual Queer Questioning Same gender loving Takatāpui Social aspects Sociosexuality Antisexuality Asociality Homosociality Heterosociality Other Achillean Allosexuality Analloeroticism Androphilia and gynephilia Aromanticism Attraction to transgender people Kinsey scale Monosexuality Plurisexuality Postgenderism Romantic orientation Sapphism See also Aphobia Acephobia Arophobia Anti-gender movement Discrimination against non-binary people Discrimination against transgender men Discrimination against transgender women Gender assignment Gender modality Gender roles Gender self-identification Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Legal status of transgender people Mental health of LGBTQ people Queer heterosexuality Right to personal identity Sex as a biological variable Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Split attraction model Suicide among LGBTQ people Transgender archaeology Transgender inequality Transmisogyny Transphobia v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_reality&oldid=1304645349 " Categories : Social constructionism Social philosophy Sociological theories Systems theory Reality Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from July 2022 All articles that may have off-topic sections This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 08:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social reality 14 languages Add topic

