Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Instrumental Marxism 2 languages Español 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist theory "Elite model" redirects here. For the agency, see Elite Model .

Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Instrumental Marxism , also elite analysis [ 1 ] or elite model , [ 2 ] is a theory which reasons that policy makers in government and positions of power tend to "share a common business or class background, and that their decisions will reflect their business or class interests".

[ 3 ] It perceives the role of the state as more personal than impersonal, where actions such as nepotism and favoritism are common among those in power, and as a result of this, the shared backgrounds between the economic elite and the state elite are discernible.

Overview [ edit ] The theory argues that due to the high concentration of wealth within the State that the actions of State actors seek to secure and increase their wealth by passing policies that benefit the economically superior class. It is also noted that businessmen-become-politicians who have a say in policy making “are not very likely, all the same, to find much merit in policies which appear to run counter to what they conceive to be in the interests of business.” [ 4 ] Instrumental Marxism tends to view the state and law as ultimately an instrument or tool for individuals of the economically dominant class to use for their own purposes, particularly maintaining economic exploitation while promoting ideological assent to their hegemony .

[ citation needed ] Instrumental Marxism is contrasted with structural Marxism , which views the class background of policymakers and so on as purely incidental to the " bourgeois " nature of the modern state, which is seen instead as a result of the position of the state and law in the objective structure of capitalist society and their objective (i.e. consciousness-independent) function of reproducing the relations of production and private property regardless of the class background of the individuals involved in the administration thereof.

[ 5 ] For example, whereas for instrumentalist Marxists the formal equality of contract law in capitalist societies is a kind of ideological shell or mystification used by the elite to conceal the real kernel of exploitation, for structural Marxists that formal legal equality is itself the real normative basis for properly capitalist exploitation, whether or not elites understand it as such as it allows labour-power to be traded at its real exchange-value (though not the value of its product), thus making regularity and rational allocation in labour markets possible.

[ 6 ] However, Miliband acknowledges that "there are ‘structural constraints which no government, whatever its complexion, wishes, and promises, can ignore or evade." In the framework of the structure and agency debate in sociology , Instrumental Marxism is an agent-centred view emphasizing the decisions of policymakers, where the relevant agents are either individual elites, a section of the ruling class, or the class as a whole whereas structural Marxism is a structural view in which individuals are no more than the bearers of certain objective structural relations.

[ citation needed ] The British sociologist and Marxist author Ralph Miliband is often considered the main proponent of this theory, however some dispute this.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Miliband's proposal of a Marxist theory of the State, in his book The State in Capitalist Society was famously criticised by Nicos Poulantzas which led to the Miliband–Poulantzas debate : a debate between instrumental Marxism and structural Marxism.

[ 9 ] Karl Kautsky is also an instrumental, orthodox marxist.

See also [ edit ] Classical Marxism Elite theory Miliband–Poulantzas debate References [ edit ] ^ Joshua S. Goldstein, Sandra Whitworth, International Relations , Pearson Longman, 2005, p. 147.

^ , p. .

^ Goldstein, Joshua S. (2004). Whitworth, Sandra (ed.).

International Relations (Canadian ed.). Toronto: Pearson Education . p. 147.

^ Miliband, Ralph (1969).

The State in Capitalist Society . New York: Basic Books. Archived from the original on 2022-03-15 . Retrieved 2021-02-01 .

^ Poulantzas, Nicos (November–December 1969). "The Problem of the Capitalist State".

New Left Review .

1 (58).

^ Poulantzas, Nicos (2008). "Marxist Examination of the Contemporary State and Law and the Question of the Alternative". In Martin, James (ed.).

The Poulantzas Reader: Marxism, Law and the State . London: Verso.

^ Schulman, Jason (August 2019).

"Miliband and the State" .

Jacobin . Retrieved July 18, 2020 .

^ Barrow, Clyde W. (2008), Wetherly, Paul; Barrow, Clyde W.; Burnham, Peter (eds.), "Ralph Miliband and the Instrumentalist Theory of the State: The (Mis)Construction of an Analytic Concept", Class, Power and the State in Capitalist Society: Essays on Ralph Miliband , London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.

84– 108, doi : 10.1057/9780230592704_5 , ISBN 978-0-230-59270-4 ^ Encyclopedia of power . Keith M. Dowding. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE. 2011. pp.

416– 417.

ISBN 978-1-4522-6641-1 .

OCLC 710790954 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐bmnfr
Cached time: 20250812083315
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.390 seconds
Real time usage: 0.556 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1382/1000000
Revision size: 6144/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 79816/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1730/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 47569/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.236/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6085081/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  448.936      1 -total
 31.55%  141.625      1 Template:Reflist
 28.26%  126.864      1 Template:Marxism
 27.43%  123.126      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 21.91%   98.364      4 Template:Cite_book
 16.25%   72.950      1 Template:Short_description
 12.97%   58.244      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.54%   47.324      2 Template:Cn
  8.90%   39.962      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.76%   39.327      1 Template:Redirect Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:40980058:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812083315 and revision id 1301079725. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Instrumental_Marxism&oldid=1301079725 " Categories : Eponymous political ideologies Marxist theory Sociological theories Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Use Oxford spelling from January 2020 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 00:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Instrumental Marxism 2 languages Add topic

