Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Philosophical work 3 Selected books 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul Guyer 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی 한국어 مصرى Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher Paul Guyer Born ( 1948-01-13 ) January 13, 1948 (age 77) New York City, U.S.

[ 2 ] Education Alma mater Harvard University Thesis Criteria for Judgment: Kant and the Problem of Taste (1974) Doctoral advisor Stanley Cavell [ 1 ] Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Main interests Immanuel Kant , aesthetics Paul Guyer ( / ˈ ɡ aɪ .

ər / ) is an American philosopher and a leading scholar of Immanuel Kant and of aesthetics . From 2012, he was Jonathan Nelson Professor of Philosophy and Humanities at Brown University until his retirement in 2023.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In 2025, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society .

[ 5 ] Education and career [ edit ] Guyer grew up on Long Island, New York, and attended public schools there, graduating from Lynbrook High School in 1965. He graduated summa cum laude from Harvard College in 1969, where he studied in the Departments of philosophy and German; his Ph.D. in philosophy was also taken at Harvard University , with a dissertation directed by Stanley Cavell .

[ 6 ] Guyer joined the University of Pennsylvania in 1983 as a tenured faculty member, where he subsequently rose to the rank of Professor of Philosophy and F.R.C. Murray Professor in the Humanities. Prior to moving to the University of Pennsylvania, Guyer taught at the University of Pittsburgh from 1973 to 1978, and the University of Illinois, Chicago from 1978 to 1983. He has also been a visiting professor at Harvard, Princeton, and the University of Michigan .

[ 6 ] Guyer was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1999.

[ 7 ] He has held fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, and the Princeton University Center for Human Values.

[ 8 ] He has also been a Research Prize Winner of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation of the Federal Republic of Germany and a Daimler Fellow at the American Academy in Berlin.

[ 6 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Guyer has written a dozen books on Kant and Kantian themes, and has edited and translated a number of Kant's works into English. In addition to his work on Kant, Guyer has published on many other figures in the history of philosophy, including Locke , Hume , Hegel , Schopenhauer , and others. Guyer's Kant and The Claims of Knowledge ( Cambridge University Press , 1987) is widely considered to be one of the most significant works in Kant scholarship. Other works include Knowledge, Reason, and Taste: Kant's Response to Hume ( Princeton University Press , 2008), and The Cambridge Companion to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason ( Cambridge University Press ). More recently, he has published Virtues of Freedom: Essays on Kant's Moral Philosophy (2016), Kant on the Rationality of Morality (2019), and Reason and Experience in Mendelssohn and Kant (2020).

His other areas of specialty include the history of philosophy and aesthetics. His three-volume work A History of Modern Aesthetics was published by Cambridge University Press in February 2014. In 2021, Cambridge published A Philosopher Looks at Architecture.

[ 9 ] Guyer was President of the American Society for Aesthetics in 2011–13.

[ 10 ] Guyer was also President of the Eastern Division of the American Philosophical Association in 2011–12.

Selected books [ edit ] Kant and the Claims of Taste (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1979) Kant and the Claims of Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987) Kant on Freedom, Law and Happiness (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000) Knowledge, Reason and Taste: Kant's Response to Hume (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008) A History of Modern Aesthetics, 3 volumes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014) Virtues of Freedom (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016) Kant on the Rationality of Morality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019) Reason and Experience in Mendelssohn and Kant (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020) A Philosopher Looks at Architecture (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021) Idealism in Modern Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2023) Kant's Impact on Moral Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2024) See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ Maes, Hans (2017).

Conversations on Art and Aesthetics . Oxford University Press. p. 231.

ISBN 978-0199686100 .

^ Library of Congress: Paul D Guyer ^ Coelho, Courtney.

"Paul Guyer" .

News from Brown . Brown University.

^ "Paul Guyer" .

Cogut Institute for the Humanities | Brown University . Retrieved 18 August 2024 .

^ https://www.amphilsoc.org/news/aps-elects-new-members-2025 ^ a b c Guyer CV (PDF) .

^ "Paul D. Guyer | American Academy of Arts and Sciences" .

www.amacad.org . 2025-05-06 . Retrieved 2025-06-04 .

^ "Guggenheim Fellowships: Supporting Artists, Scholars, & Scientists" .

www.gf.org . Retrieved 2025-06-04 .

^ "Guyer's university page" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-27 . Retrieved 2009-08-12 .

^ "Official UPenn announcement of Guyer's appointment" .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Paul Guyer at Wikiquote Works by or about Paul Guyer at the Internet Archive Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_Guyer&oldid=1304950966 " Categories : Living people Kant scholars University of Pennsylvania faculty Harvard College alumni 21st-century American philosophers University of Michigan faculty Brown University faculty American philosophers of art Presidents of the American Philosophical Association People from Nassau County, New York Lynbrook Senior High School alumni Translators of Immanuel Kant Members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with Internet Archive links Place of birth missing (living people) Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 04:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul Guyer 7 languages Add topic

