Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classes of underwater breathing apparatus 2 Personal diving equipment Toggle Personal diving equipment subsection 2.1 Underwater breathing apparatus 2.2 Environmental protection 2.3 In-water stabilisation and mobility 2.4 Equipment for dive monitoring and navigation 2.5 Vision and communication 2.6 Safety equipment 2.6.1 Surface detection aids 2.6.2 Backup equipment 2.7 Personal tools and accessories 3 Diving team tools and equipment 4 Surface support equipment connected with diving and underwater work 5 Special equipment for underwater work not carried by the diver 6 Maintenance and testing Toggle Maintenance and testing subsection 6.1 Decontamination and disinfection 7 Development, manufacture and marketing Toggle Development, manufacture and marketing subsection 7.1 History 7.2 DEMA 8 Standards 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Diving equipment 12 languages Deutsch Español فارسی עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Winaray Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Equipment used to facilitate underwater diving Further information: Equipment Diving equipment Surface supplied commercial diving equipment on display at a trade show Other names Dive gear Uses Facilitate underwater diving operations Diving equipment , or underwater diving equipment , is equipment used by underwater divers to make diving activities possible, easier, safer and/or more comfortable. This may be equipment primarily intended for this purpose, or equipment intended for other purposes which is found to be suitable for diving use.

The fundamental item of diving equipment used by divers other than freedivers , is underwater breathing apparatus , such as scuba equipment , and surface-supplied diving equipment, but there are other important items of equipment that make diving safer, more convenient or more efficient. Diving equipment used by recreational scuba divers , also known as scuba gear, is mostly personal equipment carried by the diver, but professional divers , particularly when operating in the surface supplied or saturation mode , use a large amount of support equipment not carried by the diver.

Equipment which is used for underwater work or other activities which is not directly related to the activity of diving, or which has not been designed or modified specifically for underwater use by divers is not considered to be diving equipment.

Classes of underwater breathing apparatus [ edit ] Main article: Underwater breathing apparatus The diving mode is largely defined by the type of breathing apparatus used.

Surface-supplied diving [ 1 ] – mostly used in professional diving. This category includes: Surface oriented surface-supplied diving (Bounce diving), where the diver starts and finishes the dive at normal atmospheric pressure.

[ 1 ] Standard diving dress – mostly used in professional diving . Usually free-flow open circuit air, but occasionally semi-closed circuit mixed gas. Mainly of historical interest now.

Surface-supplied open circuit free-flow air diving, using compressed atmospheric air as the breathing gas.

Surface-supplied mixed gas diving, using helium based, nitrox, or trimix breathing gases. Usually using lightweight demand helmets, sometimes with helium reclaim systems.

Airline or Hookah diving.

"Compressor diving" – a rudimentary form of surface-supplied diving used in the Philippines by artisanal fishermen.

Recreational forms like snuba .

Saturation diving , where the diver remains under pressure in an underwater habitat or saturation spread between underwater excursions.

[ 1 ] Scuba diving – The use of self-contained underwater breathing apparatus. This category includes: Open-circuit scuba consisting of diving cylinder (s) and diving regulator (s) Rebreather diving , closed-circuit or semi-closed-circuit scuba Freediving or breathhold diving, where the diver completes the dive on a single breath of air taken at the surface before the dive.

Snorkelling allows breathing at the surface with the face submerged, and is used as an adjunct to free diving and scuba.

Atmospheric diving suits and other submersibles which isolate the diver from the ambient environment. These are not considered here.

[ 2 ] Liquid breathing systems are still hypothetical and at an early experimental stage. It is hoped that some day practical systems will allow very deep diving. This is not considered here.

A US Navy diver at work. The umbilical supplying air from the surface is clearly visible Diver in standard diving dress entering the water at Stoney Cove, England Scuba diver with single cylinder and open circuit regulator Free-diver with monofin , ascending The Newtsuit is an atmospheric diving suit which has fully articulated rotary joints in the arms and legs.

Personal diving equipment [ edit ] This is the diving equipment worn by or carried by the diver for personal protection or comfort, or to facilitate the diving aspect of the activity, and may include a selection from: Underwater breathing apparatus [ edit ] Main article: Underwater breathing apparatus Scuba equipment: Primary cylinder(s) , carried back-mounted or side mounted and open circuit regulator(s) , or rebreather sets.

Alternative air source such as bailout bottle or pony bottle , and decompression cylinders and their associated regulators.

Secondary demand valve (Octopus). Sometimes a full-face diving mask is used.

Surface-supplied equipment: Helmet or full face mask , diver's umbilical, airline, bailout block, bailout cylinder and regulator.

Early twin cylinder set with twin hose regulator Twin scuba cylinders with isolation manifold Charging a small bailout cylinder from a larger aluminium scuba cylinder Scuba regulator: First stage with primary and secondary demand valves, submersible pressure gauge and low pressure hose for BC inflation.

Technical diver with back mounted open circuit scuba and sling mounted decompression cylinders Diving with a closed circuit rebreather Russian made IDA-71 rebreather set Heavy standard diving helmet , lightweight demand helmet and band mask Diver wearing lightweight demand helmet Environmental protection [ edit ] See also: Diving suit The underwater environment usually requires a diver to wear thermal, sting and abrasion protection.

In cold water, a diving suit such as a dry suit (at temperatures of 0-10 °C), [ 3 ] a wet suit (at temperatures of 21-25 °C), [ 4 ] or a Hot water suit (surface supplied diving only) is necessary.

[ 5 ] Boiler suit overalls are often worn over the thermal protection suit by commercial divers as abrasion protection for the more easily damaged and expensive diving suit.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In very warm water (temperatures of 26-30 °C), many types of tough, long, everyday clothing provide protection, as well as purpose made garments such as dive skins (made of lycra) and shorty wetsuits. In some cases, simple regular swimsuits are also used.

[ 8 ] Diving gloves , including wetsuit gloves and dry gloves, mitts, and three-finger mitts [ 3 ] Diving suit hoods are worn mainly for thermal protection, but also provide some impact protection and some protection from environmental contact with contaminants and stinging animals like jellyfish.

[ 9 ] Diving boots - With dry suits, the boots are usually integrated.

[ 3 ] Safety helmet for scuba diving . (Not part of the breathing apparatus.) Diving chain mail may be used as protection against bites by large marine animals Diver's cages may be used as protection against large predators Atmospheric diving suit provides complete isolation from the environment [ 10 ] Full wet suit Dry suits Short and full length wet suits Wet suit boots Neoprene diving gloves Chain mail shark suit Shark proof cage Atmospheric diving suit In-water stabilisation and mobility [ edit ] This equipment includes buoyancy control equipment and mobility equipment:
Buoyancy control is achieved  by  ballasting with diving weights and compensating for buoyancy changes during the dive using a buoyancy compensator: Diving weighting system - to counteract the buoyancy of the diving suit and diver to allow descent. Professional divers may use additional weighting to ensure stability when working on the bottom Buoyancy compensator , also known as Buoyancy Control Device, BCD or BC - is usually a back mounted or sleeveless jacket style device which includes an inflatable bladder used to adjust the buoyancy of the diver under water, and provide positive buoyancy at the surface. The buoyancy compensator is usually an integral part of the harness system used to secure the scuba set to the diver. The earlier collar style buoyancy compensator is seldom used any more.

Mobility equipment allows the diver to move through the water and maneuver on the spot: Fins for efficient propulsion Diver Propulsion Vehicle - to increase the range of the diver underwater Jacket buoyancy compensator Diver propulsion vehicle (scooter) Weight belt Swim fins Equipment for dive monitoring and navigation [ edit ] See also: Scuba skills § Dive management skills , Dive computer , and Diver navigation These are the equipment used for monitoring the course of the dive and following the dive plan when undesirable events are avoided. They include planning and monitoring the dive profile, gas usage and decompression, navigation, and modifying the plan to suit actual circumstances.

Depth gauge lets the diver monitor depth, particularly maximum depth and, when used with a watch and Decompression tables , also allows the diver to monitor decompression requirements. Some digital depth gauges also indicate ascent rate which is an important factor in avoiding decompression sickness Pneumofathometer is the surface supplied diving depth gauge which displays the depth of the diver at the surface control panel. It uses hydrostatic back-pressure on a low flow rate open ended air hose to the diver to indicate depth.

Diving watch is used with depth gauge for decompression monitoring when using decompression tables. Largely superseded by dive computers, where elapsed time is one of the standard displays, and time of day may also be available.

Dive timer is an instrument that displays and records depth and elapsed time during the dive. It is usually possible to extract the information after the dive. This function is often available as "Gauge setting" on dive computers.

Diving compass for underwater navigation . This may be a regular magnetic compass, but is often a selectable function of a dive computer, where a miniature magnetometer is used.

Submersible pressure gauge , also known as a "contents gauge" is used to monitor the remaining breathing gas supply in scuba cylinders.

Dive computer helps the diver to avoid decompression sickness by indicating the decompression stops needed for the dive profile . Most dive computers also indicate depth, time and ascent rate. Some also indicate oxygen toxicity exposure and water temperature, and may provide other functions. A display of cylinder pressure is available on air-integrated computers, either via a direct high pressure hose, or remotely via a pressure transducer and through-water transmission.

Distance line , guide line, or "come-home-line" can be used to guide the diver back to the start point and safety in poor visibility.

A cave line is a line laid by a diver while penetrating a cave to ensure that the way out is known. Permanent cave lines are marked with line markers at all junctions, indicating the direction along the line toward the nearest exit.

A depth gauge and submersible pressure gauge Submersible pressure gauge A surface supply panel for four divers showing four pneumofathometer gauges A watch sized dive computer incorporating an electronic compass and the ability to display cylinder pressure when used with an optional transmitter Dive computer showing the log of a previous dive Nav finder and underwater compass - basic underwater navigation tools.

Diving compass in aftermarket wrist mount with bungee straps Dive computers in compass mode 50 metres of line on a reel Line arrow marker A miniature submersible pressure gauge (mini SPG) used on pony cylinders Vision and communication [ edit ] See also: Underwater vision and Diver communications Underwater vision is significantly affected by several factors. Objects are less visible because of lower levels of natural illumination and are blurred by scattering of light between the object and the viewer, also resulting in lower contrast. These effects vary with wavelength of the light, and color and turbidity of the water. The human eye is unable to focus when in direct contact with water, and an air space must be provided. Voice communication requires special equipment, and much recreational diver communication is visual and based on hand signals.

Masks allow the diver to see clearly underwater and protect the eyes.

Full face masks protect the face from dirty or cold water and reduce risk by securing the gas supply to the diver's face. If it contains no mouthpiece, the diver can talk, allowing the use of communications equipment.

Half masks cover only the eyes and nose. The diver breathes from a separate mouthpiece on the regulator or rebreather.

A prescription mask, or glasses which can be mounted inside the mask or helmet to provide clear vision underwater, enhancing the experience and safety for those with vision problems. A prescription mask contains lenses mounted in the scuba mask frame  or bonded to the original viewports.

Diving helmets are often used for surface-supplied diving . They provide the same benefits as the full face mask but provide a very secure connection of the gas supply to the diver and additionally protect the head.

Underwater writing slates and pencils are used to transport pre-dive plans underwater, to record facts while underwater and to aid communication with other divers.

Dive lights , which are usually waterproof and pressure rated torches or flashlights , are essential for safety in low visibility or dark environments such as night diving and wreck and cave penetration. They are useful for communication and signalling both underwater and on the surface at night. Divers need artificial light even in shallow and clear water to reveal the red end of the spectrum of light which is absorbed as it travels through water. Underwater video lights can serve the same purpose.

Hand-held sonar for a diver can provide a synthetic view using ultrasonic signals emitted and processed by an electronic device and displayed on a screen.

Ultrasonic signalling devices which attract the buddies attention by vibration have been marketed and may have some limited utility.

[ 11 ] A diving half mask provides clear sight and protection for the eyes.

A full face mask covers the eyes, nose and mouth.

One piece LED dive light with soft Goodman type handle A "canister" style dive light Safety equipment [ edit ] See also: Diving safety Diving safety equipment in the broader sense would include all equipment that could make a dive safer, by reducing a hazard, reducing the probability of an adverse event, or mitigating its effects. This would include basic equipment such as primary breathing apparatus, exposure protection, buoyancy management equipment and mobility equipment. The more specific meaning is equipment primarily and explicitly used to improve safety of a dive or diving operation. Equipment intended to improve safety in the second sense includes: Diver's safety harness , to which a lifeline may be attached, including bell harness, AR vest, or jump jacket.

[ 6 ] Lifeline (or tether): A line from the diver to a tender at the surface control point, which may be used for: [ 12 ] communications, by diving line signals, to allow the diver to be found by the stand-by diver following the line, to provide a guideline to the surface control point to guide the diver on return, to assist the diver to maintain position in a current, in an emergency, to recover the diver to the surface, and in some cases lift the diver out of the water.

Shotline : A line connecting a shot weight to a marker buoy, used to mark a dive site and provide a vertical reference for descent and ascent.

[ 13 ] Buddy line : A short line or strap connecting two divers in the water, used to prevent them from being separated in poor visibility and for communication by line signals.

[ 14 ] Jonline : A short line or webbing strap to tether the diver to the shotline in a current.

[ 15 ] Alternative ascent system: Defined in Queensland law as "A highly visible buoyancy device such as a delayed surface marker buoy that provides a submerged diver with an ascent line that the diver may follow to the surface and use to complete any decompression requirements." [ 16 ] Surface marker buoy , which indicates the position of the divers to people at the surface.

[ 17 ] May be used as an alternative ascent system.

[ 16 ] DSMB - (Delayed, or deployable surface marker buoy), or decompression buoy which is inflated at the start of, or during the ascent, to indicate the position of the divers to the surface team, and as a signal that the divers are ascending.

[ 17 ] A definitive type of alternative ascent system.

[ 16 ] Cutting tool Knife to cut lines, nets or to pry or dig.  Not intended for personal protection against underwater predators as it is generally ineffective for this purpose.

Diver's net or line cutter . This is a small handheld tool carried by scuba divers to extricate themselves if trapped in fishing net or fishing line . It has a small sharp blade such as a replaceable scalpel blade inside the small notch. There is usually a hole at the other end of the handle for a lanyard to tether the cutter to the diver.

Trauma shears . Very effective as a line cutter, with low risk of inadvertent injury or damage. Usually carried in a pocket or special purpose sheath.

Automatic diver recovery devices which inflate the BCD if the diver stops breathing have been marketed. They are not generally used and the risks may outweigh possible benefits.

Front view of jacket style diver harness with removable weight pockets Scuba diver 's net cutter. 7 inches long Underwater Kinetics general purpose dive knife Trilobite line cutter with sheath on diving harness Trauma shears DiverGuard automatically inflates the buoyancy compensator if the diver stops breathing.

Spool with line and double-ender clip Dive reel with stored DSMB A stainless steel line holder with a 20-metre line Surface detection aids [ edit ] Personal locator beacon for divers - sealed for immersion Personal locator beacon for divers - open showing coiled antenna The purposes of this class of personal equipment are to: [ 18 ] allow the support boat to monitor and find divers on the surface during or after a dive prevent the diver being struck by boat traffic mark the diver's position when drift diving or while at the decompression stop help rescue services in lifeboats and helicopters to locate the diver Surface detection aids include: [ 18 ] Surface marker buoy , decompression buoy, delayed SMB, safety sausage or blob [ 17 ] Red or yellow collapsible flag - high visibility, robust, usually stored bungeed to cylinder Whistle - cheap, will only be heard by people far from engine noise Torch or flashlight - if at sea after nightfall Strobe light - needs long-lasting batteries High pressure whistle - expensive but effective Orange dye marker - increases diver's visibility from search helicopters Mirror such as a used compact disc - to reflect sunlight or searchlights Red pyrotechnic flares - for helicopters and lifeboats ENOS Rescue-System Emergency position-indicating rescue beacon (EPIRB) Emergency locator beacon - A transmitter carried by the diver that can send a GPS position by VHF radio and/or Automatic identification system (AIS) Glow stick - for night diving Backup equipment [ edit ] Backup or redundant equipment is equipment carried in case of failure of the  primary equipment. This may be safety critical equipment necessary to allow safe termination of the dive or equipment carried to improve the probability of successfully completing the task of the diving operation if the primary equipment fails. The most common example of the former is bailout gas, carried routinely by solo, technical, and professional scuba divers, and most surface-supplied divers. Solo and technical divers may also carry a backup mask, dive computer, decompression gas and other equipment based on risk assessment for the planned dive.

[ 19 ] Some backup equipment may be spread amongst a diving team, when instant availability is not critical, this practice is termed team redundancy .

[ 20 ] Personal tools and accessories [ edit ] Norwegian diving pioneer Odd Henrik Johnsen with underwater camera (1960's) Underwater camera , strobe (flash), video lights and housing - for underwater photography or underwater videography Diving reel , dive spool or line holder to store and transport a distance line or line for a surface marker buoy. A dive spool, or line spool, is a short cylindrical tube with a large flange at each end, around which a length of line can be wound, and a line holder is a flat H-shaped frame or piece of rigid sheet material on which a length of line can be wound, as an alternative to a reel or spool. The line may be used with a surface marker buoy or a delayed surface marker buoy (decompression buoy), where negative buoyancy of the spool or line holder will help with unwinding the line underwater.

[ 21 ] Dry box to hold objects the diver needs to keep dry at depth (wallet, cell phone) [ clarification needed ] Dry bag to carry items that must stay dry on the boat.

Dive bag to hold personal dive equipment for travel. Soft bags are traditional for local use, when the dive gear may be wet when packed after use. For air travel, hard and soft bags, including those with wheels and telescopic handles are available.

[ 22 ] Vinyl toolbag with bolt snaps for securing to harness Diving tool bag to carry tools that may be required for the job. Various types and sizes are available.

[ 23 ] Reef hook to hold onto a reef in a current. This is a metal rod with a handle and a bent tip to grip the reef surface. It is claimed to do less environmental damage than the diver's hand, and is also less likely for the diver to injure themself on sharp substrate. A reef hook may have a single or double claw tip, and may have a rope, webbing or coiled plastic coated lanyard, and may be clipped to the diver's harness at the other end for hands-free use. When hanging off the reef at the end of the lanyard the diver can keep sufficiently clear of the reef to prevent fin-strike damage while effortlessly maintaining position in a moderate current. Some skill is required for safe and effective use.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Surface supplied diver rescue tether with soft eye and bolt snap A rescue tether , or rescue rope, is a short lanyard or strap carried by a surface supplied stand-by diver to be used to tether an unresponsive diver to the standby diver during a rescue. It is attached at one end to a D-ring on the stand-by diver's harness, and has a clip at the other end which may be secured to a D-ring on the casualty's harness to allow the rescuer the use of both hands during the return to the bell or surface.

Diving team tools and equipment [ edit ] A jackstay is a form of guideline laid between two points to guide the diver during a search or to and from the workplace or to support and guide equipment for transport between two points.

[ 6 ] Lifting bags , an item of diving equipment consisting of a robust and air-tight bag with straps, which is used to lift heavy objects underwater by means of the bag's buoyancy when filled with air.

[ 26 ] A shot line , consisting of a weight, line and buoy , is used to mark the location and identify the ascent and descent point of a dive site, allowing divers to navigate to and from the surface and to do decompression stops at a safe location and to help control rate of ascent and descent.

[ 27 ] Decompression trapeze is used to assist in maintaining correct depth during in-water decompression stops.

[ 28 ] Diving bells and diving stages are used to transport divers from the surface to the underwater workplace.

[ 29 ] A downline is a line from the surface to underwater workplace used to control descent, ascent and the transfer of tools, materials and other equipment between the surface and the workplace.

[ 6 ] A weighted version suspended from the surface is used to control working depth when blue-water diving , [ 30 ] It is similar in function to a jackstay, with an emphasis on the vertical dimension. The terms are largely interchangeable – a downline can be considered a predominantly vertical jackstay.

Surface support equipment connected with diving and underwater work [ edit ] International diving flag Informal Recreational diving flag Boarding ladders , particularly the Christmas tree ladder configuration, with a single central rail and cantilevered rungs on both sides, which allows a diver to climb while wearing fins.

[ 31 ] Breathing gas analysis equipment.

[ 32 ] Dive platforms (or swim platforms) on boats.

Diver down flag which is flown to warn others that divers are underwater in the vicinity [ 33 ] Diver lifts , to conveniently transport a diver from the deck level into the water near the surface and back out in full equipment.

[ 34 ] Diving air compressors and gas boosters to fill diving cylinders with high pressure air or other gasses.

Diving chambers for surface decompression and treatment of decompression illness Diving support vessels Dive boats Day boats , which may be rigid-hulled inflatable boats Live-aboard dive boat Dynamically positioned vessels Echo sounder , side-scan sonar and multi-beam sonar for location, depth measurement, and profiling of dive sites GPS receiver - for locating dive sites Surface-supplied diving breathing gas supply system, including: Low pressure breathing air compressors High pressure gas storage equipment Breathing gas distribution panels Diver's umbilicals Diver voice communications equipment Gas reclaim system for deep heliox diving Gas blending systems Gas blending systems for scuba diving Hot water systems for supply of heating water to divers wearing hot water suits Light and shape signals indicating underwater operations Marine VHF radio - for communicating with rescue services and other vessels Proton magnetometer - for locating ferrous wrecks Saturation systems providing surface support for saturation diving .

Surface supply air panels. On the left for two divers, on the right for three divers A hard-wired diver communications unit mounted in a waterproof box for convenience of transport and protection.

Personnel Transfer Capsule - a dry bell Christmas tree style diver's boarding ladder Special equipment for underwater work not carried by the diver [ edit ] Tools and equipment too large or too heavy to be carried by a diver are generally lowered to the worksite from the surface platform. They are mostly used in professional diving applications.

Remotely operated underwater vehicle - for locating dive sites, observing the environment, conducting visual searches, monitoring divers or performing physical work Large lifting bags and their rigging.

Airlift and pump suction dredges Hydraulic jackhammers , Tremies and concrete placement skips Maintenance and testing [ edit ] See also: Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Life support equipment must be maintained and tested before use to ensure that it remains in serviceable condition and is fit for use at the time. Pre-dive inspection and testing of equipment at some level is standard procedure for all modes and applications of diving. The use of checklists is known to improve reliability of inspection and testing, and may be required by the applicable code of practice or operations manual, or manufacturer's operating instructions. Inadequate pre-dive checks of breathing apparatus can have fatal consequences for some equipment, such as rebreathers , or may require the diving operation to be aborted without achieving its objective.

Maintenance can be categorised as: Planned periodical maintenance, such as annual service and inspection of breathing apparatus, pressure equipment, lifting gear and other items according to manufacturers' recommendations or legislation.

Cleaning and inspection after use, and appropriate storage. A large part of this is washing off salt water to prevent it from drying on the equipment and leaving corrosive brine or abrasive salt deposits, which can cause accelerated deterioration of some materials and jamming of moving parts. The ultraviolet component of sunlight can also damage non-metallic components and equipment, and ozone produced by electrical equipment is known to adversely affect some materials, such as the latex seals on dry suits. Most diving equipment will last better if stored in a cool, dry, well ventilated place out of direct sunlight.

Decontamination and disinfection [ edit ] See also: Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment and Hazmat diving § Decontamination Diving equipment may be exposed to contamination in use and when this happens it must be decontaminated This is a particular issue for hazmat diving , but incidental contamination can occur in other environments. Personal diving equipment shared by more than one user requires disinfection before use. Shared use is common for expensive commercial diving equipment, and for rental recreational equipment, and some items such as demand valves, masks, helmets and snorkels which are worn over the face or held in the mouth are possible vectors for infection by a variety of pathogens . Diving suits are also likely to be contaminated, but less likely to transmit infection directly.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] When disinfecting diving equipment it is necessary to consider the effectiveness of the disinfectant on the expected pathogens, and the possible adverse effects on the equipment. Some highly effective methods for disinfection can damage the equipment, or cause accelerated degradation of components due to incompatibility with materials.

[ 37 ] Development, manufacture and marketing [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: more information in detail. You can help by adding to it .

( October 2020 ) The diving equipment market sectors are commercial diving, military diving, recreational and technical scuba, freediving, and snorkelling. with scientific diving using a mix of recreational, technical, and commercial equipment.

The commercial diving market is relatively small, but occupational safety issues keep cost of operations high and there is work that must be done in support of various industries, particularly the oil and gas industry, that make money available for high reliability equipment in small quantities. The military market is similarly constrained by small quantities, and there is a lot of overlap with commercial equipment where the applications are similar, but the technical requirements for stealth operations drive development of different equipment.

Recreational scuba and snorkelling are the largest markets, in which there is the most competition between manufacturers for market share, and in which the buyers are least knowledgeable about the technology and most susceptible to persuasion by advertising.

Technical diving is a niche market, where the buyers are willing to take higher risks than commercial operators, and there is enough money available to support a small number of manufacturers developing new technology. Scientific diving is also a small market, and tends to overlap the other sectors, using what is available, and occasionally driving development of new technology for special applications.

History [ edit ] Main article: Timeline of diving technology See also: History of underwater diving With the partial exception of breath-hold diving, the development of underwater diving capacity, scope, and popularity, has been closely linked to available technology, and the physiological constraints of the underwater environment which the technology allows divers to partially overcome.

DEMA [ edit ] Diving Equipment and Marketing Association Abbreviation DEMA Formation 1987 Type Trade Association Legal status Mutual-benefit nonprofit corporation Incorporated in California , Purpose Advocacy for the recreational diving industry Headquarters California , United States of America Membership 1,300 Website www .dema .org Formerly called Diving Equipment Manufacturers Association [ 38 ] The Diving Equipment and Marketing Association (DEMA, formerly the Diving Equipment Manufacturers Association), [ 38 ] [ 39 ] is an international organization for the promotion and growth of the recreational scuba diving and snorkeling industry .  It is a non-profit, global organization with more than 1,300 members, which promotes scuba diving through consumer awareness programs and media campaigns such as the national Be a Diver campaign; diver retention initiatives such as DiveCaching; and an annual trade-only event for businesses in the scuba diving, action watersports and adventure/dive-travel industries, DEMA Show.

[ 40 ] Board Members serve three-year terms.

[ 41 ] The purposes and objectives of the Association are published as: [ 42 ] To promote the advancement of the diving industry, to promote and encourage the growth of diving activities, and to enhance the growth and public enjoyment of the sport of diving.

To establish continuing business education programs to aid industry members, their officers and employees.

To facilitate the exchange of information among industry members, through experts, internet-based programming, manuals and conferences, and other media on such subjects as quality control, general industry statistics, governmental regulations, product standards and/or certification, standardized methods of keeping books and records, and related topics of industry interest.

To support the diving industry with communication services, media relations and resources.

To support the diving industry in monitoring and communicating on legislation that impacts diving and to represent the industry before the executive, legislative and judicial branches of government throughout the United States and in foreign jurisdictions.

To support the diving industry in the monitoring and protection of the environment through education and activities.

Standards [ edit ] National and international standards have been published for the manufacture and testing of diving equipment.

Underwater breathing apparatus EN 14143-2003 Respiratory equipment - Self-contained re-breathing diving apparatus BS EN 1802:2002 Transportable gas cylinders. Periodic inspection and testing of seamless aluminium alloy gas cylinders BS EN 1968:2002 Transportable gas cylinders. Periodic inspection and testing of seamless steel gas cylinders Swim fins DIN 7876 swim fin footspace length and width measurements.

MIL-S-82258:1965 US Military specification. Swim fins, rubber.

[ 43 ] GOST 22469:1977 USSR/CIS standard, Ласты резиновые для плавания. Общие технические условия. Swimming rubber flippers. General specifications.

[ 44 ] DIN 7876:1980 German standard, Tauchzubehör. Schwimmflossen. Maße, Anforderungen und Prüfung . Diving accessories for skin divers. Flippers. Dimensions, requirements and testing.

[ 45 ] BN-82/8444-17.02 Polish Industry standard.

Gumowy sprzęt pływacki - Płetwy pływackie (Rubber swimming equipment - Swimming fins).

[ 46 ] MS 974:1985 Malaysian standard, Specification for rubber swimming fins.

[ 47 ] ÖNORM S 4224:1988 Austrian standard, Tauch-Zubehör; Schwimmflossen; Abmessungen, sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen, Prüfung, Normkennzeichnung . Diving accessories; fins; dimensions, safety requirements, testing, marking of conformity.

[ 48 ] MS 974:2002 Malaysian standard, Specification for rubber swimming fins. First revision.

[ 49 ] EN 16804:2015 European standard, Diving equipment. Diving open heel fins. Requirements and test methods.

[ 50 ] Diving masks GOST 20568 compliant Russian and Ukrainian diving masks.

BS 4532:1969 British standard, Specification for snorkels and face masks. Amended 1977.

[ 51 ] GOST 20568:1975 USSR/CIS standard, Маски резиновые для плавания под водой. Общие технические условие. Rubber masks for submarine swimming. General specifications.

[ 52 ] DIN 7877:1980 German standard, Tauch-Zubehör. Tauchbrillen. Sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen und Prüfung . Diving accessories for skin divers. Diver's masks. Requirements and testing.

[ 53 ] BN-82/8444-17.01 Polish Industry standard, Gumowy sprzęt pływacki - Maski pływackie (Rubber swimming equipment - Swimming masks).

[ 54 ] ANSI Z87.11:1985 American National Standard, Underwater Safety. Recreational Skin and Scuba Diving. Lenses for Masks.

[ 55 ] ÖNORM S 4225:1988 Austrian standard, Tauch-Zubehör; Tauchmasken (Tauchbrillen); Sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen, Prüfung, Normkennzeichnung . Diving accessories; divers’ masks; safety requirements, testing, marking of conformity.

[ 56 ] CNS 12497:1989 Chinese National Standard, 潛水鏡. Diving mask.

[ 57 ] CNS 12498:1989 Chinese National Standard, 潛水鏡檢驗法. Method of test for diving mask.

[ 58 ] EN 16805:2015 European standard, Diving equipment. Diving mask. Requirements and test methods.

[ 59 ] A range of 1970s snorkels made to British Standard BS 4532 Snorkels BS 4532:1969 British standard, Specification for snorkels and face masks. Amended 1977.

[ 51 ] DIN 7878:1980 German standard, Tauch-Zubehör; Schnorchel; Maße, Anforderungen, Prüfung . Diving accessories for skin divers. Snorkel. Technical requirements of safety, testing.

[ 60 ] ÖNORM S 4223:1988 Austrian standard, Tauch-Zubehör; Schnorchel; Abmessungen, sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen, Prüfung, Normkennzeichnung . Diving accessories; snorkels; dimensions, safety requirements, testing, marking of conformity.

[ 61 ] DIN 7878:1991 German standard, Tauch-Zubehör; Schnorchel; Sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen und Prüfung . Diving accessories for skin divers. Snorkel. Safety requirements and testing.

[ 62 ] EN 1972:1997 – European standard for design and manufacture of snorkels European standard, Diving accessories. Snorkels. Safety requirements.

[ 63 ] EN 1972:2015 European standard, Diving equipment. Snorkels. Requirements and test methods.

[ 64 ] Buoyancy compensators BN-82/8444-17.05 Polish Industry standard.

Gumowy sprzęt pływacki - Kamizelki pływackie (Rubber swimming equipment - Swim vest).

[ 65 ] EN 1809:1998 Diving accessories. Buoyancy compensators. Functional and safety requirements, test methods.

EN 1809:2014+A1:2016 Diving equipment. Buoyancy compensators. Functional and safety requirements, test methods.

Wetsuits CNS 11251:1985 濕式潛水衣. Diving Wet Suit.

EN 14225-1:2005 Diving suits. Wet suits. Requirements and test methods.

EN 14225-1:2017 Diving suits. Wet suits. Requirements and test methods.

Dry suits EN 14225-2:2002 Diving suits. Dry suits. Requirements and test methods.

EN 14225-2:2017 Diving suits. Dry suits. Requirements and test methods.

Depth gauges EN 13319:2000 Diving accessories. Depth gauges and combined depth and time measuring devices. Functional and safety requirements, test methods.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Beyerstein, G (2006). Commercial Diving: Surface-Mixed Gas, Sur-D-O2, Bell Bounce, Saturation.

In: Lang, MA and Smith, NE (Eds). Proceedings of Advanced Scientific Diving Workshop (Report). Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.

^ Thornton, Mike; Randall, Robert E.; Albaugh, E. Kurt (1 January 2001).

"Subsea Technology: Atmospheric diving suits bridge gap between saturation diving and ROV units" .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 .

^ a b c Barsky, Steven M.; Long, Dick; Stinton, Bob (2006).

Dry Suit Diving: A Guide to Diving Dry . Ventura, CA.: Hammerhead Press. p. 152.

ISBN 9780967430560 .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2009 .

^ Williams, Guy; Acott, Chris J. (2003). "Exposure suits: a review of thermal protection for the recreational diver".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

33 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Bevan, John, ed. (2005). "Section 5.4".

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Alverstoke, GOSPORT, Hampshire, UK: Submex Ltd. p. 242.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ a b c d Barsky, Steven M.; Christensen, Robert W. (2004).

The Simple Guide to Commercial Diving . Hammerhead Press. pp. 78, 92– 93.

ISBN 9780967430546 .

^ "Required Gear" .

diversinstitute.edu . 8 May 2023.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

^ Halls, Monty (2007).

Go scuba dive . Dorling Kindersley.

ISBN 978-1405318211 .

^ Barsky, Steven (2007).

Diving in High-Risk Environments (4th ed.). Ventura, California: Hammerhead Press.

ISBN 978-0-9674305-7-7 .

^ Thornton, Mike; Randall, Robert; Albaugh, Kurt (March–April 2001).

"Then and Now: Atmospheric Diving Suits" . UnderWater magazine. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008 . Retrieved 18 March 2012 .

^ Gronfeldt, Thomas (11 November 2016).

"Gear Review: The Buddy-Watcher" .

scubadiverlife.com .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2017 . Retrieved 25 October 2017 .

^ Department of Labour (11 January 2002).

Diving regulations 2001 of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 . Government Gazette, Republic of South Africa. Vol. 438. Pretoria: Government Printer.

^ "U.S. Navy Standard Deep Sea Diving Outfit training film 43424 NA" on YouTube ^ Gurr, Kevin (August 2008). "13: Operational Safety". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

165– 180.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ Gentile, Gary (1998).

The Technical Diving Handbook . Gary Gentile Productions.

ISBN 1-883056-05-5 .

^ a b c "Recreational Diving, Recreational Technical Diving and Snorkelling Code of Practice 2024" (PDF) .

www.worksafe.qld.gov.au/ . State of Queensland. 2024.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 November 2024 . Retrieved 20 February 2025 .

^ a b c "Recommendations Concerning the Use of Surface Marker Buoys" (PDF) .

www.bdsg.org . British Diving Safety Group. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ a b Guimbellot, Barry; Guimbellot, Ruth.

"How to Be an Attention-Getter: Signaling Devices for Divers" .

dtmag.com .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 September 2023 .

^ Staff (4 March 2014).

"CMAS Self-Rescue Diver" .

Standard Number: 2.B.31 / BOD no 181 ( 04-18-2013 ) . CMAS.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2017 . Retrieved 13 April 2017 .

^ Jablonski, Jarrod (2006). "4: DIR Philosophy".

Doing It Right: The Fundamentals of Better Diving . High Springs, Florida: Global Underwater Explorers. pp.

53– 54.

ISBN 0-9713267-0-3 .

^ Devos, Fred; Le Maillot, Chris; Riordan, Daniel (2004).

"Introduction to Guideline Procedures Part 1: Equipment" (PDF) .

DIRquest .

5 (3).

Global Underwater Explorers .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-06-09 . Retrieved 2009-04-05 .

^ "Soft Or Hard Dive Bag? - Scuba Tech Tips: S15E09" . Alec Peirce Scuba. 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2024 – via Youtube.

^ "Tool bag" .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2023 . Retrieved 28 March 2024 .

^ "Divetek Reef Drift Hook" . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

^ "The Full Reef Hook Tutorial" . InsideDivers. 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

^ Bevan, John, ed. (2005). "3:Applied techniques".

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Alverstoke, Gosport, Hampshire: Submex Ltd. pp.

174– 177.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ Boan, Charlotte (8 December 2014).

"How to deploy a shot-line" .

divemagazine.com .

Archived from the original on 8 July 2023 . Retrieved 8 July 2023 .

^ "Iron Bottom Sound in Guadalcanal, The Solomons" .

www.rebreatherpro-training.com .

Archived from the original on 8 July 2023 . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

^ Bevan, John, ed. (2005). "Section 5.1".

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Gosport, UK: Submex Ltd. p. 200.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ "15: Mixed gas and oxygen diving".

The NOAA Diving Manual: Diving for Science and Technology (illustrated ed.). DIANE Publishing. 1992. p. 15.1.

ISBN 9781568062310 .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2016 .

^ NOAA Diving Program (U.S.) (28 Feb 2001). Joiner, James T. (ed.).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (4th ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, National Undersea Research Program.

ISBN 978-0-941332-70-5 .

CD-ROM prepared and distributed by the National Technical Information Service (NTIS) in partnership with NOAA and Best Publishing Company ^ Harlow, V. (2002).

Oxygen Hacker's Companion . Airspeed Press.

ISBN 978-0-9678873-2-6 .

^ "Maritime flags and their meaning" . eoceanic.com.

Archived from the original on 11 July 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ Knight, Marcus (10 August 2019).

"Training Fundamentals: Diver Lifts" .

scubadiverlife.com .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 11 August 2019 .

^ Liebscher, Caren (26 Jul 2015).

"Germophobia? - Just give it a reasonable thought" .

alertdiver.eu . Divers Alert Network Europe.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2021 . Retrieved 16 May 2020 .

^ "DAN's Quick Guide to Properly Disinfecting Dive Gear. Update – April 24, 2020" .

www.diversalertnetwork.org . Divers Alert Network. 24 April 2020.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2020 . Retrieved 16 May 2020 .

^ "Disinfecting your scuba diving equipment" .

www.apeksdiving.com .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 December 2020 .

^ a b Brylske, Alex.

"Training Standards: Understanding the "Why" Behind What Divers are Taught" . Dive Training magazine. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013 . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

^ "Meet the Association - the Diving Equipment & Marketing Association" .

Archived from the original on 2018-02-23 . Retrieved 2024-03-13 .

^ "Home" .

demashow.com .

Archived from the original on 2014-04-24 . Retrieved 2024-03-13 .

^ "Board, Committees & Staff Members - the Diving Equipment & Marketing Association" .

www.dema.org/staff .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2024 . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

^ "Diving Equipment and Marketing Association Inc. Bylaws" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2015-10-08 .

^ US military standard MIL-S-82258 (1965) Swim Fins, Rubber . Document found online at https://assist.dla.mil Archived 2013-06-21 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 9 December 2014.

^ "GOST 22469-77.

Ласты резиновые для плавания. Общие технические условия. Swimming rubber flippers. General specifications , ИПК Издательство стандартов, Moscow. Document found online at standartgost.ru Retrieved 16 March 2019" (PDF) (in Russian). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Deutsches Institut für Normung (1980). Tauchzubehör – Schwimmflossen – Maße, Anforderungen und Prüfung. [Diving accessories for skin divers; Flippers, dimensions, requirements and testing].

DIN 7876 (Report) (in German). Berlin: Beutz Verlag GmbH.

^ Wasielewski, Ireneusz.

Gumowy sprzęt pływacki - Płetwy pływackie BN-82/8444-17.02 - Our Digital Library (in Polish).

Archived from the original on 2024-08-23 . Retrieved 2020-01-10 .

^ Malaysian standard MS 974 (1985) Specification for rubber swimming fins , SIRIM Standards & Industrial Research Institute of Malaysia.

^ Tauch-Zubehör; Schwimmflossen; Abmessungen, sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen, Prüfung, Normkennzeichnung. [Diving accessories; fins; dimensions, safety requirements, testing, marking of conformity].

ÖNORM S 4224 (Report).

Austrian Standards International .

^ Specification for rubber swimming fins.

Malaysian standard MS 974 (Report) (First revision ed.). Department of Standards Malaysia. 2002.

^ Diving equipment. Diving open heel fins. Requirements and test methods.

European standard EN 16804 (Report). London: British Standards Institution . 2015.

^ a b BS 4532: Specification for snorkels and face masks . London: British Standards Institution. 1969.

Amendment Slip No. 1 to BS 4532:1969 Snorkels and face masks , 30 December 1977.

^ "GOST 20568-75.

Маски резиновые для плавания под водой. Общие технические условие. Rubber masks for submarine swimming. General specifications . Retrieved on 8 March 2019 at standartgost.ru" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ Deutsches Institut für Normung (1980). Tauch-Zubehör. Tauchbrillen. Sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen und Prüfung [Diving accessories for skin divers. Diver's masks. Requirements and testing].

DIN 7878 (Report) (in German). Berlin/Cologne: Beuth Verlag.

^ Wasielewski, Ireneusz (July 9, 2013).

"Gumowy sprzęt pływacki - Maski pływackie BN-82/8444-17.01 - Our Digital Library" (in Polish).

Archived from the original on August 23, 2024 . Retrieved April 7, 2022 – via bc.pollub.pl.

^ American National Standards Institute: ANSI Z87.11:1985: Underwater Safety. Recreational Skin and Scuba Diving. Lenses for Masks (Technical report). New York: American National Standards Institute. 1985.

^ Tauchmasken (Tauchbrillen); Sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen, Prüfung, Normkennzeichnung. [Diving accessories; divers' masks; safety requirements, testing, marking of conformity].

ÖNORM S 4225 (Report). Vienna: Austrian Standards International. 1988.

^ CNS 12497: 潛水鏡. Diving mask . Bureau of Standards, Metrology and Inspection, Republic of China.

Archived from the original on 2023-05-21 . Retrieved 2019-07-23 .

Preview available at cnsonline.com.tw ^ "Bureau of Standards, Metrology and Inspection: CNS 12498: 潛水鏡檢驗法.

Method of test for diving mask , Bureau of Standards, Metrology and Inspection, Republic of China. Preview available at cnsonline.com.tw" .

Archived from the original on 2023-05-21 . Retrieved 2019-07-23 .

^ Diving equipment. Diving mask. Requirements and test methods.

European standard EN 16805 (Report). London: British Standards Institution. 2015.

^ Deutsches Institut für Normung: DIN 7878: Tauch-Zubehör: Schnorchel. Maße. Anforderungen. Prüfung (Diving accessories for skin divers; snorkel; technical requirements of safety, testing) , Berlin/Cologne: Beuth Verlag, 1980.

^ ÖNORM S 4223: Tauch-Zubehör; Schnorchel; Abmessungen, sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen, Prüfung, Normkennzeichnung [Diving accessories; snorkel; dimensions, safety requirements, testing, marking of conformity] . Vienna: Austrian Standards International. 1988.

^ Deutsches Institut für Normung (1991). Tauch-Zubehör: Schnorchel. Sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen und Prüfung [Diving accessories for skin divers; snorkel; safety requirements and testing].

DIN 7878 (Report) (in German). Berlin/Cologne: Beuth Verlag.

^ BS EN 1972: Diving accessories - Snorkels - Safety requirements and test methods . London: British Standards Institution. 1997.

^ BS EN 1972: Diving equipment - Snorkels - Requirements and test methods . London: British Standards Institution. 2015.

^ BN-82/8444-17.05. Gumowy sprzęt pływacki - Kamizelki pływackie (in Polish). Warsaw: Instytut Przemysłu Gumowego STOMIL (Łódź). 1982.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 November 2020 – via bc.pollub.pl.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Underwater diving equipment at Wikimedia Commons v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bc5hs
Cached time: 20250817061446
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.545 seconds
Real time usage: 1.911 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11688/1000000
Revision size: 71568/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 620446/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5842/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 293693/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.783/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27598534/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1391.198      1 -total
 34.79%  483.970      1 Template:Reflist
 14.68%  204.284     32 Template:Annotated_link
 13.53%  188.220      1 Template:UnderwaterDiving
 13.09%  182.149      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.80%  136.351     21 Template:Cite_book
  9.32%  129.714     28 Template:Cite_web
  8.35%  116.124      9 Template:Cite_report
  7.63%  106.122     35 Template:Navbox
  5.77%   80.315      2 Template:Infobox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23617397:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817061446 and revision id 1306055481. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diving_equipment&oldid=1306055481 " Categories : Underwater diving equipment Underwater diving lists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2017 Articles to be expanded from October 2020 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 17:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diving equipment 12 languages Add topic

