Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Main themes Toggle Main themes subsection 2.1 Puritan founding 2.2 Federal constitution 2.3 Situation of women 3 Summary 4 Impact 5 Translations 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 8.1 Translations 8.2 French studies 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Democracy in America 25 languages العربية Български Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1833 text by Alexis de Tocqueville This article is about the book written by Alexis de Tocqueville. For democracy of the United States, see Elections in the United States .

Democracy in America Title page of Democracy in America by Alexis de Tocqueville, printed at New York City , 1838 Author Alexis de Tocqueville Original title De la démocratie en Amérique Language French Publisher Saunders and Otley (London) Publication date 1835–1840 Publication place America Original text De la démocratie en Amérique at French Wikisource Translation Democracy in America at Wikisource Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e De la démocratie en Amérique ( French pronunciation: [dəla demɔkʁasi ɑ̃n‿ameˈʁik] ; published in two volumes, the first in 1835 [ 1 ] and the second in 1840) [ 2 ] is a classic French work by Alexis de Tocqueville . In the book, Tocqueville examines the democratic revolution that he believed had been occurring over the previous several hundred years.

In 1831, Tocqueville and Gustave de Beaumont were sent by the French government to study the American prison system .  In his later letters, Tocqueville indicates that he and Beaumont used their official business as a pretext to study American society instead.

[ 3 ] They arrived in New York City in May of that year and spent nine months traveling the United States, studying the prisons and collecting information on American society, including its religious , political , and economic character. The two also briefly visited Canada, spending a few days in the summer of 1831 in what was then Lower Canada (modern-day Quebec ) and Upper Canada (modern-day Ontario ).

Tocqueville and Beaumont returned to France in February 1832 and submitted their report, Du système pénitentiaire aux États-Unis et de son application en France ( On the Penitentiary System in the United  States and its Application in France ), the next year. Tocqueville eventually extrapolated this work into the book Democracy in America , which was first published in Paris in two volumes. In the work, Tocqueville holds a critical lens to early 19th Century socioeconomic affairs in the United States. He notes the influence of American government and religious history on its entrepreneurial and relatively egalitarian culture. However, Tocqueville criticizes the moral, spiritual, artistic, and interpersonal costs of a society where social mobility and restlessness are organizing expectations.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Ultimately, since its publication, the work has had a dramatic impact on American (as well as broader Western) thought and education; especially in history, political science, and the social sciences.

Purpose [ edit ] Tocqueville begins his book by describing the change in social conditions taking place. He observed that over the previous seven hundred years the social and economic conditions of men had become more equal.  The aristocracy , Tocqueville believed, was gradually disappearing as the modern world experienced the beneficial effects of equality.  Tocqueville traced the development of equality to a number of factors, such as granting all men permission to enter the clergy , widespread economic opportunity resulting from the growth of trade and commerce , the royal sale of titles of nobility as a monarchical fundraising tool , and the abolition of primogeniture .

[ 4 ] Tocqueville described this revolution as a "providential fact" [ 4 ] of an "irresistible revolution," leading some to criticize the determinism found in the book.  However, based on Tocqueville's correspondences with friends and colleagues, Marvin Zetterbaum, Professor Emeritus at University of California Davis , concludes that the Frenchman never accepted democracy as determined or inevitable.  He did, however, consider equality more just and therefore found himself among its partisans.

[ 5 ] Given the social state that was emerging, Tocqueville believed that a "new political science " would be needed, in order to: [I]nstruct democracy, if possible to reanimate its beliefs, to purify its motives, to regulate its movements, to substitute little by little the science of affairs for its inexperience, and knowledge of its true instincts for its blind instincts; to adapt its government to time and place; to modify it according to circumstances and men: such is the first duty imposed on those who direct society in our day.

[ 6 ] The remainder of the book can be interpreted as an attempt to accomplish this goal, thereby giving advice to those people who would experience this change in social states.

[ citation needed ] Tocqueville's message is somewhat beyond the American democracy itself, which was rather an illustration to his philosophical claim that democracy is an effect of industrialization.

[ citation needed ] This explains why Tocqueville does not unambiguously define democracy and even ignores the intents of the Founding Fathers of the United States regarding the American political system: [ citation needed ] To pursue the central idea of his study—a democratic revolution caused by industrialization, as exemplified by America—Tocqueville persistently refers to democracy. This is in fact very different from what the Founding Fathers of the United States meant. Moreover, Tocqueville himself is not quite consistent in using the word 'democracy', applying it alternately to representative government, universal suffrage or majority-based governance: The American institutions are democratic, not only in their principle but in all their consequences; and the people elects its representatives directly, and for the most part annually, in order to ensure their dependence. The people is therefore the real directing power; and although the form of government is representative, it is evident that the opinions, the prejudices, the interests, and even the passions of the community are hindered by no durable obstacles from exercising a perpetual influence on society. In the United States the majority governs in the name of the people, as is the case in all the countries in which the people is supreme.

Democracy in America , Book 2, Ch I, 1st and 2nd paragraph Such an ambiguous understanding of democracy in a study of great impact on political thought could not help leaving traces. We suppose that it was Tocqueville's work and not least its title that strongly associated the notion of democracy with the American system and, ultimately, with representative government and universal suffrage. The recent 'Tocqueville renaissance', which enforces the democratic image of the United States and, correspondingly, of other Western countries, also speaks for the role of Tocqueville's work.

— Andranik Tangian (2020) Analytical Theory of Democracy , pp. 193–194 [ 7 ] Main themes [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Part of a series on Conservatism in France Ideologies Bonapartism Christian democracy Gaullism Integralism nationalist Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Royalism Sarkozysm Ultramontanism Principles Anti-communism Counter-revolution Dirigisme Elitism Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnopluralism Family values French culture Imperialism Monarchism Metapolitics Nationalism Nativism Natural order Patriotism Social hierarchy Social order Souverainisme Traditional authority History Ancien Régime Monarchiens Feuillant Catholic and Royal Armies War in the Vendée Thermidorian Reaction Chouannerie Chouan First White Terror Companions of Jehu Muscadins Second White Terror Bourbon Restoration Ultra-royalists Dreyfus affair Second French Empire Philippe Daudet affair Vichy France Algiers putsch of 1961 2024 The Republicans alliance crisis Intellectuals Ballanche Bainville Barbey d'Aurevilly Barruel Barrès Baudelaire de Benoist Blanc de Saint-Bonnet de Bonald Boutang Bruckner Brunetière Brague Cau de Chateaubriand Fustel de Coulanges Cochin Daudet Delsol Dumézil Faguet Faye Freund Girardet Guénon de Gobineau Houellebecq de Jouvenel Lamennais (early) Le Bon Lefebvre Lemaître Le Play Lugan Madiran de Maistre Morel Maffesoli Massis Maurras Maulnier Marcel Nimier Poulat Rémond Renan de Rivarol Rohmer Rueff Siegfried Taine de Tocqueville Thibon Literature Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1797) The Genius of Christianity (1802) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) Democracy in America (1835) The Ancient City (1864) " What Is a Nation?

" (1882) The Crowd (1895) Inquiry into the Monarchy (1900) "The Future of the Intelligentsia" (1905) My Political Ideas (1937) The Reign of Quantity (1945) The Opium of the Intellectuals (1955) Violence and the Sacred (1972) The Camp of the Saints (1973) The Tyranny of Guilt (2006) The French Suicide (2014) Submission (2015) Politicians Bardella Bellamy de Bonald Boulanger Cathelineau de Chateaubriand Ciotti Flandin Fouéré de Gaulle Holeindre Juppé de Kérillis Le Pen (Jean-Marie) Le Pen (Marine) Maurras Malraux MacMahon Maréchal Messiha Messmer Pécresse Pétain Peyrefitte Pichegru Poincaré Poisson de Polignac Pompidou Retailleau de La Rocque de La Tour du Pin Sarkozy Schuman de Vaublanc de Villèle de Villiers Zemmour Commentators Barbier Buisson Camus Cassen Jean Giesbert de Girardin d'Escufon Jamet Lasserre Lévy Marmin Massis Maulnier Ménard Mougeotte Nay Obertone d'Orcival d'Ornellas Pauwels Pujo Sastre Sérant Tasin Venner Parties Active Alliance Royale Debout la France French Future The Nationalists National Republican Movement Future with Confidence National Centre of Independents & Peasants National Rally Reconquête The Republicans Senate Republicans Soyons libres VIA, the Way of the People Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Feuillants French Agrarian and Peasant Party French Social Party Movement for France Independent Radicals Independent Republicans Party of Order Rally of the French People Popular Liberal Action Rally for France Rally for the Republic Republican Federation Resistance Party Union for a Popular Movement Union for the New Republic Organisations Active Action Française Carrefour de l'Horloge Cité catholique Groupement de Recherche et d'Études pour la Civilisation Européenne Initiative and Liberty Movement La Manif pour tous Les Identitaires March for Life Nouvelle Action Royaliste Rassemblement national de la jeunesse Student Cockade UDR group Union Nationale Inter-universitaire Defunct Action Française (pre Liberation) Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Civitas Croix-de-Feu Independent Republicans Hussards Service d'Action Civique Media Active Atlantico CNews Éléments Famille chrétienne L'Écho du Sud La Croix Le Figaro Le Figaro Magazine Le Point Nouvelle École Radio Courtoisie Valeurs actuelles Defunct La Liberté La Presse La Nation française Le Quotidien de Paris Minute Présent Related topics Archeofuturism Clerical philosophers European New Right Far-right movements in France France profonde French–German enmity French Revolution " Islamo-leftism " List of French conservatives Maurrassisme in Argentina Ligues d'extrême droite Politics of France Remigration Sinistrisme Sovereigntist Right Tocqueville effect Conservatism portal France portal v t e Puritan founding [ edit ] Tocqueville begins his study of the U.S. by explaining the contribution of the Puritans .  According to him, the Puritans established the U.S. democratic social state of equality. They arrived equals in education and were all middle class.  In addition, Tocqueville observes that they contributed a synthesis of religion and political liberty in America that was uncommon in Europe, particularly in France. He calls the Puritan Founding the "seed" of his entire work.

[ citation needed ] Federal constitution [ edit ] Tocqueville believed that the Puritans established the principle of sovereignty of the people in the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut . The American Revolution then popularized this principle, followed by the Constitutional Convention of 1787 , which developed institutions to manage popular will. While Tocqueville speaks highly of the U.S. Constitution , he believes that the mores, or "habits of mind" of the American people play a more prominent role in the protection of freedom. These include: [ citation needed ] Township democracy Mores, laws, and circumstances Tyranny of the majority Religion and beliefs The family Individualism Associations Self-interest rightly understood Materialism Situation of women [ edit ] Tocqueville was one of the first social critics to examine the situation of U.S. women and to identify the concept of separate spheres .

[ 8 ] The section Influence of Democracy on Manners Properly So Called of the second volume is devoted to his observations of women's status in U.S. society. He writes: "In no country has such constant care been taken as in America to trace two clearly distinct lines of action for the two sexes and to make them keep pace one with the other, but in two pathways that are always different." [ 9 ] He argues that the collapse of aristocracy lessened the patriarchal rule in the family where fathers would control daughters' marriages, meaning that women had the option of remaining unmarried and retaining a higher degree of independence. Married women, by contrast, lost all independence "in the bonds of matrimony" as "in America paternal discipline [by the woman's father] is very relaxed and the conjugal tie very strict." [ 10 ] Yet despite this lack of independence, he believed America would "raise woman and make her more and more the equal of man" and praised America for having more legal protections for women than in France.

[ 8 ] Tocqueville believed women would be contributors to America's prosperity and strength despite the limitations of the time, stating: [ 8 ] As for myself, I do not hesitate to avow that although the women of the United States are confined within the narrow circle of domestic life, and their situation is in some respects one of extreme dependence, I have nowhere seen women occupying a loftier position; and if I were asked, ... to what the singular prosperity and growing strength of that people ought mainly to be attributed, I should reply,—to the superiority of their women.

[ 11 ] Summary [ edit ] The primary focus of Democracy in America is an analysis of why republican representative democracy has succeeded in the United States while failing in so many other places. Tocqueville seeks to apply the functional aspects of democracy in the United States to what he sees as the failings of democracy in his native France.

[ 12 ] Tocqueville speculates on the future of democracy in the United States, discussing possible threats to democracy and possible dangers of democracy.  These include his belief that democracy has a tendency to degenerate into " soft despotism " as well as the risk of developing a tyranny of the majority .  He observes that the strong role religion played in the United States was due to its separation from the government, a separation all parties found agreeable. He contrasts this to France, where there was what he perceived to be an unhealthy antagonism between democrats and the religious, which he relates to the connection between church and state.

[ citation needed ] Insightful analysis of political society was supplemented in the second volume by description of civil society as a sphere of private and civilian affairs, mirroring Hegel .

[ 13 ] Tocqueville observed that social mechanisms have paradoxes, as in what later became known as the Tocqueville effect : "social frustration increases as social conditions improve".

[ 14 ] He wrote that this growing hatred of social privilege, as social conditions improve, leads to the state concentrating more power to itself.

[ citation needed ] Tocqueville's views on the United States took a darker turn after 1840, however, as made evident in Craiutu and Jennings' Tocqueville on America after 1840: Letters and Other Writings .

[ 15 ] Impact [ edit ] Democracy in America was published in two volumes, the first in 1835 and the other in 1840. It was immediately popular in both Europe and the United States, while also having a profound impact on the French population. By the twentieth century, it had become a classic work of political science , social science , and history . It is a commonly assigned reading for undergraduates of American universities majoring in the political or social sciences, and part of the introductory political theory syllabus at Cambridge, Oxford, Princeton and other institutions.  In the introduction to his translation of the book, Harvard Professor Harvey C. Mansfield calls it "at once the best book ever written on democracy and the best book ever written on America." [ 16 ] Tocqueville's work is often acclaimed for making a number of astute predictions. He anticipates the potential acrimony over the abolition of slavery that would tear apart the United States and lead to the American Civil War , as well as the eventual superpower rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union, which exploded after World War II and spawned the Cold War .

[ citation needed ] Noting the rise of the industrial sector in the American economy, Tocqueville argued [ citation needed ] that an industrial aristocracy would rise from the ownership of labor. He warned that 'friends of democracy must keep an anxious eye peeled in this direction at all times', observing that the route of industry was the gate by which a newfound wealthy class might potentially dominate, although he himself believed that an industrial aristocracy would differ from the formal aristocracy of the past.

[ citation needed ] In spending several chapters lamenting the state of the arts in America, he fails to envision the literary renaissance [ citation needed ] that would shortly arrive in the form of such major writers as Edgar Allan Poe , Henry David Thoreau , Ralph Waldo Emerson , Herman Melville , Nathaniel Hawthorne , and Walt Whitman . Equally, in dismissing the country's interest in science as limited to pedestrian applications for streamlining the production of material goods, he failed to imagine America's burgeoning appetite for pure scientific research and discovery.

[ citation needed ] According to Tocqueville, democracy had some unfavorable consequences: the tyranny of the majority over thought, a preoccupation with material goods, and isolated individuals.

[ citation needed ] Democracy in America was interpreted differently across national contexts. In France and the United States, Tocqueville's work was seen as liberal, whereas both progressives and conservatives in the British Isles interpreted his work as supporting their own positions.

[ 17 ] Tocqueville's book can be compared with Letters on the English (1733) by Voltaire in how it flatteringly explains a nation to itself from the perspective of an outsider. Voltaire based his book on his experiences living in Great Britain as his compatriot Tocqueville did a century later in America, and according to the National Constitution Center, "Voltaire's passages on the spirit of commerce, religious diversity, religious freedom, and the English form of government also greatly influenced American thinking".

[ 18 ] Translations [ edit ] Henry Reeve , translated 1835.

[ 19 ] This translation was completed by Reeve and later revised by Francis Bowen .  In 1945, it was reissued in a modern edition by Alfred A. Knopf edited and with an extensive historical essay by Phillips Bradley.

[ 20 ] George Lawrence , translated in 1966 with an introduction by J.P. Mayer [ 21 ] Harvey C. Mansfield and Delba Winthrop , translated circa 2000 [ 22 ] Gerald Bevan , translated circa 2003 [ 23 ] Arthur Goldhammer , translated circa 2004 [ 24 ] James T. Schleifer , edited by Eduardo Nolla and published by Liberty Fund in March 2010.

[ 25 ] Bilingual edition based on the authoritative edition of the original French-language text.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] The Alexis de Tocqueville Tour: Exploring Democracy in America Economic sociology Democracy in the Americas Notes [ edit ] ^ a b de Tocqueville, Alexis (1835).

De la démocratie en Amérique . Vol. I (1st ed.). Paris: Librairie de Charles Gosselin . Retrieved 24 June 2015 .

via Gallica; de Tocqueville, Alexis (1835).

De la démocratie en Amérique . Vol. II (1st ed.). Paris: Librairie de Charles Gosselin . Retrieved 24 June 2015 .

via Gallica ^ a b de Tocqueville, Alexis (1840).

De la démocratie en Amérique . Vol. III (1st ed.). Paris: Librairie de Charles Gosselin . Retrieved 24 June 2015 .

via Gallica; de Tocqueville, Alexis (1840).

De la démocratie en Amérique . Vol. IV (1st ed.). Paris: Librairie de Charles Gosselin . Retrieved 24 June 2015 .

via Gallica ^ Johri, Vikram.

" 'Alexis de Tocqueville': the first French critic of the US" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 22 April 2011 .

^ a b Tocqueville, Alexis de (2000).

Democracy in America . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0226805328 .

^ Zetterbaum, Marvin (1967).

Tocqueville and the problem of democracy . Stanford: Stanford University Press.

^ Tocqueville, Alexis de (2000).

Democracy in America . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 7.

ISBN 0226805328 .

^ Tangian, Andranik (2020).

Analytical Theory of Democracy. Vols. 1 and 2 . Studies in Choice and Welfare. Cham, Switzerland: Springer.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-39691-6 .

ISBN 978-3030396909 .

S2CID 216190330 .

^ a b c Kerber, Linda K. (1988). "Separate Spheres, Female Worlds, Woman's Place: The Rhetoric of Women's History".

The Journal of American History .

75 (1). University of North Carolina Press: 9– 39.

doi : 10.2307/1889653 .

JSTOR 1889653 .

Full text available online ^ Tocqueville, Alexis de (1840). "Chapter XII: How the Americans understand the Equality of the sexes".

Democracy in America . London: Saunders and Otley. p.

101 .

^ Tocqueville, Alexis de (1840). "Chapter X: The young Woman in the Character of a Wife".

Democracy in America . London: Saunders and Otley. pp.

79 –81.

^ Tocqueville, Alexis de (1840). "Chapter XII: How the Americans understand the Equality of the sexes".

Democracy in America . London: Saunders and Otley. p.

106 .

^ L. Jaume, Tocqueville , Fayard 2008 ^ Zaleski, Pawel (2007). "Tocqueville on Civilian Society. A Romantic Vision of the Dichotomic Structure of Social Reality".

Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte .

50 . Felix Meiner Verlag, Paris, Mare et Martin.

[1] ^ Swedberg, Richard (2009).

Tocqueville's Political Economy . Princeton University Press. p. 260.

ISBN 978-1400830084 .

^ Crăiuțu, Aurelian; Jennings, Jeremy (2009).

Tocqueville on America after 1840: Letters and Other Writings .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511840340 .

ISBN 978-0511840340 .

^ Tocqueville, Alexis de (2000).

Democracy in America . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0226805328 .

^ Bonin, Hugo (2021).

"Friend or foe? British receptions of Tocqueville's Democracy in America, 1835–1885" .

British Politics .

19 (4): 590– 608.

doi : 10.1057/s41293-021-00182-8 .

ISSN 1746-9198 .

S2CID 236226826 .

^ "Letters concerning the English Nation (1733)" . National Constitution Center . Retrieved July 21, 2024 .

^ "Tocqueville, Democracy in America, Note on the Translation" . Press.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 2012-06-23 .

^ de Tocqueville, Alexis (1863). Bowen, Francis (ed.).

Democracy in America . Vol. I. Translated by Reeve, Henry (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Sever and Francis.

ISBN 978-0665415944 . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ; de Tocqueville, Alexis (1864). Bowen, Francis (ed.).

Democracy in America . Vol. II. Translated by Reeve, Henry (4th ed.). Cambridge: Sever and Francis . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive .

^ ASIN 0060956666 ^ Democracy in America . University of Chicago Press.

^ ASIN 0140447601 ^ "Democracy in America: Translator's Note – Arthur Goldhammer" . Loa.org. Archived from the original on 2012-07-26 . Retrieved 2012-06-23 .

^ "Democracy in America De la Démocratie en Amérique" . Libertyfund.org. Archived from the original on 2011-02-03 . Retrieved 2012-06-23 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Manent, Pierre.

Tocqueville and the Nature of Democracy (1996) Morton, F.L. "Sexual Equality and the Family in Tocqueville's Democracy in America," Canadian Journal of Political Science (1984) 17#2 pp. 309–324 JSTOR 3227281 Schleifer, James T.

The Chicago Companion to Tocqueville's Democracy in America (U of Chicago Press, 2012) Schneck, Stephen. "New Readings of Tocqueville's America: Lessons for Democracy," Polity (1992) 25#2 pp. 283–298 JSTOR 3235112 Welch, Cheryl B., ed.

Cambridge Companion to Tocqueville (2006) excerpt and text search Zetterbaum, Marvin.

Tocqueville and the Problem of Democracy (1967) Translations [ edit ] Tocqueville, Alexis de, Democracy in America , Henry Reeve , tr., revised edition (2 vols., Cambridge, 1862) Tocqueville, Democracy in America (Arthur Goldhammer, trans.; Olivier Zunz , ed.) ( The Library of America , 2004) ISBN 1931082545 Tocqueville, Democracy in America (George Lawrence, trans.; J.P. Mayer, ed.; New York: Perennial Classics, 2000) Tocqueville, Democracy in America (Harvey Mansfield and Delba Winthrop, trans., ed.; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000) French studies [ edit ] Jean-Louis Benoît, Tocqueville Moraliste , Paris, Honoré Champion , 2004.

Arnaud Coutant, Tocqueville et la Constitution démocratique , Paris, Mare et Martin, 2008.

A. Coutant, Une Critique républicaine de la démocratie libérale , Paris, Mare et Martin, 2007.

Laurence Guellec, Tocqueville : l'apprentissage de la liberté , Michalon, 1996.

Lucien Jaume, Tocqueville, les sources aristocratiques de la liberté , Bayard, 2008.

Eric Keslassy, le libéralisme de Tocqueville à l'épreuve du paupérisme , L'Harmattan , 2000 F. Melonio, Tocqueville et les Français , 1993.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Democracy in America French Wikisource has original text related to this article: De la démocratie en Amérique 1831 Notes of Alexis de Tocqueville in Lower Canada Democracy in America , the full book text ( Note: this is public domain) Democracy in America, Volume 1 at Project Gutenberg Democracy in America, Volume 2 at Project Gutenberg Democracy in America public domain audiobook at LibriVox Booknotes , February 26, 1995 – Interview with Alan Ryan on the writing of the introduction to the 1994 edition of Democracy in America . (Page includes transcript) Booknotes , December 17, 2000 – Interview with Harvey Mansfield on the 2000 University of Chicago Press edition of Democracy in America , which he and his wife, Delba Winthrop, translated and edited. (Page includes transcript) Audiolivre : De la démocratie en Amérique . Première partie. (7h 31min) (en français) Alexis de Tocqueville: Tyranny of the Majority EDSITEment from the National Endowment for the Humanities Yale Tocqueville Manuscripts . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.

v t e Democracy in America by Alexis de Tocqueville Ideas Mutual liberty Soft despotism Associated persons (contemporaries) Gustave de Beaumont Francis J. Lippitt Henry Reeve Jared Sparks John C. Spencer Scholars, editors, and translators Leo Damrosch Harvey Mansfield George Wilson Pierson Other The Old Regime and the Revolution The Alexis de Tocqueville Tour: Exploring Democracy in America Links to related articles v t e Alexis de Tocqueville Books Democracy in America (1835, 1840) The Old Regime and the Revolution (1856) Concepts American exceptionalism Mutual liberty Soft despotism Soft tyranny Tocqueville effect In culture The Alexis de Tocqueville Tour: Exploring Democracy in America (1997–1998) Parrot and Olivier in America (2010) Dream On (2015) v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International VIAF National France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kzvvs
Cached time: 20250817044110
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.307 seconds
Real time usage: 1.556 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10680/1000000
Revision size: 29931/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 414127/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 84392/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 168489/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.714/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16386172/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1162.077      1 -total
 22.25%  258.604      1 Template:Reflist
 15.59%  181.217     17 Template:Cite_book
 15.46%  179.679      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.16%  176.147      1 Template:Infobox_book
 13.88%  161.344      1 Template:Infobox
 12.14%  141.071     32 Template:Lang
 10.06%  116.851      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
  9.87%  114.652      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
  9.63%  111.907     14 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:199780:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044110 and revision id 1306159028. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Democracy_in_America&oldid=1306159028 " Categories : 1835 non-fiction books 1840 non-fiction books Books about democracy Community building France–United States relations Sociology books Books about politics of the United States American political philosophy literature Modern philosophical literature Works by Alexis de Tocqueville Books about the United States written by foreigners Democracy promotion Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles using Template:ASIN with an all-numeric value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles that link to foreign-language Wikisources Articles that link to Wikisource Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Wikisource templates with missing id Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 07:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Democracy in America 25 languages Add topic

