Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Poetry 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ausiàs March 30 languages Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Galego हिन्दी Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Valencian poet and knight Ausiàs March A 15th-century painting by Jacomart in the Church of Santa Maria in Xàtiva , once thought to portray Ausiàs March Born 1400 Kingdom of Valencia ( Crown of Aragon ) Died 1459 Valencia , Kingdom of Valencia ( Crown of Aragon ) Occupation Poet and knight Language Valencian language Notable works Plena de Seny , Llir entre Cards , Amor, amor , Mon darrer bé , Oh, foll amor Spouse Isabel Martorell ​ ​ ( m.

1439⁠–⁠1441) ​ Joana Escorna ​ ( m.

1443⁠–⁠1450) ​ Relatives Pere March (father) Jaume March II (uncle) Arnau March (cousin) Ausiàs March ( Valencian: [awziˈaz ˈmaɾk] ; 1400 – March 3, 1459) was a medieval Valencian poet and knight from Gandia , Valencia . He is considered one of the most important poets of the "Golden Century" ( Segle d'or ) of Catalan literature .

Biography [ edit ] Not much is known of March's life. He was born in approximately 1400 to a Valencian noble family. His father, Pere March , was himself a poet and served at the court of the younger brother of King Alfonso IV , Peter. His uncle, Jaume March II , was also a poet. March was one of the two children of Pere's second wife, Lionor of Ripoll; he had a younger sister, Peirona.

[ 1 ] In 1413, the still-young March became head of his family—part of the Valencian petty nobility—upon the death of his father. From a very young age he took part in the expeditions that King Alfons el Magnànim carried out in the Mediterranean. After returning from these expeditions in 1427, he settled in Gandia . After his return, he would never again leave the region where he was born. March was twice married: first to Isabel Martorell (sister of the writer Joanot Martorell ), and later to Joana Escorna.

In 1450, he moved from Gandia to Valencia . It was there that he died on March 3, 1459. While March himself was buried in his family's chapel at the Valencia Cathedral , his two wives and family are buried in the Monastery of Sant Jeroni de Cotalba .

[ 2 ] Five illegitimate children but no legitimate heirs have been attributed to him.

Poetry [ edit ] March's tomb, in the Valencia Cathedral Inheriting an easy fortune from his father, Pere March—the treasurer to the Duke of Gandia —and enjoying the powerful patronage of Charles of Viana , prince of Aragon , March was able to devote himself to poetical composition. He was an undisguised follower of Petrarch , carrying the imitation to such a point that he addressed his Cants d'amor (love songs) to a lady whom he professed to have seen first in church on Good Friday .

[ 3 ] So far as the difference of language allows, he reproduced the rhythmical cadences of his model, but this should be qualified as the medieval tradition of locus communis requested this following. This is something Petrarch himself did and it need not to be stressed.

[ 4 ] March is a very original and idiosyncratic poet. In the Cants de mort (death hymns) he touches a note of brooding sentiment peculiar to himself.

[ 3 ] It can be said that he developed Petrarch's rhetoric and used it for more inner psychological meditations, as other major poets like Camões and Shakespeare would.

March was one of the first poets to use the local vernacular, Valencian , instead of the troubadour language, Occitan . 
His poems are marked by obscurity, a sometimes monotonous morbidity, and a conflicting battle between desire and morality, achieved at its apex in the great Cant Spiritual . 
He was fully entitled to the supremacy which he enjoyed among his contemporaries, and the success of his innovation no doubt encouraged Boscán to introduce the Italian metres into Castilian .
His verses were transmitted in manuscript tradition until its first print edition in Valencian in 1543, but they had already become known through the Spanish translation in 1539.

[ 3 ] March's poetry has been set to music by Raimon , Joan Brudieu and other composers.

[ 5 ] Gallery [ edit ] Portrait at the Palace of the Marqués de Dosaigües, Valencia Statue of March at the Central Municipal Library of Valencia Monument in Gandia Monument on the premises of a secondary school in Barcelona See also [ edit ] Monastery of Sant Jeroni de Cotalba Route of the Valencian classics Notes [ edit ] ^ "Ausiàs March – L'autor" (in Catalan). Iluisvives.com . Retrieved 19 March 2014 .

^ Las Provincias .

"Hallan en Sant Jeroni de Cotalba los restos de las dos esposas y el padre de Ausiàs March".

Published 14 November 2016.

^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " March, Auzias ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 17 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 688.

^ For a thorough treatment of imitatio , see Thomas M. Greene's The Light in Troy ^ Four settings by Brudieu: Fantasiant, Amor a mi descobre. Si fos Amor substança rahonable. Lir entre carts, lo meu voler se tempra. Plena de seny, donau-me una crosta. on CD accompanying book, Magraner, Charles.

Fantasiant, Música y poesía para Ausiàs March CDM 0927, Valencia 2009 References [ edit ] Ford, J.D.M. (1913).

"Auzias March" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ausiàs March .

Ausiàs March in the AELC (Association of Writers in the Catalan Language), (in English, Catalan, and Spanish) "Ausiàs March" . lletrA-UOC – Open University of Catalonia .

A key anthology translated to English by the Anglo-Catalan Society.

Biography and some poems Short biography and some pictures from Find A Grave English verse translations of poem I , poem IV , and poem XXVIII Works by Ausiàs March at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ausiàs_March&oldid=1296532422 " Categories : 1400 births 1459 deaths Catalan-language poets Medieval Catalan-language writers 15th-century Spanish poets People from Gandia Writers from the Valencian Community Monastery of Sant Jeroni de Cotalba 15th-century writers from the Crown of Aragon Hidden categories: CS1 Catalan-language sources (ca) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with Valencian IPA Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Catalan-language sources (ca) Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ausiàs March 30 languages Add topic

