Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fauna Toggle Fauna subsection 1.1 Mammals 1.1.1 Large plains herbivores 1.1.2 Aquatic herbivores 1.1.3 Medium-sized herbivores 1.1.4 Small herbivores 1.1.5 Predators 1.2 Birds 1.3 Reptiles 2 National parks 3 Reserves 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Kenya 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Biodiversity of Kenya ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Wildlife of Kenya" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A herd of African buffalo in Kenya The wildlife of Kenya refers to its fauna . The diversity of Kenya's wildlife has garnered international fame, especially for its populations of large mammals. Mammal species include lion ( Panthera leo ), cheetah ( Acinonyx jubatus ) hippopotamus ( Hippopotamus amphibius ), African buffalo ( Syncerus caffer ), wildebeest ( Connochaetes ), African bush elephant ( Loxodonta africana ), zebra ( Equus ), giraffe ( Giraffa ), and rhinoceros . Kenya has a very diverse population of birds, including flamingo and common ostrich ( Struthio camelus ).

[ 1 ] Fauna [ edit ] Mammals [ edit ] Main article: List of mammals of Kenya Large plains herbivores [ edit ] Common eland The largest of the antelope in the savannah, lives in most national parks and reserves.

Wildebeest Share grazing with zebra and stay in groups, lives in places like Nairobi National Park and Amboseli National Park . It also visits Masaai Mara National Reserve in great numbers during the spring as part of the annual great migration .

[ 2 ] African buffalo Known to be the most dangerous animal in Africa. They can be found in most national parks and reserves.

Black and white rhinoceros Most black and white species are being relocated to safe places because of their endangerment, but there are still many wild rhinos roaming Kenya. Although there are few places to see them, they can be found at Nairobi National Park , Tsavo National Park , Masaai Mara and Aberdares National Park . Both species are abundant in Lake Nakuru National Park and Lewa Downs .

[ 3 ] Elephant Found in many different habitats in Kenya. They can be found from the hot coastlands to the cool moorlands of the Aberdares and Mount Kenya range. A few of these places are Aberdares National Park , Meru National Park , Samburu National Reserve , Maasai Mara , Tsavo National Park and Amboseli National Park .

Giraffe Have little competition for the tender leaves of the acacia tree, their principal food.

Aquatic herbivores [ edit ] Hippopotamus Irritable and normally cranky, are very dangerous. They are found in many of Kenya's basins, swamps, and areas with water. Some other places to find them are Nairobi National Park , Meru National Park, and Kora National Park.

Medium-sized herbivores [ edit ] Impala A medium-sized antelope often found in large herds, and known for its leaping ability.

Common warthog A type of wild pig.

Waterbuck A medium-sized antelope often found near sources of water, are known for excreting a scent that makes them unappetizing to most predators. Two subspecies, the common and defassa waterbuck are present in Kenya.

Lesser kudu The smaller relative of the significantly larger greater kudu , the lesser kudu is often a rare sight but common throughout the drier parts of the country.

Small herbivores [ edit ] Suni A small antelope similar to the oribi and duiker. They travel in groups of two or alone. They can be found in different areas in Kenya.

Oribi They travel alone or in groups of two or three. They are similar to the suni and the duiker.

Duiker Normally travel alone but sometimes go in pairs. They are similar to the suni and oribi.

Thomson's gazelle and Grant's gazelle A common sight across the plains of Kenya, they are often found in small or large herds and are the favored prey of the cheetah. Two species, the more common Thomson's gazelle and the larger Grant's gazelle live across the country.

Predators [ edit ] Lion A powerful predator which uses its power to its advantage. It can be found all over Kenya, especially in Nairobi National Park, Mount Kenya National Park, and Kora National Park .

Leopard Another predator which, like the lion, uses brute force. They hunt at night and use their eyesight to spot and kill their prey. They can be found at Nairobi National Park , Mount Kenya National Park, Meru National Park , Kora National Park and over almost all of Kenya.

Cheetah A big cat that lives in places like Nairobi National Park , Meru National Park and Kora National Park.

African wild dog A predator that roams over parts of Kenya in packs. The African Wild Dog Conservancy is actively engaged in helping to save this endangered species from extinction.

Spotted hyena A powerful predator that sometimes travels in groups. They have the strongest jaw pressure and most powerful bite out of any animal in Kenya except for the Nile crocodile. Both the spotted and striped variety of hyena can be found at Nairobi National Park, Mount Kenya National Park, and Kora National Park.

Serval One of the small wild cat species in Kenya.

Genet A small viverrid that lives in Kenya.

Black-backed jackal A small dog-like predator that travels in small groups across Kenya.

Birds [ edit ] Main article: List of birds of Kenya Reptiles [ edit ] Nile crocodile A large, powerful reptile that has been known to attack and kill people. It inhabits many areas of Kenya.

National parks [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of national parks of Kenya .

Nairobi National Park Mount Kenya National Park Meru National Park Kora National Park Sibiloi National Park Amboseli National Park Tsavo East National Park Tsavo West National Park Lake Nakuru National Park Hell's Gate National Park Chyulu Hills National Park Marsabit National Park Ol Donyo Sabuk National Park Aberdare National Park Saiwa Swamp National Park Reserves [ edit ] Maasai Mara Samburu National Reserve Buffalo Springs National Reserve Shaba National Reserve Shimba Hills National Reserve Kisumu Impala Sanctuary Lewa Downs ← a conservancy See also [ edit ] Elephant hunting in Kenya Maasai Mara conservancies References [ edit ] ^ "Flora and fauna - Kenya" .

Nationsencyclopedia.com . Retrieved 26 August 2017 .

^ "Wildebeest migration" .

Shadows Of Africa . Retrieved 2020-05-28 .

^ "Rhinos" .

Lewa Wildlife Conservancy . Retrieved 2020-05-28 .

External links [ edit ] Kenya Wildlife Service, a state corporation Wild Dog Conservancy, a nonprofit v t e Kenya articles History Timeline Wanga Kingdom Indian Ocean slave trade East Africa Protectorate Uganda Railway Kenya Colony In World War II Ilemi Triangle Kenya African Union Mau Mau rebellion 1963 Constitution 1982 coup d'état attempt Goldenberg scandal 1992 Elections 2007–2008 crisis 2010 referendum 2013 Elections Geography Biosphere reserves Climate Ecoregions Environmental issues Great Rift Valley Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Volcanoes Wildlife World Heritage Sites Subdivisions Cities Counties Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Intersex LGBT rights Judiciary Law enforcement Military Parliament Building Political parties President list Deputy President Prime Minister (defunct) Economy Agriculture Central bank Coffee Energy Real Estate Shilling (currency) Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Child marriage Corruption Crime Demographics Education Health Human trafficking Languages Polygamy Prostitution Religion Squatting Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Anthem Cinema Coat of arms English Engsh Flag Names Literature Media Museums Music Public holidays Sports Sheng Swahili Video gaming Outline Index Category Portal v t e Wildlife of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jwsjh
Cached time: 20250816125312
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.335 seconds
Real time usage: 0.486 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1851/1000000
Revision size: 7501/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 71127/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9754/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 30182/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.194/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5544232/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  405.864      1 -total
 35.24%  143.028      1 Template:Kenya_topics
 34.64%  140.600      1 Template:Country_topics
 21.51%   87.284      1 Template:Reflist
 18.92%   76.790      3 Template:Cite_web
 16.03%   65.073      1 Template:Short_description
 14.88%   60.379      1 Template:Refimprove
 13.58%   55.135      1 Template:Ambox
  8.40%   34.105      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.88%   19.811      2 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12310843:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816125312 and revision id 1277675967. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Kenya&oldid=1277675967 " Categories : Tourism in Kenya Wildlife by country Biota of Kenya Fauna of Kenya Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 26 February 2025, at 01:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Kenya 1 language Add topic

