Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In religion 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Collective effervescence 3 languages Azərbaycanca Português Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sociological concept coined by Émile Durkheim Collective effervescence is a sociological concept coined by Émile Durkheim . According to Durkheim, a community or society may at times come together and simultaneously communicate the same thought and participate in the same action. Such an event then causes collective effervescence which excites individuals and serves to unify the group.

[ 1 ] In religion [ edit ] Émile Durkheim 's theory of religion , as presented in his 1912 volume Elementary Forms of Religious Life , is rooted in the concept of collective effervescence. Durkheim argues that the universal religious dichotomy of profane and sacred results from the lives of these tribe members: most of their life is spent performing menial tasks such as hunting and gathering, which are profane. However, during the rare occasions when the entire tribe comes together, a sense of heightened energy and unity, "collective effervescence," emerges. This intense communal experience transforms certain physical objects or individuals into sacred symbols, as the energy of the gathering is projected onto them.

The force is thus associated with the totem which is the symbol of the clan, mentioned by Durkheim in his study of "elementary forms" of religion in Aboriginal societies. Because it provides the tribe's name, the symbol is present during the gathering of the clan. Through its presence in these gatherings, the totem comes to represent both the scene and the strongly felt emotion, and thus becomes a collective representation of the group.

[ 2 ] For Durkheim, religion is a fundamentally social phenomenon. The beliefs and practices of the sacred are a method of social organization . This explanation is detailed in Elementary Forms "Book 2/The Elementary Beliefs", chapter 7, "Origins of These Beliefs: Origin of the Idea of the Totemic Principle or Mana ". According to Durkheim, "god and society are one of the same…the god of the clan…can be none other than the clan itself, but the clan transfigured and imagined in the physical form of a plant or animal that serves as a totem." [ 3 ] The group members experience a feeling of a loss of individuality and unity with the gods and according to Durkheim, thus with the group.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Bandwagon effect Crowd psychology Collective action Collective behavior Collective consciousness Collective hysteria Collective intelligence Echo chamber (media) Herd behavior Herd instinct Hooliganism Football hooliganism Group action (sociology) Group behaviour Group cohesiveness Groupthink Limbic resonance Mass action (sociology) Ochlocracy Peer pressure Psychology of religion Social comparison theory Spiral of silence Superorganism References [ edit ] ^ "Durkheim, Emile | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Iep.utm.edu . Retrieved 2019-05-27 .

^ Griswold, Wendy , Cultures and Societies in a Changing World , Pine Forge Press, 2008; 51–56.

^ Durkheim 1995, p. 208 (1965, p. 236).

^ Kunin, pp. 20–21.

Sources [ edit ] Durkheim, Émile.

The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life , (1912, English translation by Joseph Swain: 1915) The Free Press, 1965: ISBN 0-02-908010-X ; HarperCollins, 1976: ISBN 0-04-200030-0 ;  new translation by Karen E. Fields, Free Press 1995: ISBN 0-02-907937-3 Griswold, Wendy, Cultures and Societies in a Changing World , Pine Forge Press, 2008; 51–56.

Kunin, Seth D.

Religion; the modern theories , University of Edinburgh, 2003: ISBN 0-7486-1522-9 v t e Émile Durkheim Books The Division of Labour in Society (1893) The Rules of Sociological Method (1895) Suicide (1897) The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life (1912) Founded Academic sociology L'Année Sociologique Conceptualized and defined Social integration Collective consciousness Mechanical and organic solidarity Social fact Sociology of knowledge Sacred–profane dichotomy Quantitative methods in criminology Statistical social research Collective effervescence Anomie Related Positivism Totemism History of sociology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Collective_effervescence&oldid=1304864647 " Categories : Crowd psychology Émile Durkheim Sociological terminology Violence Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 16:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Collective effervescence 3 languages Add topic

