Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Legal capital 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Share capital 33 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Igbo Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Portion of a company's equity This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Share capital" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Share certificate of the Boston American League Base-Ball Club shows a capital stock of $100 000 A corporation 's share capital , commonly referred to as capital stock in the United States, is the portion of a corporation's equity that has been derived by the issue of shares in the corporation to a shareholder, usually for cash .

Share capital may also denote the number and types of shares that compose a corporation's share structure.

Definition [ edit ] In accounting , the share capital of a corporation is the nominal value of issued shares (that is, the sum of their par values , sometimes indicated on share certificates). If the allocation price of shares is greater than the par value, as in a rights issue, the shares are said to be sold at a premium (variously called share premium , additional paid-in capital or paid-in capital in excess of par).

[ citation needed ] This equation shows the constituents that make up a company's real share capital: ∑ ∑ Share capital = Number of shares issued × × (Par value + Share premium) {\displaystyle \sum {\text{Share capital = Number of shares issued}}\times {\text{(Par value + Share premium)}}} This is differentiated from share capital in the accounting sense, as it presents nominal share capital and does not take the premium value of shares into account, which instead is reported as additional paid-in capital.

[ 1 ] Legal capital [ edit ] Legal capital is a concept used in European corporate and foundation law , United Kingdom company law , and various other corporate law jurisdictions to refer to the sum of assets contributed to a company by shareholders when they are issued shares.

[ 2 ] The law often requires that this capital is maintained and that dividends are not paid when a company is not showing a profit above the level of historically recorded legal capital.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Balance sheet Capital impairment Market capitalization Paid-in capital Share dilution Share premium account References [ edit ] ^ "Share Premium Account" . Corporate Finance Institute. December 13, 2022 . Retrieved August 13, 2023 .

^ a b Thakur, Madhuri (August 29, 2020). Vaidya, Dheeraj (ed.).

"Legal Capital" .

WallStreetMojo.com . CFA Institute . Retrieved May 12, 2022 .

v t e Financial markets Types of markets Primary market Secondary market Third market Fourth market Types of stocks Common stock Golden share Preferred stock Restricted stock Tracking stock Share capital Authorised capital Issued shares Shares outstanding Treasury stock Participants Broker Floor broker Inter-dealer broker Broker-dealer Market maker Trader Floor trader Proprietary trader Quantitative analyst Investor Hedger Speculator Arbitrager Scalper Regulator Trading venues Exchange List of major stock exchanges Over-the-counter (off-exchange) Alternative trading system (ATS) Multilateral trading facility (MTF) Electronic communication network (ECN) Direct market access (DMA) Straight-through processing (STP) Dark pool (private exchange) Crossing network Liquidity aggregator Stock valuation Alpha Arbitrage pricing theory (APT) Beta Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP) Book value (BV) Capital asset pricing model (CAPM) Capital market line (CML) Dividend discount model (DDM) Dividend yield Earnings yield EV/EBITDA Fed model Net asset value (NAV) Security characteristic line Security market line (SML) T-model Trading theories and strategies Algorithmic trading Buy and hold Contrarian investing Dollar cost averaging Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) Fundamental analysis Growth stock Market timing Modern portfolio theory (MPT) Momentum investing Mosaic theory Pairs trade Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT) Random walk hypothesis (RMH) Sector rotation Style investing Swing trading Technical analysis Trend following Value averaging Value investing Related terms Bid–ask spread Block trade Cross listing Dividend Dual-listed company DuPont analysis Efficient frontier Financial law Flight-to-quality Government bond Greenspan put Haircut Initial public offering (IPO) Long Mandatory offer Margin Market anomaly Market capitalization Market depth Market manipulation Market trend Mean reversion Momentum Open outcry Order book Position Public float Public offering Rally Returns-based style analysis Reverse stock split Share repurchase Short selling Short squeeze Slippage Speculation Squeeze-out Stock dilution Stock exchange Stock market index Stock split Stock swap Trade Tender offer Uptick rule Volatility Voting interest Yield Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Share_capital&oldid=1304455929 " Categories : Capital management Corporate law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from December 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from December 2023 Articles needing additional references from May 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 04:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Share capital 33 languages Add topic

