Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Climate change 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Stream bed 44 languages العربية Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Channel bottom of a stream, river, or creek "Riverbed" redirects here. For other uses, see Riverbed (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Stream bed" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A streambed or stream bed is the bottom of a stream or river and is confined within a channel or the banks of the waterway.

[ 1 ] Usually, the bed does not contain terrestrial (land) vegetation and instead supports different types of aquatic vegetation ( aquatic plant ), depending on the type of streambed material and water velocity. Streambeds are what would be left once a stream is no longer in existence. The beds are usually well preserved even if they get buried because the banks and canyons made by the stream are typically hard, although soft sand and debris often fill the bed. Dry, buried streambeds can actually be underground water pockets.

[ 1 ] During times of rain, sandy streambeds can soak up and retain water, even during dry seasons, keeping the water table close enough to the surface to be obtainable by local people.

[ 1 ] A stream bed armored with rocks The nature of any streambed is always a function of the flow dynamics and the local geologic materials. The climate of an area will determine the amount of precipitation a stream receives and therefore the amount of water flowing over the streambed. A streambed is usually a mix of particle sizes which depends on the water velocity and the materials introduced from upstream and from the watershed. Particle sizes can range from very fine silts and clays to large cobbles and boulders ( grain size ). In general, sands move most easily, and particles become more difficult to move as they increase in size. Silts and clays, although smaller than sands, can sometimes stick together, making them harder to move along the streambed.

[ 2 ] In streams with a gravel bed, the larger grain sizes are usually on the bed surface with finer grain sizes below. This is called armoring of the streambed.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The old bed of the Mississippi River near Kaskaskia, Illinois , left behind after the river shifted The streambed is very complex in terms of erosion and deposition. As the water flows downstream, different sized particles get sorted to different parts of a streambed as water velocity changes and sediment is transported, eroded and deposited on the streambed.

[ 5 ] Deposition usually occurs on the inside of curves, where water velocity slows, and erosion occurs on the outside of stream curves, where velocity is higher.

[ 2 ] This continued erosion and deposition of sediment tends to create meanders of the stream. In streams with a low to moderate grade, deeper, slower water pools ( stream pools ) and faster shallow water riffles often form as the stream meanders downhill.  Pools can also form as water rushes over or around obstructions in the waterway.

[ 2 ] Under certain conditions a river can branch from one streambed to multiple streambeds.

[ 2 ] For example, an anabranch may form when a section of stream or river goes around a small island and then rejoins the main channel. The buildup of sediment on a streambed may cause a channel to be abandoned in favor of a new one ( avulsion (river) ). A braided river may form as small threads come and go within a main channel.

[ 6 ] The measurement of riverbed depths is called bathymetry .

Climate change [ edit ] The intensity and frequency of both drought and rain events are expected to increase with climate change.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Floods , or flood stage , occur when a stream overflows its banks. In undisturbed natural areas, flood water would be able to spread out within a floodplain and vegetation of either grassland or forest , would slow and absorb peak flows. In such areas, streambeds should remain more stable and exhibit minimal scour. They should retain rich organic matter and, therefore continue to support a rich biota ( river ecosystem ). The majority of sediment washed out in higher flows is "near-threshold" sediment that has been deposited during normal flow and only needs a slightly higher flow to become mobile again. This shows that the streambed is left mostly unchanged in size and shape over time.

[ 9 ] In urban and suburban areas with little natural vegetation, high levels of impervious surface , and no floodplain, unnaturally high levels of surface runoff can occur. This causes an increase in flooding and watershed erosion which can lead to thinner soils upslope. Streambeds can exhibit a greater amount of scour, often down to bedrock, and banks may be undercut causing bank erosion . This increased bank erosion widens the stream and can lead to an increased sediment load downstream.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Armor (hydrology) Benthic zone Hyporheic zone Thalweg References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Below sandy, dry riverbeds: A medicine against drought" .

www.un-ihe.org . Retrieved 2023-06-08 .

^ a b c d e Allan, David (2009).

Stream Ecology: Structure and Function of Running Waters (2nd ed.). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer. pp. |pages=36-43.

ISBN 9781402055829 .

^ Whiting, Peter J.; King, John G. (2003).

"Surface particle sizes on armoured gravel streambeds: Effects of supply and hydraulics" .

Earth Surface Processes and Landforms .

28 (13): 1459– 1471.

Bibcode : 2003ESPL...28.1459W .

doi : 10.1002/esp.1049 .

^ Wilcock, Peter R.; DeTemple, Brendan T. (2005).

"Persistence of armor layers in gravel-bed streams" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

32 (8).

Bibcode : 2005GeoRL..32.8402W .

doi : 10.1029/2004GL021772 .

ISSN 0094-8276 .

^ Garcia, Marcelo; Parker, Gary (1991). "Entrainment of Bed Sediment into Suspension".

Journal of Hydraulic Engineering .

117 (4): 414– 435.

doi : 10.1061/(asce)0733-9429(1991)117:4(414) .

^ Jerolmack, Douglas J.; Mohrig, David (2007).

"Conditions for branching in depositional rivers" .

Geology .

35 (5): 463.

Bibcode : 2007Geo....35..463J .

doi : 10.1130/G23308A.1 .

ISSN 0091-7613 .

^ Blöschl, Günter; Hall, Julia; Viglione, Alberto; Perdigão, Rui A. P.; Parajka, Juraj; Merz, Bruno; Lun, David; Arheimer, Berit; Aronica, Giuseppe T.; Bilibashi, Ardian; Boháč, Miloň; Bonacci, Ognjen; Borga, Marco; Čanjevac, Ivan; Castellarin, Attilio (2019).

"Changing climate both increases and decreases European river floods" .

Nature .

573 (7772): 108– 111.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.573..108B .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-019-1495-6 .

hdl : 11585/740407 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 31462777 .

^ Marsooli, Reza; Lin, Ning; Emanuel, Kerry; Feng, Kairui (2019-08-22).

"Climate change exacerbates hurricane flood hazards along US Atlantic and Gulf Coasts in spatially varying patterns" .

Nature Communications .

10 (1): 3785.

Bibcode : 2019NatCo..10.3785M .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-019-11755-z .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 6706450 .

PMID 31439853 .

^ Phillips, Colin B.; Jerolmack, Douglas J. (2016).

"Self-organization of river channels as a critical filter on climate signals" .

Science .

352 (6286): 694– 697.

Bibcode : 2016Sci...352..694P .

doi : 10.1126/science.aad3348 .

PMID 27151865 .

^ US EPA, ORD (2015-12-23).

"Urbanization - Stormwater Runoff" .

www.epa.gov . Retrieved 2023-06-08 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Stream beds at Wikimedia Commons v t e Aquatic ecosystems General components and freshwater ecosystems General Acoustic ecology Algal bloom Anoxic waters Aquatic adaptation Aquatic animal Insect Mammal Water bird Aquatic biomonitoring Aquatic plant Aquatic population dynamics Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Aquatic science Aquatic toxicology Benthos Bioluminescence Biomass Cascade effect Colored dissolved organic matter Dead zone Ecohydrology Eutrophication Fisheries science Food chain Food web GIS and aquatic science Hydrobiology Hypoxia Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial loop Nekton Neuston Particle Pelagic zone Photic zone Phytoplankton Plankton Pleuston Productivity Ramsar Convention Sediment trap Semiaquatic Shoaling and schooling Siltation Spawn Stable isotope analysis in aquatic ecosystems Stream metabolism Substrate Thermal pollution Trophic level Underwater camouflage Water column Zooplankton Freshwater Freshwater biology Freshwater biome Freshwater environmental quality parameters Freshwater fish Hyporheic zone Limnology Lake ecosystem Lake stratification Macrophyte Pond Fish pond Rheotaxis River Ecosystem Stream bed Stream pool Trophic state index Upland and lowland Water garden Wetland Bog Brackish marsh Fen Freshwater marsh Freshwater swamp forest Ecoregions List of freshwater ecoregions (WWF) Africa and Madagascar Latin America and the Caribbean List of marine ecoregions Specific examples Everglades Maharashtra North Pacific Subtropical Gyre San Francisco Estuary Marine ecosystems ( components ) General Deep scattering layer Diel vertical migration f-ratio Iron fertilization Large marine ecosystem Marine biology Marine chemistry Marine food web Marine primary production Marine snow Ocean fertilization Oceanic physical-biological process Ocean turbidity Photophore Thorson's rule Upwelling Viral shunt Whale fall Marine life Census of Marine Life Deep-sea community Deep-water coral Marine fungi Marine invertebrates Marine larval ecology Seagrass Seashore wildlife Wild fisheries Microorganisms Marine bacteriophage Marine prokaryotes Marine protists Marine viruses Paradox of the plankton Vertebrates Marine mammal Marine reptile Saltwater fish Coastal fish Coral reef fish Deep-sea fish Demersal fish Pelagic fish Seabird Marine habitats Bay mud Marine coastal ecosystem Coastal biogeomorphology Cold seep Coral reef Davidson Seamount § Ecology Estuary Intertidal ecology Intertidal wetland Kelp forest Hydrothermal vent Lagoon Mangrove Marine biomes Mudflat Oyster reef Rocky shore Salt marsh Salt pannes and pools Seagrass meadow Sponge ground Sponge reef Tide pool Conservation Coral bleaching Ecological values of mangroves Fisheries and climate change HERMIONE Human impact on marine life Marine conservation activism Marine pollution Marine protected area Lakes portal Oceans portal Category v t e Rivers , streams and springs Rivers ( lists ) Alluvial river Braided river Blackwater river Channel Channel pattern Channel types Confluence Distributary Drainage basin Mountain river Subterranean river River bifurcation River ecosystem River source Tributary Streams Arroyo Beck Bourne Burn Chalk stream Coulee Current Stream bed Stream channel Streamflow Stream gradient Stream pool Perennial stream Winterbourne Springs ( list ) Estavelle/Inversac Geyser Holy well Hot spring list list in the US Karst spring list Mineral spring Ponor Rhythmic spring Spring horizon Sedimentary processes and erosion Abrasion Anabranch Aggradation Armor Bed load Bed material load Granular flow Debris flow Deposition Dissolved load Downcutting Erosion Headward erosion Knickpoint Palaeochannel Progradation Retrogradation Saltation Secondary flow Sediment transport Suspended load Wash load Water gap Fluvial landforms Ait Alluvial fan Antecedent drainage stream Avulsion Bank Bar Bayou Billabong Canyon Chine Cut bank Estuary Floating island Fluvial terrace Gill Gulch Gully Glen Meander scar Mouth bar Oxbow lake Riffle-pool sequence Point bar Ravine Rill River island Rock-cut basin Sedimentary basin Sedimentary structures Strath Thalweg River valley Wadi Fluvial flow Helicoidal flow International scale of river difficulty Log jam Meander Plunge pool Rapids Riffle Shoal Stream capture Waterfall list of waterfalls Whitewater Surface runoff Agricultural wastewater First flush Urban runoff Floods and stormwater 100-year flood Crevasse splay Flash flood Flood Urban flooding Non-water flood Flood barrier Flood control Flood forecasting Flood-meadow Floodplain Flood pulse concept Flooded grasslands and savannas Inundation Storm Water Management Model Return period Point source pollution Effluent Industrial wastewater Sewage River measurement and modelling Baer's law Baseflow Bradshaw model Discharge (hydrology) Drainage density Exner equation Groundwater model Hack's law Hjulström curve Hydrograph Hydrological model Hydrological transport model Infiltration (hydrology) Main stem Playfair's law Relief ratio River Continuum Concept Rouse number Runoff curve number Runoff model (reservoir) Stream gauge Universal Soil Loss Equation WAFLEX Wetted perimeter Volumetric flow rate River engineering Aqueduct Balancing lake Canal Check dam Dam Drop structure Daylighting Detention basin Erosion control Fish ladder Floodplain restoration Flume Infiltration basin Leat Levee River morphology Retention basin Revetment Riparian-zone restoration Stream restoration Weir River sports Canyoning Fly fishing Rafting River surfing Riverboarding Stone skipping Triathlon Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater slalom Related Aquifer Aquatic toxicology Body of water Hydraulic civilization Limnology Riparian zone River valley civilization River cruise Sacred waters Surface water Wild river Rivers by length Rivers by discharge rate Drainage basins Whitewater rivers Flash floods River name etymologies Countries without rivers Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stream_bed&oldid=1305394127 " Categories : Water streams Fluvial landforms Limnology Riparian zone Freshwater ecology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 20:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stream bed 44 languages Add topic

