Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History before the 20th century Toggle History before the 20th century subsection 1.1 Origins in Calvinistic millennialism 1.2 Pietism, Evangelicalism, and British foreign policy 1.3 In the United States 1.4 In Great Britain 1.4.1 Balfour Declaration 2 Between World War I and the 1948 Palestine War Toggle Between World War I and the 1948 Palestine War subsection 2.1 In the United States 3 After the founding of the State of Israel Toggle After the founding of the State of Israel subsection 3.1 In the United States 3.2 In Israel 4 Critical views within Christianity Toggle Critical views within Christianity subsection 4.1 General 4.2 Catholic Church 4.3 Protestantism 5 Biblical interpretations Toggle Biblical interpretations subsection 5.1 Other doctrines 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Christian Zionism 26 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political and religious ideology For Christians who belong to Zionist denominations in southern Africa, see Zionist churches .

"Christian restorationism" redirects here. For other uses, see Restorationism (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Zionism Variants Cultural Federal General Green Labor Neo- Nietzschean Non- Post- Proto- Reform Religious Christian Islamic Revisionist Principles Zion Aliyah Gathering of Israel Hebraization of surnames Hebrew revival Homeland ( proposals ) Jewish culture Jewish state Jewish values Judaization Land of Israel Law of Return Negation of the Diaspora Promised Land Racial conceptions of Jewish identity Revival of the Hebrew language Settlement Territorialism Yerida Yishuv History Jewish land purchase in Palestine Katowice Conference Uganda Scheme Balfour Declaration Faisal–Weizmann agreement Mandate for Palestine Mandatory Palestine Jewish insurgency in Mandatory Palestine People Aaronsohn Aleichem Ariel Arlosoroff Baazov Begin Ben-Gurion Borochov Herzl Hess Jabotinsky Kalischer Meir Reading Syrkin Weizmann Zangwill Zuckerman Parties Active Agudat Yisrael Blue and White Degel HaTorah The Democrats Likud National Religious Party–Religious Zionism New Hope New Right Noam Otzma Yehudit Shas Shinui Yesh Atid Yisrael Beiteinu Defunct Ahdut HaAvoda Ahi Democratic Movement for Change Eretz Yisrael Shelanu General Zionists Gesher Hashomer Hatzair Workers Party Hatnua Hatikva Hatzohar Herut Hetz Independent Liberals Israeli Liberal Party Jewish Communist Party of Austria The Jewish Home Jewish National Party Jewish Party Jewish Party of Romania Kach Kadima Kulanu Mapai Mapam Moledet National Religious Party Poale Zion Progressive Party Religious Zionist Party Tehiya Yisrael BaAliyah Zionist Organization Mizrachi Zionist Socialist Workers Party Alliances Alignment National Union National Unity One Israel Union of Right-Wing Parties United Torah Judaism Yamina Zionist Union Organisations Active Betar Defunct Haganah Irgun Lehi By region Iraq Morocco United Kingdom (Christian) Related topics Anti-Germans (political current) Anti-national sentiments Arab Iranian Palestinian Anti-Zionism The Holocaust Israeli–Palestinian conflict Kibbutz Zionist as a pejorative Zionism as settler colonialism Zionist antisemitism Zionist political violence Israel portal Politics portal v t e This article's lead section may need to be rewritten . The reason given is: Needs to summarise all of the body sections and reflect the weight in the body of different elements.

Please review the lead guide and help improve the lead of this article if you can.

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Christian Zionism is a political and religious ideology that, in a Christian context , espouses the return of the Jewish people to the Holy Land .

[ 1 ] Likewise, it holds that the founding of the State of Israel in 1948 was in accordance with biblical prophecies transmitted through the Old Testament : that the re-establishment of Jewish sovereignty in the Levant —the eschatological " Gathering of Israel "—is a prerequisite for the Second Coming of Jesus Christ .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The term began to be used in the mid-20th century, in place of Christian restorationism , as proponents of the ideology rallied behind Zionists in support of a Jewish national homeland .

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] An expectation of Jewish restoration among Christians is rooted in 17th-century English Puritan thought.

[ 6 ] [ 2 ] Christian pro-Zionist ideals emerged in that context.

[ 6 ] Contemporary Israeli historian Anita Shapira suggests that England's Zionist Evangelical Protestants "passed this notion on to Jewish circles" around the 1840s.

[ 7 ] While supporting a mass Jewish return to the Land of Israel , Christian Zionism asserts a parallel idea that the returnees ought to be encouraged to reject Judaism and adopt Christianity as a means of fulfilling biblical prophecies .

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Polling and academic research have suggested a trend of widespread distrust among Jews towards the motives of Evangelical Protestants, who have been promoting support for the State of Israel and evangelizing the Jews at the same time.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] History before the 20th century Further information: History of Zionism and Proto-Zionism Origins in Calvinistic millennialism Main articles: History of the Puritans , Millennialism , and Christian Zionism in England and Scotland Thomas Brightman , an English Puritan, published Shall They Return to Jerusalem Again?

in 1615. This was one of the earliest Restorationist works.

The first wave of Protestant leaders, including Martin Luther and John Calvin , did not mention any special eschatological views which included a return of the Jews to Palestine (converted to Christianity or otherwise).

[ 11 ] More generally, Luther had hoped that the Jews would convert to his brand of Christianity once he had broken with the Catholic Church , but later he harshly denounced Jews . Like the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church , the Lutheran Church and the Reformed Church saw the Christian Church as being the "spiritual Israel" and considered faithful Christians the exclusive " people of God "—those with whom God had entered into a covenant through Jesus Christ —assigning no special privileges or role to persons of Jewish descent. (In later times this has been called supersessionism .) [ 12 ] [ 11 ] The Protestant focus on sola scriptura and the wider distribution of the Bible across Europe in the vernacular languages, however, allowed various radical protestants to interpret the scriptures in their own ways, in a manner which was not entirely reflective of either medieval Catholic tradition , or, the views of the Magisterial Protestant leaders themselves.

[ 11 ] Coupled with this was a general cultural Hebraising among more radical Protestants, as they saw the veneration of saints as idolatry and placed more focus on the biblical patriarchs and prophets of the Old Testament , often naming their children Abraham, Cain, Jeremiah, Zachary, Daniel, Sampson, and the like.

[ 13 ] The anticipation of Jews returning to Palestine and making it their national homeland was first heard among self-identified Christian groups in the 1580s, particularly those aligned with Puritanism , a Reformed branch of Christianity that gave rise to the Congregationalist denomination.

[ 6 ] [ 14 ] [ 11 ] While Edward VI of England was the Tudor child-monarch of England , a Calvinist-leaning Regency de facto ruled. This allowed Continental Protestants such as Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr Vermigli to teach at the prestigious universities of Cambridge and Oxford.

[ 11 ] These two men forwarded a biblical exegesis which included an important role for the Jews, converted to Christianity, in the end times .

[ 11 ] [ nb 1 ] Early versions of the Bible endorsed by the English monarchy and the Anglican Church included the Great Bible and the Bishops' Bible . However, a number of English Puritans and Lowland Scots Presbyterians viewed these (along with Episcopalianism and the establishment " Protestantism of the princes "), in general, as too " Romanist ." In response, a number of these Puritans and Presbyterians spent some time in Geneva in the 1560s under Calvin's successor Theodore Beza and developed a translation of the Bible called the Geneva Bible , which contained footnotes in reference to the Book of Romans , specifically claiming that the Jews would be converted to Christianity in the end times and reorientating attention to Palestine as a central theatre.

[ 11 ] This view came to be taken up strongly by English Puritans (such as Francis Kett , Edmund Bunny , Thomas Draxe , Thomas Brightman , Joseph Mede , William Perkins , Richard Sibbes , Thomas Goodwin , William Strong , William Bridge , Henry Finch , John Owen and Giles Fletcher ), Lowland Scots Presbyterians (such as George Gillespie , Robert Baillie and Samuel Rutherford ), [ 15 ] and even some Continental Protestants (such as Oliger Paulli , Isaac Vossius , Hugo Grotius , Gerhard Vossius and David Blondel ).

[ 11 ] The Puritans, once a "fringe" faction, came to power under Oliver Cromwell during the Commonwealth. Several of his closest advisors held Philo-Semitic millennialist religious views.

During the late Tudor and early Stuart period, these Puritans remained outsiders in England and bitterly opposed the Laudian -dominated Anglican Church (though the Presbyterians, who held very similar views, had established the Church of Scotland as the largest " Kirk " in Scotland). With the English Civil War , the Puritans filled the ranks of the Parliamentarians and the New Model Army . Under the leadership of Oliver Cromwell they were victorious, executed Charles I of England and gained complete state power, establishing the Commonwealth of England between 1649 and 1660.

[ 16 ] The Philo-Semitic millennialist undercurrent came to have a direct influence on politics. A number of Cromwell's close advisors, such as John Dury , John Sadler and Hugh Peter , came into contact with Dutch-based Jews such as Menasseh ben Israel and advocated Jewish resettlement in England (they had been banned from the country since the 13th century). Sadler, Cromwell's secretary, even argued that the British were one of the Lost Tribes of Israel in his pamphlet The Rights of the Kingdom (1649) and thus kindred to the Jews, initiating British Israelism . Other Puritans such as Jeremiah Burroughs , Peter Bulkley , John Fenwicke and John Cotton , [ 17 ] some of whom lived in the Massachusetts Bay Colony , saw Jewish re-entry to England as a step on the path to their eventual return to Palestine (all tied up within a millennialist eschatology, which would hasten the Second Coming of Jesus Christ and thus the final judgement ).

[ 18 ] Johanna and Ebenezer Cartwright, two Baptists who had spent time in Amsterdam , held the same view and issued the original petition to Thomas Fairfax 's Council of War in January 1649 for Jewish readmission: [ 19 ] the petition hoped, "That this Nation of England, with the inhabitants of the Netherlands, shall be the first and the readiest to transport Israel's sons and daughters on their ships to the land promised to their forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob for an everlasting inheritance." [ 16 ] Their de facto toleration in England was informally achieved by 1655 to 1656 and was not rolled back after the Restoration .

A prominent French-born figure Isaac La Peyrère , who was nominally a Huguenot Calvinist, but came from a Portuguese New Christian (converted Sephardic Jewish ) family was also a significant 17th century progenitor, with influence on both sides of the English Channel .

[ 20 ] [ 16 ] La Peyrère in his millennialist work Du rappel des juifs (1643) wrote about a Jewish return to Palestine, predicted the building of the Third Temple and Jerusalem playing the most powerful role in world governance: all working towards the Second Coming.

[ 16 ] La Peyrère closely followed the developments of Oliver Cromwell's Dissenter regime and dreamed of overthrowing Louis XIV of France and replacing him with the Prince of Condé (who he worked for as a secretary) as part of a millennialist proto-Zionist messianic project.

[ 21 ] After the publication of La Peyrère's book the Amsterdam-based Menasseh Ben Israel informed his friend, Petrus Serrarius (a close associate of John Dury), about the importance of the theories, showing an early interplay between 17th century Jewish and Protestant proto-Zionism.

[ 22 ] Other Continental Protestant millennialists enthused by La Peyrère's theories were the Germans Abraham von Franckenberg (a student of the Kabbalah ) and Paul Felgenhauer.

[ 22 ] Menasseh Ben Israel himself would author The Hope of Israel in 1652. Serrarius ended up being the main supporter among Protestants in Amsterdam of the message that Sabbatai Zevi was the Messiah , as proclaimed by Nathan of Gaza (his followers, the Sabbateans , were based in the Ottoman Empire but he had significant support throughout the Jewish diaspora ).

[ 23 ] Although removed from power in England itself, the millennialist Puritans who had moved to New England continued to have a deeper cultural legacy in society. As well as John Cotton, Increase Mather , one of the early Presidents of Harvard College was a strong proponent of the restoration of the Jews to Palestine.

[ 14 ] [ 16 ] An author of numerous works, his most notable in this regard was The Mystery of Israel's Salvation (1669).

[ 16 ] Roger Williams , the Puritan proponent of religious liberty (including for Jews) [ 24 ] in the Colony of Rhode Island that he founded has been citied as a proto-Zionist in speeches by later Jewish Zionist leaders such as Stephen S. Wise , due to his comment that "I have longed after some trading with the Jews themselves, for whose hard measure I fear the nations and England have yet a score to pay." [ 25 ] Some important 17th-century philosophers who acted a bridge between the millennialist sectarians of their day and the approaching Age of the Enlightenment with its Scientific Revolution either held views associated with premillennial restorationists, or moved closely in their circles: this applies particularly to Sir Isaac Newton and Baruch Spinoza . Newton especially, who held Radical Reformation views in terms of religion and also dabbled in the occult (including the Kabbalah) predicted a Jewish return to Palestine, with the rebuilding of Jerusalem in the late 19th century and the erection of the Third Temple in the 20th or 21st century, leading to the end of the world no later than 2060.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Much of these private writings were embarrassing to his supporters who sought to uphold him as a man of reason and science against Leibniz and while the University of Cambridge inherited his scientific papers, they refused to take these private ones.

[ 27 ] Many of these, collected by Abraham Yahuda , now rest in the National Library of Israel since 1967.

[ 27 ] Spinoza for his part, although Jewish himself, moved in circles in the Netherlands which included Petrus Serrarius, Henry Oldenburg and was even directly influenced by La Peyrère.

[ 28 ] Pietism, Evangelicalism, and British foreign policy See also: Pietism , Evangelicalism , and Political Zionism This secton possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) With the rise of the Hanoverians to power in Britain and the ascent of the Enlightenment, much of the 18th century mainstream elite adopted Philhellenism , looking back to the culture and philosophies of the classical world for inspiration for the Georgian age , rather than entertaining millennialist fantasies based on the Hebrew Old Testament (though Jews themselves enjoyed significant toleration in the British Empire ). Although marginal at first, a religious underground was slowly growing from the 1730s which would eventually spout a second wave of Protestant Zionism and with it the birth of Evangelical Protestantism .

[ citation needed ] This was precipitated in Germany by Philipp Spener 's Pietism , a mystical and often millennialist take on Lutheranism, which prophesied the "conversion of the Jews and the fall of the Papacy as the prelude of the triumph of the Church." One of Spener's followers, Nicolaus Zinzendorf , spread this into the Moravian Church , linking the theory to Palestine, changing the Moravian liturgy to include a prayer "to restore the tribe of Judah in its time and bless its first fruits among us." [ 16 ] John and Charles Wesley , early leaders in Methodism , inspired by the Pietists and Zinzendorf's Moravians, also promoted a Jewish return to Palestine with Charles Wesley even authoring a hymn dedicated to it.

[ 16 ] [ 29 ] The Baptist, John Gill , who moved in similar circles to the Wesleys, authored works expressing similar views.

[ 30 ] By 1771, the Evangelical minister, John Eyre , founder of the Evangelical Magazine and among the original members of the London Missionary Society was promoting a more developed version of these views with his Observations upon Prophecies Relating to the Restoration of the Jews .

[ 16 ] By the end of the 18th century, in the aftermath of the French Revolution and the National Assembly decreeing in December 1789 that non-Catholics were eligible for all civil and military positions, the Revolutionary government in France made a play for the allegiance of Jews , in competition with Britain. During the Egypt–Syria campaign of the French Revolutionary Wars , Bonaparte invited "all the Jews of Asia and Africa to gather under his flag in order to re-establish the ancient Jerusalem." [ 31 ] Although Bonaparte himself was secular and the idea an early example of pragmatic Political Zionism , the Jacobin idea itself may have originated from Thomas Corbet (1773–1804), an Anglo-Irish Protestant émigrée who, as a member of the liberal-republican Society of United Irishmen , was an ally of the Jacobin -government, engaged in revolutionary activities against the British and served in the French Army.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] In February 1790, he authored a letter to the French Directory , then under the leadership of Napoleon's patron Paul Barras .

[ 32 ] In the letter he stated "I recommend you, Napoleon, to call on the Jewish people to join your conquest in the East, to your mission to conquer the land of Israel" saying, "Their riches do not console them for their hardships. They await with impatience the epoch of their re-establishment as a nation." [ 33 ] Milka Levy-Rubin, a curator at the National Library of Israel , has attributed Corbet's motivation to a Protestant Zionism based on premillennialist themes.

[ 32 ] In New England during the 18th century, Ezra Stiles , president of Yale College was a supporter of Jewish restoration and befriended Rabbi Raphael Chaim Yitzchak Karigal of Hebron in 1773 during his visit.

[ 34 ] Jonathan Edwards also anticipated a future return of Jews to their homeland.

[ 35 ] In 1808, Asa McFarland , a Presbyterian, voiced the opinion of many that the fall of the Ottoman Empire was imminent and would bring about Jewish restoration.

[ citation needed ] One David Austin of New Haven spent his fortune building docks and inns from which the Jews could embark to the Holy Land.

[ citation needed ] In 1825, Mordecai Manuel Noah , a Jew who wanted to found a national home for the Jews on Grand Island in New York as a way station on the way to the Holy Land, won widespread Christian backing for his project.

[ citation needed ] Likewise, restorationist theology was among the inspirations for the first American missionary activity in the Middle East [ 36 ] and for mapping the Holy Land.

[ 37 ] Most early-19th-century British Restorationists, like Charles Simeon , were postmillennial in eschatology.

[ 8 ] With the rise of James Frere , James Haldane Stewart and Edward Irving a major shift in the 1820s towards premillennialism occurred, with a similar focus on advocacy for the restoration of the Jews to Israel.

[ 8 ] [ 38 ] As the demise of the Ottoman Empire appeared to be approaching, the advocacy of restorationism increased.

[ citation needed ] The Earl of Shaftesbury , influenced by Evangelical Anglicanism and the views of Edward Bickersteth was one of the first British politicians to seriously endorse a Jewish return to Ottoman Palestine as official policy.

The crumbling of the Ottoman Empire threatened the British route to India via the Suez Canal as well as sundry French, German and American economic interests. In 1831 the Ottomans were driven from the region of Syria (including Palestine) by an expansionist Egypt, in the First Turko-Egyptian War . Although Britain forced Muhammad Ali to withdraw to Egypt, the Levant was left for a brief time without a government. The ongoing weakness of the Ottoman Empire made some in the west consider the potential of a Jewish state in the Holy Land. A number of important figures within the British government advocated such a plan, including Charles Henry Churchill .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Again during the lead-up to the Crimean War (1854), there was an opportunity for political rearrangements in the Near East. In July 1853, Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury , who was President of the London Society for Promoting Christianity Amongst the Jews , wrote to Prime Minister Aberdeen urging Jewish restoration as a means of stabilizing the region.

[ 8 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] At the same time, the visit of John Nelson Darby to the United States [ when?

] catalyzed a new movement.

[ citation needed ] Darby was the founder of a theological framework known as dispensationalism . Darby’s dispensationalist theology is often claimed to be a significant awakener of American Christian Zionism.

[ 43 ] He first distinguished the hopes of the Jews and that of the church and gentiles in a series of 11 evening lectures in Geneva in 1840. His lectures were immediately published in French ( L'Attente Actuelle de l'Eglise ), English (1841), German and Dutch (1847) and so his teachings began their global journey. Some dispensationalists, like Arno Gabelein , whilst philo-semitic , opposed Zionism as a movement born in self-confidence and unbelief.

[ 3 ] While dispensationalism had considerable influence through the Scofield Reference Bible (first published by OUP, 1909), [ 43 ] Christian lobbying for the restoration of the Jews preceded its publication by over a century, [ 8 ] and many Christian Zionists and Christian Zionist organizations such as the International Christian Embassy Jerusalem do not subscribe to dispensationalism.

[ citation needed ] Many non-dispensationalist Protestants were also strong advocates of a Jewish return to their homeland, Charles Spurgeon , [ 44 ] both Horatius [ 45 ] and Andrew Bonar , [ citation needed ] Robert Murray M'Chyene , [ 46 ] [ verification needed ] and J. C. Ryle [ 47 ] [ verification needed ] were among a number of proponents of both the importance and significance of a Jewish return to Israel. However, Spurgeon averred of dispensationalism: "It is a mercy that these absurdities are revealed one at a time, in order that we may be able to endure their stupidity without dying of amazement".

[ 48 ] In 1864, Spurgeon wrote: We look forward, then, for these two things. I am not going to theorize upon which of them will come first — whether they shall be restored first, and converted afterwards — or converted first and then restored. They are to be restored and they are to be converted, too.

[ 44 ] Darby’s dispensationalism was expressed at the Niagara Bible Conference in 1878, [ citation needed ] which issued a 14-point proclamation (relying on Luke 12:35–40, 17:26–30, 18:8 Acts 15:14–17, 2 Thessalonians 2:3–8, 2 Timothy 3:1–5, and Titus 1:11–15), including: that the Lord Jesus will come in person to introduce the millennial age, when Israel shall be restored to their own land, and the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord; and that this personal and premillennial advent is the blessed hope set before us in the Gospel for which we should be constantly looking.

[ 49 ] Late-19th-century non-messianic restorationism was largely driven by concern over the fate of the Jews of the Russian Empire, beset by poverty and by deadly, government-inspired pogroms. It was widely accepted that western nations did not wish to receive Jewish immigrants. Restorationism was a way for charitable individuals to assist oppressed Jews without actually accepting them as neighbors and fellow-citizens.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] In this, Restorationism was not unlike the efforts of the American Colonization Society to send blacks to Liberia and the efforts of British abolitionists to create Sierra Leone .

[ citation needed ] Winston Churchill endorsed Restoration because he recognized that Jews fleeing Russian pogroms required a refuge, and preferred Palestine for sentimental reasons.

[ 53 ] In the United States "Memorandum to the Protestant Powers of the North of Europe and America", Colonial Times , Hobart, Australia, 1841 In 1818, President John Adams wrote, "I really wish the Jews again in Judea an independent nation", and believed that they would gradually become Unitarian Christians.

[ 54 ] In 1844, George Bush , a professor of Hebrew at New York University and the cousin of an ancestor of the Presidents Bush, published a book titled The Valley of Vision; or, The Dry Bones of Israel Revived . In it he denounced "the thralldom and oppression which has so long ground them (the Jews) to the dust," and called for "elevating" the Jews "to a rank of honorable repute among the nations of the earth" by allowing restoring the Jews to the land of Israel where the bulk would be converted to Christianity .

[ 55 ] This, according to Bush, would benefit not only the Jews, but all of mankind, forming a "link of communication" between humanity and God. "It will blaze in notoriety ...". "It will flash a splendid demonstration upon all kindreds and tongues of the truth." [ 9 ] Herman Melville expressed the idea in a poem, "Clarel; A Poem and Pilgrimage in the Holy Land": the Hebrew seers announce in time the return of Judah to her prime; Some Christians deemed it then at hand Here was an object. Up and On.

With seed and tillage help renew – Help reinstate the Holy Land The tycoon William Eugene Blackstone was inspired by the conference to publish the book Jesus is Coming , which took up the restorationist cause. His book was translated and published in Yiddish . On November 24–25, 1890, Blackstone organized the Conference on the Past, Present and Future of Israel at the First Methodist Episcopal Church in Chicago where participants included leaders of many Christian communities. Resolutions of sympathy for the oppressed Jews living in Russia were passed, but Blackstone was convinced that such resolutions—even though passed by prominent men—were insufficient. He advocated strongly for the resettlement of Jewish people in Palestine. In 1891 he lobbied President Benjamin Harrison for the restoration of the Jews, in a petition signed by 413 prominent Americans, that became known as the Blackstone Memorial .

[ 56 ] The names included the US Chief Justice, Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Chair of the House Foreign Relations Committee, and several other congressmen, Rockefeller, Morgan and famous industrialists.

[ 56 ] It read, in part: "Why shall not the powers which under the treaty of Berlin, in 1878, gave Bulgaria to the Bulgarians and Servia to the Servians now give Palestine back to the Jews? ... These provinces, as well as Romania, Montenegro, and Greece, were wrested from the Turks and given to their natural owners. Does not Palestine as rightfully belong to the Jews?" [ 57 ] In Great Britain Main articles: Zionism § British influence , and Christian Zionism in the United Kingdom By the time of Mandate Palestine , the British struggled to balance sympathies for Jews and Arabs. Some, such as Orde Wingate , fought alongside the Haganah as part of the Special Night Squads .

British Reformationists had written about the restoration of the Jews as early as the 16th century, and the idea had strong support among Puritans.

[ 7 ] While Jewish nationalism in the early 19th century was largely met with hostility from British Jews , [ 58 ] ideas favoring the restoration of the Jews in Palestine or the Land of Israel entered the British public discourse in the 1830s. Not all such attitudes were favorable towards the Jews; they were shaped in part by a variety of Protestant beliefs, [ 8 ] [ 59 ] or by a streak of philo-Semitism among the classically educated British elite.

[ 60 ] At the urging of Lord Shaftesbury , Britain established a consulate in Jerusalem in 1838, the first diplomatic appointment to Palestine.

[ 8 ] In 1839, the Church of Scotland sent Andrew Bonar , Robert Murray M'Cheyne , Alexander Black and Alexander Keith on a mission to report on the condition of the Jews in Palestine. Their report was widely published.

[ 61 ] They traveled through France, Greece, and Egypt, and from Egypt, overland to Gaza . On the way home they visited Syria , the Austrian Empire and some of the German states. They sought out Jewish communities and inquired about their readiness to accept Christ, and separately, their preparedness to return to Israel as prophesied in the Bible.

Alexander Keith recounted the journey in his 1844 book The Land of Israel According to the Covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob . It was also in that book that Keith used the slogan that became popular with other Christian Restorationists, a land without a people for a people without a land . In 1844 he revisited Palestine with his son, George Skene Keith (1819–1910), who was the first person to photograph the land.

[ 62 ] An important, though often neglected, figure in British support of the restoration of the Jews was William Hechler (1845–1931), an English clergyman of German descent who was Chaplain of the British Embassy in Vienna and became a close friend of Theodor Herzl .

[ 63 ] Hechler was instrumental in aiding Herzl through his diplomatic activities, and may, in that sense, be called the founder of modern Christian Zionism. When it came to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of Herzl's death, the editors of the English-language memorial volume said that William Hechler was "not only the first, but the most constant and the most indefatigable of Herzl's followers".

[ 56 ] Balfour Declaration On 2 November 1917, UK Home Secretary Arthur Balfour sent a letter to Lord Walter Rothschild . This letter, known as the Balfour Declaration , famously stated that "His Majesty's Government view with favour the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people." As noted by Philip Alexander, "A crucial ingredient in Balfour's Zionism [may have been] his Christian belief or, to put it a little more subtly, his Christian formation. The most persuasive advocate of this thesis is the Canadian historian Donald Lewis in his 2010 monograph, The Origins of Christian Zionism , but it has been espoused by a number of other scholars as well." [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Between World War I and the 1948 Palestine War In the United States In the decades leading up to the 1948 Palestine war and establishment of the State of Israel in 1948 , the most prominent and politically active American Christian supporters of Zionism were liberal and mainline Protestants whose support for the movement was often unrelated to their interpretation of the Bible.

[ 66 ] These Christian supporters of Zionism viewed Palestine as a needed safe haven for Jews who were fleeing from intensifying persecution in Europe and they frequently believed that their support of the movement was part of a broader effort at interfaith rapprochement . The Pro-Palestine Federation , a Christian pro-Zionist organization which was founded in 1930, called for the promotion of "goodwill and esteem between Jews and non-Jews" and it also called for the British government to adhere to the terms of its Mandate for Palestine, which pledged support for the establishment of a Jewish national home.

[ 67 ] Amidst World War II and their growing awareness of the Holocaust , American Jewish Zionists helped coordinate the establishment of two non-Jewish Zionist organizations, the American Palestine Committee and the Christian Council on Palestine, which were later merged into the American Christian Palestine Committee (ACPC). The ACPC, which was composed largely of liberal and mainline Protestants, became the leading American Christian lobby in support of the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine.

[ 68 ] After the establishment of Israel in 1948, the ACPC continued its lobbying efforts. For instance, it coordinated opposition to the United Nations' efforts to internationalize the city of Jerusalem, which was divided between Israel and Transjordan in the 1948 War.

[ citation needed ] During these years, dispensational premillennialism grew in popularity among conservative American Protestants. Many dispensationalists viewed the Zionist movement as at least a partial fulfillment of biblical prophecy or they viewed it as a modern fulfillment of God's covenantal promises to the Jewish people. In the 1930s, Southern Baptist missionary Jacob Gartenhaus, himself a convert from Judaism, argued that "Zionism is going to win whether anybody likes it or not...To oppose it is to oppose God's plan." [ 69 ] But for the most part, such beliefs did not translate into political action on behalf of the movement in this era. One slight exception was J. Frank Norris, a fundamentalist Baptist who split time between pulpits in Fort Worth, Texas, and Detroit, Michigan.

[ 70 ] While Norris did not organize lobbying efforts in the way that the ACPC did, he did preach to his followers that it was their Christian duty to support the Zionist cause and wrote President Truman in support of Zionist claims to Palestine in 1947 and 1948. Norris also loosely coordinated with the ACPC, at times publishing their materials in his periodical, The Fundamentalist .

[ 71 ] After the founding of the State of Israel The Flag of Israel , flying alongside the Union Flag and the Ulster Banner . In the Protestant Unionist community of Northern Ireland , sympathy for Israel is frequently expressed by communal flag-flying.

[ 72 ] In the United States See also: Israel–United States relations In the decades since the establishment of Israel, and especially since the 1967 Six-Day War , the most prominent American Christian supporters of Israel have come from the evangelical wing of American Protestantism .

American evangelicalism itself underwent significant changes in the years surrounding Israel's birth, as a "new" evangelicalism led by figures like Billy Graham emerged from Protestantism and came to cultural prominence.

[ 73 ] It was among these new evangelicals that the contemporary movement that most commonly associated with the term "Christian Zionism" originated.

[ 74 ] Many new evangelicals adhered to dispensationalism or at least, they adhered to beliefs which were inspired by it—most especially, they adhered to the dispensationalist understanding that Jews remained in a special covenantal relationship with God. Most important to the development of Christian Zionism as a movement, though, was the fact that American evangelical leaders began to build relationships with American and Israeli Jews and they also began to build institutional connections with Jewish organizations and the Israeli government itself. Crucial to the building of these relationships was a motivated coterie of American evangelicals who resided in Israel, most notably, the founder of the American Institute of Holy Land Studies, G. Douglas Young. Through his institute, Young worked to convince American Christians that it was their biblical duty to support the Jewish people and the Jewish state. He also worked as a go-between for Jewish organizations and Israeli government agencies which were seeking to build relationships with American evangelicals.

[ 75 ] Such activism provided the basis for the development of Christian Zionism as a movement.

Christian Zionist Pastor John Hagee with Rabbi Shlomo Riskin and Israel's Deputy Foreign Minister Tzipi Hotovely in November 2018 Such activism, it should be noted, was in many ways distinct from the prophetic speculation about the State of Israel that exploded after the 1967 Six-Day War (even as it had somewhat common theological and hermeneutical antecedents). This activism includes the wildly popular writings of the American dispensationalist evangelical writer Hal Lindsey , which sought to fit Israel into a dispensationalist end-time narrative. In The Late Great Planet Earth , for example, Lindsey anticipated that, per Ezekiel 39:6–8 , Jews would fight off a " Russian " invasion before realizing their miraculous deliverance and converting to Christianity. Their lives would be spared the great fire that God will put upon Russia and people of the "coastlands." And, per Zechariah 13:8–9 , one third of Jews alive who have converted will be spared.

[ 76 ] Lindsay has been critiqued for highly specific, failed predictions even by those who share his eschatology, like John MacArthur .

[ 77 ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Examples of Protestant leaders who combined political conservatism with Christian Zionism are Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson , leading figures on the Christian Right in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1981, Falwell said: "To stand against Israel is to stand against God. We believe that history and scripture prove that God deals with nations in relation to how they deal with Israel." [ 78 ] They cite part of the blessing of Isaac at Genesis 27:29 , "Those who curse you will be cursed, and those who bless you will be blessed." [ citation needed ] Martin Luther King Jr.

has also been cited as a Christian supporter of Israel and Zionism.

[ 79 ] Tens of millions of Americans belong to Evangelical churches that strongly support Israel for religious reasons, [ 80 ] [ 81 ] and there are tens of millions more Christians who identify as Christian Zionists outside the United States.

[ 82 ] The largest Zionist organisation is Christians United for Israel , which has 10 million members and is led by John Hagee .

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] According to a Pew Research survey in 2003, in the US more than 60% of the Evangelical Christians and about 50% of Blacks agreed that the existence of Israel fulfilled biblical prophecy. About 55% of poll respondents said that the Bible was the biggest influence for supporting Israel, 11 times the number of people who said church was the biggest influence.

[ 86 ] A 2017 LifeWay poll conducted in United States found that 80% of evangelical Christians believed that the creation of Israel in 1948 was a fulfillment of biblical prophecy that would bring about Christ's return and more than 50% of Evangelical Christians believed that they support Israel because it is important for fulfilling the prophecy.

[ 86 ] In Israel The government of Israel has given official encouragement to Christian Zionism, allowing the establishment of the International Christian Embassy Jerusalem in 1980.

[ citation needed ] The embassy has raised funds to help finance Jewish immigration to Israel from the former Soviet Union , and has assisted Zionist groups in establishing Jewish settlements in the West Bank .

[ citation needed ] The Third International Christian Zionist Congress, held in Jerusalem in February 1996, issued a proclamation which said: [ 87 ] God the Father, Almighty, chose the ancient nation and people of Israel, the descendants of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to reveal His plan of redemption for the world. They remain elect of God, and without the Jewish nation His redemptive purposes for the world will not be completed.

Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah and has promised to return to Jerusalem, to Israel and to the world.

It is reprehensible that generations of Jewish peoples have been killed and persecuted in the name of our Lord, and we challenge the Church to repent of any sins of commission or omission against them.

The modern Ingathering of the Jewish People to Eretz Israel and the rebirth of the nation of Israel are in fulfilment of biblical prophecies, as written in both Old and New Testaments.

Christian believers are instructed by Scripture to acknowledge the Hebraic roots of their faith and to actively assist and participate in the plan of God for the Ingathering of the Jewish People and the Restoration of the nation of Israel in our day.

Popular interest in Christian Zionism was given a boost around the year 2000 in the form of the Left Behind series of novels by Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins .

[ 88 ] The novels are built around the prophetic role of Israel in the apocalyptic end times.

Critical views within Christianity See also: Anti-Zionism § Christian anti-Zionism , and Jerusalem Declaration on Christian Zionism General For most Christians, [ citation needed ] the City of God ( Psalm 46:4 ( Septuagint : ΜΕ:5 ): "ἡ πόλις τοῦ Θεοῦ" , romanized: "hē pólis toũ theoũ" , lit.

'the city of God') has nothing to do with Jewish immigration to Israel and the ongoing Israeli–Palestinian conflict ; instead, it predicts the sack of Rome (410) and it is cited in the teaching of Saint Augustine of Hippo .

[ citation needed ] Eastern Orthodox Christians did not consider Zionism in any political form: "[The Eastern Orthodox Church [...] upheld a historic lack of emphasis on pilgrimage, insisting that the land of promise was not Palestine but the Kingdom of God. Thus, Patriarch Ignatius IV , head of the church in the Middle East, reiterated that the people were his concern in Jerusalem, not the stones." [ 89 ] Not a worldly kingdom, not an earthly Jerusalem is sought after,but the focus is on the heavenly Jerusalem , the kingdom of the triune God : [ 90 ] At first you will see prayer as a ladder, then as a book which you read, and finally, as you advance further and further, you will see it as the heavenly Jerusalem, the city of the King of Hosts, Who is together with His Father — with Whom He is of one Essence — and with the venerable Holy Spirit.

— Hesychius of Jerusalem Nor did traditional Catholic Christians support Christian Zionism.

[ 91 ] [ clarification needed ] Catholic Church Main article: Catholicism and Zionism Pope Pius X : Theodor Herzl had an audience with Pope Pius X in 1904. The Pope explained that the Catholic Church could not theologically endorse Zionism and control of Holy Places in Jerusalem.

The Catholic Church —the largest branch of Christians in the world—does not endorse the theological premises underlying millennialist Restorationism as propounded by dispensationalists and it has generally inveighed against the prospect of Jewish governance over Holy Places in Palestine which it deems of importance to Christianity.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Theodor Herzl , the secular Jewish founder of modern political Zionism, had an audience in the Vatican with Pope Pius X in 1904, arranged by the Austrian Count Berthold Dominik Lippay, seeking out the position of the Catholic Church on Herzl's prospective project for the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine. Pope Pius X stated "We cannot prevent the Jews from going to Jerusalem—but we could never sanction it. The soil of Jerusalem, if it was not always sacred, has been sanctified by the life of Jesus Christ . As the head of the Church I cannot tell you anything different. The Jews have not recognized our Lord , therefore we cannot recognize the Jewish people." [ 93 ] After Herzl explained that his reasoning behind the project for the creation of a Jewish state was not a religious statement, but interest in secular land for national independence, Pope Pius X replied "Does it have to be Gerusalemme ?" [ 93 ] While it rejected a theological basis for Zionism outright, a major concern for the Holy See was the fate of the Holy Places which were associated with Jesus Christ if they should ever fall under the governance of such a state.

[ 92 ] By the mid-19th century, relations between the Vatican and Istanbul were fairly collegial; by that time, the Muslim Ottomans permitted the Vatican to work among the Arab Catholics in Palestine and they also permitted the Vatican to access the Holy Places quite freely so the status quo was already workable for them. Following the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine , the Vatican advocated the position that Jerusalem should be treated as a separate " international city ", as laid out in the encyclical Redemptoris nostri cruciatus . Until the Second Vatican Council , the Catholic Church was forthright in its international lobbying against Zionism (including the Catholic Church in the United States , because the United States had become Zionism's most powerful endorser).

[ 92 ] The State of Israel and the Holy See only established full diplomatic relations in 1993 and this was a recognition of political and civic reality, not a theological statement.

[ 92 ] In the 20th and 21st centuries, certain Catholic theologians such as André Villeneuve, Gary Anderson and Gavin D'Costa , have written in support of Christian Zionism, holding it to be a sign of God's fidelity.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Protestantism Political Zionism has also been critised by some Protestants: [I]t is the conviction of most biblical scholars that the Old Testament contains no description of the restoration of Israel to its ancient homeland which can apply to the Jewish people of the present age.

— The Christian Century : 144–145. December 1929 [ 89 ] Political Zionism and Christian Zionism are biblically anathema to the Christian faith. [...] [T]rue Israel today is neither Jews nor Israelis, but believers in the Messiah, even if they are gentiles.

— John Stott [ 96 ] The La Grange Declarations of 1979 and 1981 were issued by a broad array of (mostly Protestant) Christian leaders critical of Christian Zionism who advocated for a change in church and governmental positions on Israel and Palestine. The 1979 statement, drafted at a conference in LaGrange, Illinois , criticized Israel’s territorial actions, recognized the right of Palestinians to self-determination, and called for the U.S. to end its unconditional backing of Israel, though it stopped short of denying Israel's legitimacy. The 1981 declaration took a more assertive stance, challenging the religious justification for Israel’s claims to the land, demanding a full cessation of U.S. military aid to Israel, and denouncing American policies that restricted the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Both declarations represented a growing Christian movement that sought to oppose pro-Israel evangelical perspectives and bring attention to Palestinian political and humanitarian concerns.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] In the United States, the General Assembly of the National Council of Churches in November 2007 approved a resolution for further study which stated that the "theological stance of Christian Zionism adversely affects: justice and peace in the Middle East, delaying the day when Israelis and Palestinians can live within secure borders relationships with Middle Eastern Christians (see the Jerusalem Declaration on Christian Zionism ) relationships with Jews, since Jews are seen as mere pawns in an eschatological scheme relationships with Muslims, since it treats the rights of Muslims as subordinate to the rights of Jews interfaith dialogue , since it views the world in starkly dichotomous terms" [ 101 ] The Reformed Church in America at its 2004 General Synod found "the ideology of Christian Zionism and the extreme form of dispensationalism that undergirds it to be a distortion of the biblical message noting the impediment it represents to achieving a just peace in Israel/Palestine." [ 102 ] The Mennonite Central Committee has criticized Christian Zionism, noting that in some churches under its influence the "congregations 'adopt' illegal Israeli settlements, sending funds to bolster the defense of these armed colonies." [ 103 ] [ non-primary source needed ] As of September 2007, churches in the US that have criticized Christian Zionism include the United Methodist Church , the Presbyterian Church (USA) , [ 104 ] and the United Church of Christ .

[ 105 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The 2009 film With God On Our Side , by Porter Speakman Jr. and Kevin Miller (the latter of whom also co-created the film Expelled: No Intelligence Allowed ), criticizes both the underlying theology behind Christian Zionism as well as its negative influence on the church, from a Christian perspective.

[ 106 ] [ self-published source?

] In the United Kingdom, the Church of Scotland , despite its Restorationist history, [ 107 ] has recently been critical of Zionism in general, and in turn has received strong criticism over the perceived injustice of its 2013 report, "The Inheritance of Abraham: A Report on the Promised Land" , [ 108 ] which resulted in its republication in a briefer form.

[ 109 ] On 9 July 2012, the Anglican General Synod passed a motion affirming support for the Ecumenical Accompaniment Programme in Palestine and Israel (EAPPI).

[ 110 ] This was criticised by the Board of Deputies claiming the Synod 'has chosen to promote an inflammatory and partisan programme'.

[ 111 ] The advocated group was simultaneously criticised for its publication of a call for sit-ins at Israeli Embassies, the hacking of government websites to promote its message, and support for the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions campaign against Israel.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Biblical interpretations Some Christian Zionists interpret the prophetic texts as describing inevitable future events, and these events primarily involve Israel (taken to mean the descendants of the Biblical patriarch Jacob ) or Judah (taken to mean the remaining faithful adherents of Judaism). These prophecies are seen as requiring the presence of a Jewish state in the Holy Land , the central part of the lands promised to the Biblical patriarch Abraham in the Covenant of the pieces . This requirement is sometimes interpreted as being fulfilled by the contemporary state of Israel.

[ 113 ] Other doctrines Christian schools of doctrine which consider other teachings to counterbalance these doctrines, or which interpret them in terms of distinct eschatological theories, are less conducive to Christian Zionism.

[ citation needed ] Among the many texts which address this subject in counterbalance are the words of Jesus, as for example in Matthew 21:43 , "the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a nation producing the fruits of it".

[ original research?

] In Defending Christian Zionism , David Pawson , a Christian Zionist in the United Kingdom , puts forward the case that the return of the Jews to the Holy Land is a fulfilment of scriptural prophecy, and that Christians should support the existence of the Jewish State (although not unconditionally its actions) on theological grounds. He also argues that prophecies spoken about Israel relate specifically to Israel (not to the church, as in "replacement theology"). However, he criticises Dispensationalism, which he says is a largely American movement holding similar views. Pawson was spurred to write this book by the work of Stephen Sizer , an evangelical Christian who rejects Christian Zionism.

[ citation needed ] See also Christianity portal Center for Jewish–Christian Understanding and Cooperation Christian–Jewish reconciliation Christian views on the Old Covenant Christianity in Israel Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites History of Zionism International Fellowship of Christians and Jews Jewish views on religious pluralism Jews as the chosen people Judaizers Muslim Zionism Philosemitism Sacred Name Movement Notes ^ According to Dick Wursten, a Doctor of Theology from Belgium, in his Clément Marot and Religion (2010), Bucer, a prominent Reformation Christian Hebraist , has been categorised as a Judaizer due to his reliance on later rabbinical Jewish commentators, external to Christian tradition, for his Commentary on the Psalter (1529). In particular, for his millennialism and views for a future Messianic Age , he drew from Abraham ibn Ezra and David Kimhi , from whom he shared their sense of " derek ha peshat " (an exegesis which prefers a literalist historicalism above allegorical or moral speculation) but syncretised this with Christian elements which would include a Jewish conversion in the end times. In addition to this he referenced the medieval Talmudic commentator Shlomo Yitzchai, also known as Rashi , though drew from him to a lesser extent than the others. Bucer owned a copy of the Mikraot Gedolot —a version of the Hebrew Bible preferred by medieval Rabbinic Judaism —and drew from it freely.

References ^ a b c d e Ben Barka, Mokhtar (December 2012).

"The New Christian Right's relations with Israel and with the American Jews: the mid-1970s onward" .

E-Rea .

10 (1).

Aix-en-Provence and Marseille : Centre pour l'Édition Électronique Ouverte on behalf of Aix-Marseille University .

doi : 10.4000/erea.2753 .

ISSN 1638-1718 .

S2CID 191364375 .

The Jews have cause to worry because Evangelicals are active on both fronts, promoting support for the State of Israel, and evangelizing the Jews at the same time. While the Israeli government eagerly accepts public support of Evangelicals and courts the leaders of the New Christian Right , many Jews bitterly condemn Christian proselytism and try their best to restrict the activities of missionaries in Israel.

Jews for Jesus and other Christian Jewish groups in Israel have become especially effective in evangelizing, often with the support of foreign Evangelicals. It is not surprising that Jewish leaders, both in the United States and Israel , react strongly to "Jews for Jesus" and the whole "Messianic Jewish" movement , whose concern is to promote awareness among the Jews as to God's real plans for humanity and the need to accept Jesus as a Savior . In this respect, Gershom Gorenberg lamented the fact that "people who see Israel through the lens of Endtimes prophecy are questionable allies, whose support should be elicited only in the last resort. In the long run, their apocalyptic agenda has no room for Israel as a normal country." ^ a b Sharif, Regina (1983).

Non-Jewish Zionism: Its Roots in Western History (translated in Arabic by Ahmad Abdullah Abdul Aziz (1985)). London, UK: Zed Books .

ISBN 978-0-86232-151-2 .

Archived from the original on July 1, 2019 . Retrieved July 1, 2019 .

The Zionist idea itself has its organic roots deep within the European imperialist movement . [...] England of the seventeenth century was, in Carlyle's own words, an England of 'awful devout Puritanism '. [Note: Thomas Carlyle , Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches (Boston, 1884), 1:32] Puritanism meant the invasion of Hebraism as transmitted through the Old Testament , but distorted by the effort to apply the ethics, laws and manners of the Old Testament Hebrew people , a people that lived in the Middle East more than two thousand years earlier, to post-Renaissance England . [Note: In the words of Matthew Arnold , 'Puritanism was a revival of the Hebraic spirit in reaction to the Hellenic spirit that had animated the immediately preceding period of the Renaissance.' See Matthew Arnold, Culture and Anarchy (London, 1869), chap. 4] [...] Palestine had up until then been remembered as the Christian Holy Land , unfortunately lost to Islam . But in seventeenth century England it came to be regarded as the homeland of the Jews , whose return to Palestine was, according to Old Testament prophecies, inevitable for the coming of the Second Advent of Christ .

· Samman, Khaldoun (2015).

"The Anti-Semitic Gaze and the Making of the New Jew" .

Clash of Modernities: The Making and Unmaking of the New Jew, Turk, and Arab and the Islamist Challenge .

Abingdon, Oxon , New York, NY : Routledge . pp.

49– 92.

ISBN 978-1-317-26235-0 .

Long before the arrival of Theodor Herzl and other prominent Jewish nationalists, as Regina Sharif has so persuasively argued, there had already existed a significant non-Jewish Zionist movement within Europe . [...] [W]hen an influential U.S. evangelist named William E. Blackstone learned upon his visit to Palestine in 1889 that Herzl had been considering Uganda and Argentina as possible sites for the Jewish homeland [...] [i]mmediately, he sent Herzl a Bible, 'marking every passage which referred to Palestine, with instructions that it alone was to be the site of the Jewish State.

' ^ a b Weber, Timothy (April 1987), Living in the Shadow of the Second Coming: American Premillennialism, 1875–1982 , Texas: Univ of Chicago Press, ISBN 9780226877327 ^ Christian Perspectives on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict, p. 131, Wesley Haddon Brown, Peter F. Penner, 2008, 11, "Western Restorationism and Christian Zionism: Germany as a Case Study ^ Proceedings of the World Congress of Jewish Studies: World Union of Jewish Studies, 1993 ^ a b c Paas, Steven (15 January 2020).

Christian Zionism Examined, Second Edition: A Review of Ideas on Israel, the Church, and the Kingdom . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 59.

ISBN 978-1-7252-5454-1 .

In their thought physical Israel continued to have a place in God's plan of salvation, due to His covenantal faithfulness. Consequently, probably beginning with Thomas Brightman, many Puritans expected that the Jews would return to their old geographical habitat in the Middle East. Later Puritans, like Samuel Rutherford, Joseph Mede, and Robert Maton, expected reconciliation of Israel with Christ and the flourishing of the Church after Christ's return.

^ a b Shapira, Anita (2014).

Israel: A History (illustrated, reprint). The Schusterman Series in Israel Studies. Translated by Berris, Anthony.

Lebanon, NH : Brandeis University Press . p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-61168-618-0 .

[T]he idea of the Jews returning to their ancient homeland as the first step to world redemption seems to have originated among a specific group of evangelical English Protestants that flourished in England in the 1840s; they passed this notion on to Jewish circles.

^ a b c d e f g Lewis, Donald (2 January 2014).

The Origins of Christian Zionism: Lord Shaftesbury And Evangelical Support For A Jewish Homeland . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 380.

ISBN 9781107631960 .

^ a b Hillel Halkin (January 2007).

"Power, Faith, and Fantasy by Michael B. Oren" .

Commentary magazine . Retrieved 1 November 2013 .

^ Stephen Spector, Evangelicals and Israel: The Story of American Christian Zionism, Oxford University Press 2009 ISBN 978-0-195-36802-4 p.vii: "The alliance that many born-again Christians offer to Israel and the Jewish people is astonishing to many Jews. Bible-believing Christians are the last people whom Jews expect to love, defend, and even idealize them. Polls have shown just how much the Jewish community distrusts them. In 2004, when asked to give a 'thermometer rating' of their feelings towards groups of people... Jews gave evangelicals a frigid average rating of twenty-four degrees. More than one-third of them (37%) rated evangelicals at zero!" ^ a b c d e f g h Thomas D. Ice (May 2009).

"Lovers of Zion: A History of Christian Zionism" .

Liberty University .

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ Almen, Lowell G.; Madden, Denis J. (5 December 2023).

Faithful Teaching: Lutherans and Catholics in Dialogue XII . Fortress Press.

ISBN 978-1-5064-9560-6 .

In light of the history of supersessionism found in Catholic and Lutheran writers ^ "Revisiting Puritan Names in England, 1550–1600" (PDF) . Durham University.

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ a b Murray, Iain (June 1971).

the Puritan Hope . Edinburgh: Banner of Truth. p. 326.

ISBN 9780851512471 .

^ Rutherford, Samuel (June 1973).

Letters of Samuel Rutherford . Edinburgh: Banner of Truth. pp.

208 .

ISBN 9780851511634 .

^ a b c d e f g h i "Christian Zionist Hall of Fame" . Israel Answers.

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ Owen, John "Complete Works", Vol.17. Exercitation 18, p. 560.

^ Crome (2014). p.179, 184–188 ^ Smith (2013). p.141 ^ "The History of Christian Zionism: The roots of the movement" . ICEJ. Archived from the original on 2020-10-21 . Retrieved 2020-10-24 .

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ John Christian Laursen, Millenarianism and Messianism in Early Modern European Culture Volume IV: Continental Millenarians: Protestants, Catholics, Heretics (2013), p. 80 ^ a b R.H. Popkin, Jewish Christians and Christian Jews: From the Renaissance to the Enlightenment (2013), p. 62 ^ Nadler, Steven (2007).

Spinoza (in Dutch). Translated by van Zetten, Frans. Amsterdam: Olympus, Amstel Publishers. pp. 205, 208, 221, 235, 246, 270, 280, 284, 317, 323– 325.

ISBN 978-90-467-0021-1 .

^ "The Jews iof Rhode Island" (PDF) . Ellen Smith.

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ Wise, Stephen S. (1946).

"America and Zionism: Statement to The Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry" .

World Affairs .

109 (1). Stephen S. Wise: 10– 17.

JSTOR 20664249 .

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ Lappin, Yaakov (22 June 2007).

"The first Christian Zionist? Secret writings by Isaac Newton reveal his views on the Jewish return to Israel" .

Ynetnews . Ynet News.

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ a b c Heller, Aron (19 February 2012).

"Sir Isaac's Jewish writings enter the 21st century" .

The Times of Israel . Times of Israel.

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ Popkin, Richard H. (1986).

"Some new Light on the Roots of Spinoza's Science of Bible Study" .

Spinoza and the Sciences . Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Vol. 91. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. pp.

171– 188.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-009-4514-2_7 .

ISBN 978-94-010-8511-3 .

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ " A Wesley 'Zionist' Hymn?

Charles Wesley's hymn, published in 1762 and included by John Wesley in his 1780 hymn-book, A Collection of Hymns for the use of the People called Methodists" . The Wesley Fellowship. 2010-07-01. Archived from the original on 2014-07-17 . Retrieved 2014-07-05 .

^ "Exposition of the Old and New Testament, Deuteronomy 30 verse 5, by John Gill" . Retrieved 2014-07-01 .

^ Jerusalem Post (25 February 2016).

"This day in history: Napoleon in the Holy Land" .

^ a b c Ynet News (3 March 2017).

"New exhibition shows letter advising Jewish state in Israel" .

^ a b Irish Democrat (29 December 2002).

"The perils of religious mysticism" .

^ "The Rabbi from Hebron and the President of Yale" .

the Jewish Community of Hebron . 21 February 2016 . Retrieved 2020-09-20 .

^ Stephen J. Stein, editor, "Introduction," Jonathan Edwards, Works, Apocalyptic Writings, V. 8, pp.17–19.

^ Rodenbeck, Max (2007-01-26).

"Of missionary zeal and its consequences" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2022-06-16 . Retrieved 2015-08-23 .

^ Ben David, Lenny (2015-08-14).

"American 'Manifest Destiny' Heads to the Holy Land in 1847" .

Israel National News . Archived from the original on 2015-08-25 . Retrieved 2015-08-23 .

^ Sandeen, Ernest (2008-08-01).

Roots of Fundamentalism: British and American Millenarianism 1800–1930 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 336.

ISBN 9780226734682 .

^ The Question of Palestine: British-Jewish-Arab Relations, 1914–1918 , Isaiah. Friedman, Transaction Publishers, 1992, see Chapter 1 with a summary in the Introduction ^ The foreign policy of Palmerston, 1830–1841: Britain, the liberal movement and the Eastern question, Charles Kingsley Webster, Pub. G. Bell, 1951 ^ Shaftsbury as cited in Hyamson, Albert , "British Projects for the Restoration of Jews to Palestine," American Jewish Historical Society, Publications 26, 1918 p. 140 [1] ^ Mel Scult (1978).

Millennial Expectations and Jewish Liberties: A Study of the Efforts to Convert the Jews in Britain, Up to the Mid Nineteenth Century . Brill Archive. p. 91.

^ a b Kuttab, Jonathan (2018).

"Palestinian Evangelicals and Christian Zionism" (PDF) .

Jerusalem Quarterly (76).

Ramallah : Institute of Jerusalem Studies : 70– 78.

doi : 10.70190/jq.I76.p70 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 16, 2019 . Retrieved June 20, 2019 .

Christian Zionism was never a fundamental or integral element in evangelical thinking. It was a peripheral movement which grew among some evangelicals, but also other Christians in Europe during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Among its luminaries are Reverend John Darby and Cyrus Scofield. The publication of the Scofield Bible, which included commentary in the margins that reflected the teachings of Christian Zionism, contributed to its popularity among Christians, including evangelicals. [...] Christian Zionism found a home among many Christians, even those who were themselves anti-Semitic.

^ a b Spurgeon, Charles (1864), "Sermon preached in June 1864 for the British Society for the Propagation of the Gospel among the Jews" , Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit , vol. 10 ^ 'The Jew', July 1870, The Quarterly Journal of Prophecy ^ Sermon preached 17th November 1839, after returning from a "Mission of Inquiry into the State of the Jewish People" ^ Sermon preached June 1864 to London Society for promoting Christianity among the Jews ^ Sermon on 'Jesus Christ Immutable', Metropolitan Tabernacle Pulpit , 1869, vol. 15, no. 848 [2] .

^ Wessinger, Catherine (2016).

The Oxford Handbook of Millennialism . Oxford University Press. p. 508.

ISBN 978-0-19-061194-1 .

^ WEDGWOOD FAVORS JEWISH HOME LAND; Sees in Palestine Restoration Plan the Final Solution of the Eastern Problem. COMES HERE TO ADVOCATE IT Hopes Ambassadors from the New State Will Be in Every National Capital of the World; New York Times , Feb 4, 1918 ^ Persecution of the Jews, The Living Age , Littell, Son & Company, 1883, p. 604 ff.

^ Allies for Armageddon: The Rise of Christian Zionism, Victoria Clark, Yale University Press, 2007, p. 111 ^ Churchill's Promised Land: Zionism and Statecraft, By Michael Makovsky, Yale University Press, 2007, p. 68 ^ Kark, Ruth (1994).

American Consuls in the Holy Land, 1832–1914 . Wayne State University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 0814325238 .

^ Valley of vision: or, The dry bones of Israel revived: an attempted proof, from Ezekiel, chap. xxxvii, 1–14, of the restoration and conversion of the Jews, George Bush, 1844 "When the Most High accordingly declares that he will bring the house of Israel into their own land, it does not follow that this will be effected by any miraculous interposition which will be recognized as such....The great work of Christians, in the meantime, is to labor for their conversion. In this they are undoubtedly authorized to look for a considerable measure of success, though it be admitted that the bulk of the nation is not to be converted till after their restoration; for it is only upon the coming together of bone to his bone that the Spirit of life comes into them, and they stand up an exceeding great army." ^ a b c Merkley, Paul Charles (1998).

The politics of Christian Zionism, 1891–1948 . London: F. Cass. p. 240.

ISBN 0-7146-4850-7 .

OCLC 38478548 .

^ Yaakov Ariel, On Behalf of Israel; American Fundamentalist Attitudes toward Jews, Judaism, and Zionism, 1865–1945 (New York: Carlson Publishing, 1991), pp. 70–72.

^ Friedman, Isaiah (1992) [1991].

The Question of Palestine: British-Jewish-Arab Relations, 1914–1918 (reprint). Armenian Research Center collection. Judaica history.

New Brunswick, NJ : Transaction Publishers . p. 458.

ISBN 978-0-88738-214-7 .

^ The Untold Story. The Role of Christian Zionists in the Establishment of Modern-day Israel by Jamie Cowen (Leadership U), July 13, 2002 ^ Rethinking Sir Moses Montefiore: Religion, Nationhood, and International Philanthropy in the Nineteenth Century Archived 2008-02-17 at the Wayback Machine by Abigail Green. (The American Historical Review. Vol. 110 No.3.) June 2005 ^ A Narrative of a Mission of Inquiry to the Jews from the Church of Scotland in 1839 (Edinburgh, 1842) ISBN 1-85792-258-1 ^ M'Cheyne's friends Archived 2008-05-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ Jerry Klinger (July 2010).

"Reverend William H. Hechler—The Christian minister who legitimized Theodor Herzl" .

Jewish Magazine . Archived from the original on 2014-04-18 . Retrieved 2014-07-06 .

^ Alexander, Philip (2017).

"Why did Lord Balfour back the Balfour Declaration?" .

Jewish Historical Studies .

49 .

doi : 10.14324/111.444.jhs.2017v49.050 .

ISSN 2397-1290 . Retrieved 17 September 2021 .

^ Lewis, Donald M. (2010).

The origins of Christian Zionism: Lord Shaftesbury and evangelical support for a Jewish homeland . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press & Assessment .

ISBN 978-0-521-51518-4 .

OCLC 422753455 .

^ Caitlin, Carenen (2012).

The fervent embrace: liberal Protestants, evangelicals, and Israel . New York: NYU Press.

ISBN 9780814708378 .

OCLC 779828048 .

^ Merkley, Paul Charles (1998).

The politics of Christian Zionism, 1891–1948 . London: F. Cass.

ISBN 9781136316296 .

OCLC 815969328 .

^ Carenen, Caitlin (2010-10-01).

"The American Christian Palestine Committee, the Holocaust, and Mainstream Protestant Zionism, 1938–1948" .

Holocaust and Genocide Studies .

24 (2): 273– 296.

doi : 10.1093/hgs/dcq025 .

ISSN 8756-6583 .

S2CID 143544757 .

^ Robins, Walker (2017).

"Jacob Gartenhaus: The Southern Baptists' Jew" .

Journal of Southern Religion .

19 .

^ Hankins, Barry (2015-01-13).

God's rascal : J. Frank Norris & the beginnings of Southern fundamentalism (Paperback ed.). Lexington, Kentucky: University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 9780813149899 .

OCLC 903955383 .

^ Robins, Walker (2019).

Between Dixie and Zion : Southern Baptists and Palestine before Israel . Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.

ISBN 978-0-8173-9279-6 .

OCLC 1143219783 .

^ "Northern Ireland's Protestants and Catholics Adopt Israeli, Palestinian Flags as Symbols" .

Haaretz .

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ Hummel, Daniel (2019).

Covenant Brothers . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 15, 65, 138.

ISBN 978-0812296242 .

^ Hummel, Daniel (2019).

Covenant Brothers . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0812296242 .

^ Hummel, Daniel G. (2015).

"A "Practical Outlet" to Premillennial Faith: G. Douglas Young and the Evolution of Christian Zionist Activism in Israel" .

Religion and American Culture .

25 (1): 37– 81.

doi : 10.1525/rac.2015.25.1.37 .

ISSN 1052-1151 .

S2CID 146393019 .

^ Hal Lindsey, Carole C. Carlson, The Late Great Planet Earth , Zondervan, 1970, p. 167–168 , ISBN 0-310-27771-X , 9780310277712 ^ MacArthur, John (2011-04-03).

"Sermon: The Final Generation" .

Grace To You Website . Archived from the original on 2017-05-14 . Retrieved 2017-05-14 .

^ Falwell, Jerry (1981).

Fundamentalist Phenomenon . Grand Rapids: Baker Publishing Group. pp.

150 .

ISBN 978-0801029585 .

^ Sundquist, Eric J. (2005).

Strangers in the land: Blacks, Jews, post-Holocaust America Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, p. 110.

^ "Video: The Christian Right and the Shaping of American Policies in Israel/Palestine" . Harvard Divinity School. 26 October 2021.

^ "A sizeable US demographic, many Evangelicals are sending money and manpower to Israel" .

The Times of Israel . 12 November 2023.

^ "Israel's Current Crisis Exposes Christian Zionism's Contradictory Ideals" .

New Lines Magazine . 27 July 2023.

^ Rubin, Jennifer (August 2, 2010).

"Onward, Christian Zionists" . Archived from the original on July 26, 2010.

^ Savage, Sean (9 March 2021).

"How CUFI has awakened the 'sleeping giant' of Christian Zionism" .

Jewish News Syndicate . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Kornbluh, Jacob (8 May 2022).

"He was the head of Christians United for Israel. Now he's running as a Jewish candidate for Congress" .

The Forward . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ a b "Half of evangelicals support Israel because they believe it is important for fulfilling end-times prophecy" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2020-02-15 .

^ "christianactionforisrael.org" .

christianactionforisrael.org . Archived from the original on July 19, 2012.

^ Rammy Haija. "The Armageddon Lobby: Dispensationalist Christian Zionism and the Shaping of US Policy Towards Israel-Palestine." Holy Land Studies 5(1): 75–95. 2006.

^ a b Ghada Hashem Talhami.

"Zionism and the Quest for Justice in the Holy Land" ( book review ).

Middle East Policy Council .

Archived from the original on September 15, 2017 . Retrieved June 6, 2019 .

^ Saint Hesychius (Priest) of Jerusalem (2001). "The Teachings of the Holy Fathers on the Interior Prayer of the Heart ". In Hopko, Thomas (ed.).

The Way of a Pilgrim and a Pilgrim Continues His Way .

The Way of a Pilgrim and the Pilgrim Continues His Way . Translated by Savin, Olga.

Boulder, CO : Shambhala Publications . pp.

193– 238.

ISBN 978-1-57062-807-8 .

The Way of a Pilgrim and the Pilgrim Continues His Way , p. 212, at Google Books .

^ Catholic Zionists are a marginal post-World War II phenomenon: Alan Keyes (USA), Menahem Macina (France), Roy Schoeman (USA).

^ a b c d "The Vatican, American Catholics and the Struggle for Palestine, 1917–1958: A Study of Cold War Roman Catholic Transnationalism" . Western University.

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ a b c "THEODOR HERZL: Audience with Pope Pius X (1904)" . Council of Centers on Jewish-Christian Relations. 26 January 1904.

Retrieved on 20 March 2018.

^ Villeneuve, André (26 July 2024).

"Why Israel Matters: The Biblical Roots of Catholic Zionism" .

Homiletic & Pastoral Review . Retrieved 16 November 2024 .

Biblical support for Israel does not contradict or undermine the Catholic faith in any way, but is wholly in continuity with God's revelation. Respected Catholic theologians have recently made compelling cases for Catholic Zionism. Gary Anderson believes that the Jewish return to Zion, though also a call to responsibility and justice, is "part of God's providential design and eternal promise to His people Israel," even despite the uncertainty that surrounds the future of the current State of Israel. Gavin D'Costa, likewise, in his article "Catholic Zionism," argues that "the existence of the Jewish State is a sign of God's fidelity to his people," even if this does not require endorsing a particular form of government for the Jewish state.

^ D’Costa, Gavin (1 January 2020).

"Catholic Zionism" .

First Things . Retrieved 16 November 2024 .

^ Wagner, Donald E. (1995).

Anxious for Armageddon: A Call to Partnership for Middle Eastern and Western Christians .

Scottdale, Pennsylvania : Herald Press. p.

80 .

ISBN 978-0-8361-3651-7 .

The introduction by Stephen Sizer to John Stott 's sermon "The Place of Israel" (see below) renders similarly: " Zionism, both political and Christian, is incompatible with biblical faith.

" Archived June 6, 2019, at the Wayback Machine · Stott, John.

"The Place of Israel" ( sermon preached at All Souls Church, Langham Place ). Stephen Sizer.

Archived from the original on March 12, 2019 . Retrieved June 6, 2019 .

It is an amazing statement that Paul makes. ' He is not a real Jew who is one outwardly by descent from Jacob. Nor is true circumcision something external and physical. He is a Jew who is one inwardly, that is by faith in Jesus. And real circumcision is a matter of the heart, spiritual and not literal.

' ^ "Christian Declaration on Palestinians' Plight Hit by Jewish Church Groups" .

Los Angeles Times . May 26, 1979.

ProQuest 158878501 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ Abernathy, Ralph (July 1979). "La Grange Declaration".

Sojourners .

8 : 24– 25.

^ "Anti-Falwell Christians Talk of Financing Rotating Staff of Spies in Israel to Assist PLO" .

The New York Jewish Week . June 21, 1981. p. 3.

ProQuest 371534220 . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ "La Grange Declaration II: A Christian Call for Justice and Peace in the Holy Land".

Sojourners .

10 : 11. July 1981.

^ "Response to Christian Zionism" .

National Council of Churches USA . 2013-11-04. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 2024-10-28 .

^ "Position on Christian Zionism" .

Reformed Church in America . Retrieved 1 November 2013 .

^ Weaver, Alain Epp (July–September 2005).

"Introduction" (PDF) .

Peace Office Newsletter .

35 (3, Christian Zionism and Peace in the Holy Land ).

Mennonite Central Committee . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-03-21.

^ Berman, Lazar (11 February 2014).

"Presbyterian Church group: Zionism is the problem" .

www.timesofisrael.com . Retrieved 2023-10-23 .

^ "Resources on the Middle East" . Global Ministries: a common missional witness of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) and the United Church of Christ .

Archived from the original on January 30, 2019 . Retrieved June 6, 2019 .

^ "With God On Our Side" .

alexchediak.com .

^ The Church Of Scotland (1845).

Narrative of a Mission of inquiry . Philadelphia: Presbyterian Board of Publication. p. 535.

^ "Church of Scotland: Jews do not have a right to the land of Israel A new church report challenging Jewish historic claims and criticizing Zionism has drawn anger and harsh condemnation from the local Jewish community" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 2014-06-29 .

^ "Church of Scotland Thinks Twice, Grants Israel the Right to Exist" . The Jewish Press. 2013-05-12 . Retrieved 2014-06-29 .

^ "Support work for peace in divided region, Synod urged" .

Church Times . 2012-07-13.

^ a b "Board of Deputies statement on the Synod EAPPI vote" .

Jewish Chronicle . 2012-07-12 . Retrieved 2014-08-02 .

^ Quinn, Ronan; Botnen, Trond (2007), "40 ways to end the occupation" (PDF) , Chain Reaction (6): 25 ^ Ismael, Tareq Y.; Rippin, Andrew (2010).

Islam in the Eyes of the West: Images and Realities in an Age of Terror . Routledge. p. 42.

ISBN 9780415564144 .

Further reading Samuel Goldman.

God's Country: Christian Zionism in America (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2018).

Conforti, Yitzhak (March 2024).

"Zionism and the Hebrew Bible: from religious holiness to national sanctity" .

Middle Eastern Studies .

60 (3).

Taylor & Francis : 483– 497.

doi : 10.1080/00263206.2023.2204516 .

ISSN 1743-7881 .

LCCN 65009869 .

OCLC 875122033 .

S2CID 258374291 .

Andrew Crome.

Christian Zionism and English National Identity, 1600–1850.

Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.

Robert O. Smith.

More Desired than Our Owne Salvation: The Roots of Christian Zionism.

Oxford University Press, 2013.

Barbara Tuchman.

Bible and Sword: England and Palestine from the Bronze Age to Balfour.

W&N, 2001.

Nahum Sokolow .

History of Zionism, 1600–1918.

Longmans, Green and Company, 1919.

Paul Richard Wilkinson.

For Zion's Sake: Christian Zionism and the Role of John Nelson Darby.

Paternoster, 2007.

Douglas J. Culver.

Albion and Ariel: British Puritanism and the Birth of Political Zionism.

P. Lang, 1995.

Mikael Knighton, Christians Standing with Israel, Copyright 2007 – The Theological Background of Christian Zionism Archived 2017-11-07 at the Wayback Machine Mark Dunman.

Has God Really Finished with Israel?

New Wine Press 2013.

ISBN 978-1-905991-87-7 Paul Richard Wilkinson.

For Zion's Sake: Christian Zionism and the Role of John Nelson Darby ISBN 978-1-84227-569-6 , Paternoster Press, Authentic, Carlisle 2008.

Zev Chafets.

A Match Made in Heaven: American Jews, Christian Zionists, and One Man's Exploration of the Weird and Wonderful Judeo-Evangelical Alliance.

HarperCollins, 2007.

Victoria Clark.

Allies for Armageddon: The Rise of Christian Zionism . Yale University Press, 2007.

Grace Halsell.

Prophecy and Politics: Militant Evangelists on the Road to Nuclear War . Lawrence Hill & Co., 1986.

ISBN 0-88208-210-8 .

Donald E. Wagner.

Anxious for Armageddon: A Call to Partnership for Middle Eastern and Western Christians . Herald Press, 1995.

ISBN 978-0-8361-3651-7 Donald M. Lewis.

The Origins of Christian Zionism: Lord Shaftesbury and Evangelical Support for a Jewish Homeland Cambridge University Press. 2009.

ISBN 978-0-521-51518-4 Donald M. Lewis, A Short History of Christian Zionism from the Reformation to the Twenty-First Century .  InterVarsity Press, 2021.

ISBN 978-0-8308-4697-9 online Rammy Haija, " The Armageddon Lobby: Dispensationalist Christian Zionism and the Shaping of US Policy Towards Israel-Palestine ." Holy Land Studies 5(1): 75–95. 2006.

Irvine Anderson.

Biblical interpretation and Middle East policy: the promised land, America, and Israel, 1917–2002.

University Press of Florida. 2005.

ISBN 0-8130-2798-5 .

Tony Campolo . "The Ideological Roots of Christian Zionism." Tikkun . January–February 2005.

Gershom Gorenberg.

The End of Days: Fundamentalism and the Struggle for the Temple Mount . Oxford University Press. 2002.

ISBN 0-19-515205-0 Paul Charles Merkley.

The Politics of Christian Zionism 1891–1948 . Frank Cass. 1998.

ISBN 0-7146-4850-7 Paul Merkley, Christian Attitudes Towards the State of Israel , Mcgill Queens Univ Press, Montreal, Sep 2001.

ISBN 978-0773521889 Lawrence Jeffrey Epstein.

Zion's Call: Christian Contributions to the Origins and Development of Israel . University Press of America. 1984.

Michael Oren .

Power, Faith and Fantasy: America in the Middle East, 1776–Present . New York, 2007.

Barbara W. Tuchman .

Bible and Sword . New York, 1956.

David Pawson .

Defending Christian Zionism Terra Nova Publications, 2008.

ISBN 978-1-901949-62-9 Iain Murray, The Puritan Hope . Banner of Truth, June 1971.

ISBN 978-0851512471 Shalom Goldman, Zeal for Zion: Christians, Jews, & the Idea of the Promised Land.

University of North Carolina Press, 2009.

Stephen Spector, Evangelicals and Israel: The Story of American Christian Zionism.

Oxford University Press, 2009.

Yaakov Ariel, An Unusual Relationship: Evangelical Christians and Jews.

New York University Press, 2013.

Daniel G. Hummel, Covenant Brothers: Evangelicals, Jews, and U.S.-Israeli Relations.

University of Pennsylvania Press, 2019.

Walker Robins, Between Dixie and Zion: Southern Baptists and Palestine Before Israel.

University of Alabama Press, 2020.

External links Christian Zionists – Bridges for Peace Jewish and Christian Zionists – SAZ – Support Association for Zionism Christian Zionism and Its Religious Arguments to Create Conflict, Strategic Outlook Christians Standing with Israel: Support Israel, What is a Christian Zionist? Stand Against Anti-Semitism Rabbi Eliezer Melamed , Christians Who Love Israel on Arutz Sheva .

v t e Zionism Concepts Zion Land of Israel Aliyah Yerida Homeland ( proposals ) Jewish state Law of Return Yishuv Territorialism Promised Land Gathering of Israel Settlement Negation of the Diaspora Revival of the Hebrew language Hebraization of surnames Judaization Racial conceptions of Jewish identity in Zionism Ideologies General Labor Revisionist Reform Religious Cultural Federal Post-Zionism Proto-Zionism Neo-Zionism Non-Zionism Green Christian Islamic Canaanism Yiddishist Golus Organizations Histadrut Hovevei Zion Bilu World Zionist Organization Zionist General Council Zionist Federation of Germany Zionist Organization of America Zionist Organization of Canada Religious Zionists of America Jewish National Fund Poale Zion Jewish Agency for Israel Jewish National Council Mizrachi Bnei Akiva Habonim Dror Hashomer Hatzair Haganah HaNoar HaTzioni World Agudath Israel Irgun Betar Betar US Lehi Jewish Party (Czechoslovakia) Jewish Party (Romania) Jewish Resistance Movement Palmach Women's International Zionist Organization Hadassah Women's Zionist Organization of America Aytzim American Zionist Movement Am Yisrael Foundation Zionist Federation of Great Britain and Ireland Institute for Zionist Strategies International Fellowship of Christians and Jews Nefesh B'Nefesh Birthright Israel History and timelines History of Israel Chronology of Aliyah History of Zionism Balfour Declaration UN General Assembly Resolution 3379 UN General Assembly Resolution 46/86 Timeline of Zionism Israeli–Palestinian peace process Timeline of the Arab–Israeli conflict Holidays Yom HaZikaron Independence Day Jerusalem Day Yom HaAliyah Herzl Day Jabotinsky Day Ben-Gurion Day Rabin Day Related topics List of Zionists American Zionism Anti-Zionism The Holocaust Antisemitism New antisemitism Not one inch Jewish Autonomism Jewish emancipation Jewish political movements Greater Israel Muscular Judaism Muslim supporters of Israel Progressive except Palestine Zionism as settler colonialism Zionist antisemitism Zionist political violence Zionist as a pejorative Ulpan Conservatism in Israel Liberalism in Israel v t e Christianity and Judaism Theologies Abrogation Christian Zionism Covenant theology Dispensationalism Dual-covenant theology New Covenant theology Nontrinitarianism Supersessionism Relations By branch Catholics Eastern Orthodoxy Protestantism Mormonism By conflict Antisemitism Christophobia Anti-Judaism Anglo-Israelism Jesus and Judaism Paul and Judaism Religious dialogue Center for Jewish–Christian Understanding and Cooperation International Council of Christians and Jews Syncretism Judaizers Hebrew Christian movement Hebrew Roots Messianic Judaism Jews for Jesus Sacred Name Movement Crypto-Judaism ( Converso , Anusim , Xueta ) Xueta Christianity See also Abrahamic religions Christian observances of Jewish holidays Judeo-Christian v t e Religion in Israel Judaism Orthodox Ashkenazi Hasidic Sepharadi Conservative Reform Masortim Hiloni Haymanot Karaite Christianity Catholicism Latin Armenian Catholic Chaldean Catholic Maronites Haifa Jerusalem Melkite Greek Catholic Akka Jerusalem Syriac Catholic Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Russian Orthodox Oriental Orthodoxy Armenian Apostolic Syriac Orthodox Coptic Orthodox Ethiopian Tewahedo Protestantism Anglican Hebrew Christian movement Jehovah's Witnesses Lutheran Messianic Judaism Templers The Church of Almighty God Islam Sunni Shia Ahmadiyya Other Abrahamic religions Druzism Baháʼí Faith Samaritanism Black Hebrews Other Buddhism Hinduism Irreligion Neopaganism v t e Evangelicalism in the United States Churches Baptist family Southern Baptist Convention Independent Baptist Missionary Baptists Conservative Baptist Association of America Free Will Baptist General Association of Regular Baptist Churches Lutheran family Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod Presbyterian family Presbyterian Church in America Presbyterian Church USA Pentecostal family Assemblies of God USA Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee) Church of God in Christ Foursquare Church Pentecostal Church of God Pentecostal Holiness Church Pentecostal Assemblies of the World United Pentecostal Church International Restorationist family Churches of Christ Christian churches and churches of Christ Congregationalist family Conservative Congregational Christian Conference Holiness family Church of the Nazarene Wesleyan Church Free Methodist Church Church of God (Anderson, Indiana) Keswickian family Christian and Missionary Alliance Reformed family Christian Reformed Church in North America Adventist family Seventh-day Adventist Church Nondenominational family Association of Vineyard Churches Calvary Chapel Association History Azusa Street Revival Black church Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy Fundamentalist–modernist controversy Great Awakening First Great Awakening Second Great Awakening Cane Ridge Revival Third Great Awakening Fourth Great Awakening Healing revival Los Angeles Crusade (1949) Revival of 1800 Thought Baptism by fire Baptism with the Holy Spirit Believers' Church Biblical literalism Biblical inerrancy Biblical patriarchy Biblical womanhood Born again Christianity and abortion Christian Zionism Decision theology Evangelical theology Full Gospel Kingdom theology Quiverfull Second work of grace Practices Altar call Child preacher Contemporary worship Contemporary worship music Mourner's bench Open-air preaching Prayer warrior Revival meeting Camp meeting Tent revival Sinner's prayer Forms Bible church Megachurch Televangelism Movements Apostolic-Prophetic Movement Bapticostal movement Christian fundamentalism Evangelical left Exvangelical Jesus movement Post-evangelicalism New Apostolic Reformation Neo-charismatic movement Red-Letter Christians Seven Mountain Mandate Transformational Christianity Institutions Christianity Today International Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood Evangelical Climate Initiative Evangelical and Ecumenical Women's Caucus Fuller Theological Seminary Moody Bible Institute National Association of Evangelicals National Religious Broadcasters Promise Keepers World Vision United States Youth for Christ Major figures Aimee Semple McPherson Billy Graham Billy Sunday C. I. Scofield Charles Grandison Finney Dwight L. Moody Franklin Graham Jerry Falwell Jonathan Edwards NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐fcm8r
Cached time: 20250817001551
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.496 seconds
Real time usage: 1.791 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13176/1000000
Revision size: 100579/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 429522/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 23505/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 436208/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.850/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21243778/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1371.410      1 -total
 42.38%  581.216      2 Template:Reflist
 10.33%  141.711     27 Template:Cite_book
  9.97%  136.727     29 Template:Cite_web
  9.74%  133.556     11 Template:Cite_journal
  9.57%  131.310     25 Template:Fix
  7.84%  107.499     15 Template:Cn
  7.12%   97.619      1 Template:Langx
  6.22%   85.239      1 Template:Zionism_sidebar
  6.07%   83.249      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:382494:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817001551 and revision id 1306288994. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_Zionism&oldid=1306288994 " Categories : Dispensationalism Christian Zionism Christian eschatology Christian and Jewish interfaith dialogue Christian terminology Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Wikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles that may contain original research from August 2025 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from August 2025 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles containing Koine Greek-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2025 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from August 2025 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 00:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian Zionism 26 languages Add topic

