Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Accreditation 2 Notes 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Private school in Brookline, MA Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis is a private educational institution that focuses on training psychoanalysts , particularly in the field of modern psychoanalysis .  Founded in 1973, it only awards graduate degrees.  Its main campus is in Brookline, Massachusetts .

Accreditation [ edit ] The Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis, including its branch campus in New York , is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges , Inc. through its Commission on Institutions of Higher Education. It first received accreditation from the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC) in 1995, which opened psychoanalytic study to any qualified and engaged student irrespective of prior courses of study.

[ 1 ] Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis is the only regionally accredited school of psychoanalytic studies in the United States to grant graduate degrees.

[ book 1 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "NEASC" . Retrieved 18 January 2013 .

[ permanent dead link ] References [ edit ] ^ Spotnitz, Hyman (2004).

Modern psychoanalysis of the schizophrenic patient:Theory of the technique . NY, NY: YBK Pub Inc. pp. preface.

ISBN 0-9703923-6-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Meadow, Phyllis W.

The New Psychoanalysis . Rowman & Littlefield, 2003.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School Authority control databases ISNI This psychology -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boston_Graduate_School_of_Psychoanalysis&oldid=1221264455 " Categories : Mental health organizations based in Massachusetts Psychology research institutes Psychoanalysis in the United States Psychology organizations based in the United States Private universities and colleges in Massachusetts Psychology stubs Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 28 April 2024, at 21:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Add languages Add topic

