Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Forms 2 History 3 Examples 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Appeal to nature 26 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rhetorical tactic and potential fallacy For the ethical argument that it is fallacious to define 'good' in terms of natural properties, see Naturalistic fallacy .

An appeal to nature is a rhetorical technique for presenting and proposing the argument that "a thing is good because it is 'natural', or bad because it is 'unnatural'." [ 1 ] In debate and discussion, an appeal-to-nature argument can be considered to be a bad argument, because the implicit primary premise "What is natural is good " has no factual meaning beyond rhetoric in some or most contexts.

Forms [ edit ] The following is a construction of the appeal to nature argument: That which is natural is good or right.

N is natural.

Therefore, N is good or right.

That which is unnatural is bad or wrong.

U is unnatural.

Therefore, U is bad or wrong.

[ 2 ] In some contexts, the use of the terms of " nature " and "natural" can be vague, leading to unintended associations with other concepts. The word "natural" can also be a loaded term – much like the word "normal", in some contexts, it can carry an implicit value judgment. An appeal to nature would thus beg the question , because the conclusion is entailed by the premise.

[ 2 ] Opinions differ regarding appeal to nature in rational argument. By some more permissive views, it can sometimes be taken as a helpful rule of thumb in certain limited domains, even if it admits some exceptions. When such a principle is applied as a rule of thumb, natural facts are presumed to provide reliable value judgments regarding what is good , barring evidence to the contrary , and likewise for unnatural facts providing reliable value judgments regarding what is bad. Within a limited domain, treating a rule of thumb such as "all else being equal, you should generally try to eat natural foods" as if it is an exceptionless principle can sometimes involve a fallacy of accident .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Julian Baggini explains the standard view of what makes this a fallacy as follows: "Even if we can agree that some things are natural and some are not, what follows from this? The answer is: nothing. There is no factual reason to suppose that what is natural is good (or at least better) and what is unnatural is bad (or at least worse)." [ 4 ] History [ edit ] Part of a series on Human enhancement Advocacy Rationale Adaptionist "Beneficient" Emancipatory Compensatory Democratic "Directive" Libertarian " Metahumanistic " Posthumanistic " Prometheist " Preventative Transhumanistic Paradigm Biohappiness Cyborgs Eugenics Intelligence amplification Moral enhancement Prostheses ( De facto ) germline interventions Selective Cloning Counseling Genetic Genomic Pre-conception Genetic enhancement Genetic engineering Epigenome editing PGD Embryo quality Oocyte selection Polygenic (risk) score (technical article) Prenatal testing Selective abortion Sex selection Sperm sorting "Nobelist sperm banks" Somatic interventions Body hacking Somatic gene therapy for color blindness in sports doping Stem-cell therapy Embryonic cells Fetal tissue implant Chemical Stimulants Amphetamine Methamphetamine Ritalin Nootropics Modafinil Piracetam Xanthine derivatives Caffeine Neurological Brain implant Brain–computer interface Deep brain stimulation " Man-Computer Symbiosis " (1960) Neuralink Neurohacking Opposition Appeal to nature Bioconservatism " Brave New World Argument " Chesterton Francis Fukuyama Our Posthuman Future (2002) Cloning prohibition Leon Kass Stem cell controversy " Designer baby " " Frankenstein's monster " He Jiankui affair Hwang affair Against life extension Undesirability of immortality Nikolas Kompridis Legal EU convention on Bioethics Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act (vetoed) United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning In the UK 1990 act 2003 act 2008 act 2001 act C. S. Lewis The Abolition of Man (1943) That Hideous Strength (1945) "Playing God" Religious response to ART s " Wisdom of repugnance " Related ART Exo wombs IVG Augmented learning Deep ecology Treating executive dysfunction Evolutionary humanism Longevity Anti-aging movement Life extension Rejuvenation Young blood transfusion Natalism Natura naturans Pontifical and Promethean man Collapse of the therapy-enhancement divide Promethean gap Technophobia Therapy-enhancement distinction v t e The meaning and importance of various understandings and concepts of "nature" has been a persistent topic of discussion historically in both science and philosophy. In Ancient Greece , "the laws of nature were regarded not [simply] as generalized descriptions of what actually happens in the natural world ... but rather as norms that people ought to follow ... Thus the appeal to nature tended to mean an appeal to the nature of man treated as a source for norms of conduct. To Greeks this ... represented a conscious probing and exploration into an area wherein, according to their whole tradition of thought, lay the true source for norms of conduct." [ 5 ] In modern times, philosophers have challenged the notion that human beings' status as natural beings should determine or dictate their normative being. For example, Rousseau famously suggested that "We do not know what our nature permits us to be." [ 6 ] More recently, Nikolas Kompridis has applied Rousseau's axiom to debates about genetic intervention (or other kinds of intervention) into the biological basis of human life, writing: [T]here is a domain of human freedom not dictated by our biological nature, but [this] is somewhat unnerving because it leaves uncomfortably open what kind of beings human beings could become ... Put another way: What are we prepared to permit our nature to be? And on what basis should we give our permission?

[ 7 ] Kompridis writes that the naturalistic view of living things, articulated by one scientist as that of "machines whose components are biochemicals" [ 8 ] ( Rodney Brooks ), threatens to make a single normative understanding of human being the only possible understanding. He writes, "When we regard ourselves as 'machines whose components are biochemicals,' we not only presume to know what our nature permits us to be, but also that this knowledge permits us to answer the question of what is to become of us ... This is not a question we were meant to answer, but, rather, a question to which we must remain answerable." [ 7 ] Examples [ edit ] Supermarket shelf with four different brands advertising themselves, in some form, as "natural" Some popular examples of the appeal to nature can be found on labels and advertisements for food, clothing, alternative herbal remedies , and many other areas.

[ 4 ] [ 9 ] Labels may use the phrase "all-natural", to imply that products are environmentally friendly and safe. However, whether or not a product is "natural" is irrelevant, in itself, in determining its safety or effectiveness.

[ 4 ] [ 10 ] For example, many dangerous poisons are compounds that are found in nature.

It is also common practice for medicine to be brought up as an appeal to nature, stating that medicine is "unnatural" and therefore should not be used.

[ 9 ] This is particularly notable as an argument employed against the practice of vaccination.

[ 11 ] On the topic of meat consumption , philosopher Peter Singer argues that it is fallacious to say that eating meat is morally acceptable simply because it is part of the "natural way", as the way that humans and other animals do behave naturally has no bearing on how we should behave. Thus, Singer claims, the moral permissibility or impermissibility of eating meat must be assessed on its own merits, not by appealing to what is "natural".

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Antinaturalism (politics) Antivaccination Carnism Chemophobia Confirmation bias Ethical naturalism Gender roles Greenwashing Green marketing Homophobia Human nature Natural law Neurodiversity Noble savage Norm (philosophy) Predation problem Problem of evil Scientism Technophobia Transhumanism Vitalism Vis medicatrix naturae Wild animal suffering Notes [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ Edward Moore, George (1922).

Principia Ethica . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 45.

^ a b c Curtis, Gary N.

"Appeal to Nature" .

The Fallacy Files . Retrieved 12 April 2020 .

^ Groarke, Leo (2008).

"Fallacy Theory" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Informal Logic .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2008 ed.).

Informal logic is sometimes presented as a theoretical alternative to formal logic. This kind of characterization may reflect early battles in philosophy departments which debated, sometimes with acrimony, whether informal logic should be considered "real" logic. Today, informal logic enjoys a more conciliatory relationship with formal logic. Its attempt to understand informal reasoning is usually (but not always) couched in natural language, but research in informal logic sometimes employs formal methods and it remains an open question whether the accounts of argument in which informal logic specializes can in principle be formalized.

^ a b c Baggini, Julian (2004).

Making Sense: Philosophy Behind the Headlines . Oxford University Press. pp.

181– 182.

ISBN 978-0-19-280506-5 .

^ Saunders, Jason Lewis (26 October 2008).

"Western Philosophical Schools and Doctrines: Ancient and Medieval Schools: Sophists: Particular Doctrines: Theoretical issues." .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 27 May 2011 . Retrieved 7 February 2011 .

^ Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Emile: or, On education , USA: Basic Books, 1979, p. 62.

^ a b Kompridis, Nikolas (2009).

"Technology's Challenge to Democracy: What of the human?" (PDF) .

Parrhesia .

8 : 20– 33.

^ "The current scientific view of living things is that they are machines whose components are biochemicals." Rodney Brooks, "The relationship between matter and life", Nature 409 (2010), p. 410.

^ a b Meier, Brian P.; Dillard, Amanda J.; Lappas, Courtney M. (2019).

"Naturally better? A review of the natural-is-better bias" .

Social and Personality Psychology Compass .

13 (8): e12494.

doi : 10.1111/spc3.12494 .

ISSN 1751-9004 .

S2CID 201321386 .

^ Flew, Antony (1998).

How to Think Straight: An Introduction to Critical Reasoning . Prometheus Books.

ISBN 978-1-57392-239-5 .

^ Gavura, Scott (13 February 2014).

"False "balance" on influenza with an appeal to nature" .

Science-Based Medicine . Retrieved 30 January 2019 .

^ Singer, Peter (2011).

Practical Ethics (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

60– 61.

ISBN 978-0521707688 .

There would still be an error of reasoning in the assumption that because this process is natural it is right.

External links [ edit ] Nature, Human Nature, and Biotechnology Appeal to Nature Dietary Supplements: How To Know What Is Safe American Cancer Society: §The "Natural Is Safe" or "Natural Is Better" Myth (Archived from the original 18 April 2008) Thomas Hobbes A Brief of the Art of Rhetorick Chap. XI Archived 4 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Of the Colours, or Common Opinions concerning Pleasure." Chap. XVI Archived 4 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Of Proofs Inartificial." v t e Common fallacies ( list ) Formal In propositional logic Affirming a disjunct Affirming the consequent Denying the antecedent Argument from fallacy Masked man Mathematical fallacy In quantificational logic Existential Illicit conversion Proof by example Quantifier shift Syllogistic fallacy Affirmative conclusion from a negative premise Negative conclusion from affirmative premises Exclusive premises Existential Necessity Four terms Illicit major Illicit minor Undistributed middle Informal Equivocation Equivocation False equivalence False attribution Moral equivalence Quoting out of context Loki's Wager No true Scotsman Reification Map–territory relation Question-begging Circular reasoning / Begging the question Loaded language Leading question Compound question / Loaded question / Complex question No true Scotsman Correlative-based False dilemma Perfect solution Denying the correlative Suppressed correlative Illicit transference Composition Division Ecological Secundum quid Accident Converse accident Faulty generalization Anecdotal evidence Sampling bias Cherry picking McNamara Base rate / Conjunction Double counting False analogy Slothful induction Overwhelming exception Ambiguity Accent False precision Moving the goalposts Quoting out of context Slippery slope Sorites paradox Syntactic ambiguity Questionable cause Animistic Furtive Correlation implies causation Cum hoc Post hoc Gambler's Inverse Regression Single cause Slippery slope Texas sharpshooter Appeals Law/Legality Stone / Proof by assertion Consequences Argumentum ad baculum Wishful thinking Emotion Children Fear Flattery Novelty Pity Ridicule In-group favoritism Invented here / Not invented here Island mentality Loyalty Parade of horribles Spite Stirring symbols Wisdom of repugnance Genetic fallacy Ad hominem Appeal to motive Association Reductio ad Hitlerum Reductio ad Stalinum Bulverism Poisoning the well Tone Tu quoque Whataboutism Authority Accomplishment Ipse dixit Poverty / Wealth Etymology Nature Tradition / Novelty Chronological snobbery Other fallacies of relevance Arguments Ad nauseam Sealioning Argument from anecdote Argument from silence Argument to moderation Argumentum ad populum Cliché The Four Great Errors I'm entitled to my opinion Ignoratio elenchi Invincible ignorance Moralistic / Naturalistic Motte-and-bailey fallacy Psychologist's fallacy Rationalization Red herring Two wrongs make a right Special pleading Straw man Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐647cb4546b‐h5zsd
Cached time: 20250814055015
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.361 seconds
Real time usage: 0.416 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1758/1000000
Revision size: 12310/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 103824/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1609/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59357/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.216/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5743718/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  344.043      1 -total
 38.46%  132.302      2 Template:Reflist
 23.19%   79.770      4 Template:Cite_book
 22.37%   76.968      1 Template:Human_enhancement_sidebar
 22.01%   75.725      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.51%   53.358      6 Template:Navbox
 12.68%   43.610      1 Template:Fallacies
 11.70%   40.250      1 Template:Short_description
  7.78%   26.762      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.04%   13.912      2 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4791872:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814055015 and revision id 1305806396. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Appeal_to_nature&oldid=1305806396 " Categories : Genetic fallacies Relevance fallacies Advertising techniques Naturopathy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 05:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Appeal to nature 26 languages Add topic

