Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Goals Toggle Goals subsection 1.1 1. Develop ocean models that can be used in climate models and collect the data necessary for testing them 1.2 2. Find the representativeness of the dataset for long-term behavior and find methods for determining long-term changes in ocean currents 2 Modeling 3 Field Program 4 Resulting Conclusions 5 See also 6 External links 7 References Toggle the table of contents World Ocean Circulation Experiment 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Component of the international World Climate Research Program This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: poor formatting.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) was a component of the international World Climate Research Program , and aimed to establish the role of the World Ocean in the Earth 's climate system . WOCE's field phase ran between 1990 and 1998, and was followed by an analysis and modeling phase that ran until 2002.

[ 1 ] When the WOCE was conceived, there were three main motivations for its creation.  The first of these is the inadequate coverage of the World Ocean, specifically in the Southern Hemisphere . Data was also much more sparse during the winter months than the summer months, and there was—and still is to some extent—a critical need for data covering all seasons.  Secondly, the data that did exist was not initially collected for studying ocean circulation and was not well suited for model comparison. Lastly, there were concerns involving the accuracy and reliability of some measurements. The WOCE was meant to address these problems by providing new data collected in ways designed to "meet the needs of global circulation models for climate prediction ." [ 2 ] Goals [ edit ] Two major goals were set for the campaign.

[ 1 ] 1. Develop ocean models that can be used in climate models and collect the data necessary for testing them [ edit ] Specifically, understand: Large scale fluxes of heat and fresh water Dynamical balance of World Ocean circulation Components of ocean variability on months to years The rates and nature of formation, ventilation and circulation of water masses that influence the climate system on time scales from ten to one hundred years [ 3 ] In order to achieve Goal 1, the WCRP outlined and established Core Projects that would receive priority. The first of these was the "Global Description" project, which was meant to obtain data on the circulation of heat, fresh water and chemicals, as well as the statistics of eddies .  The second project—"Southern Ocean"—placed particular emphasis on studying the Antarctic Circumpolar Current and the Southern Ocean ’s interaction with the World Ocean. The third and final Core Project serving goal one was the " Gyre Dynamics Experiment." The second and third of these focuses are designed specifically to address the ocean’s role in decadal climate changes.  Initial planning of the WOCE states that achievement of Goal 1 would involve "strong interaction between modeling and field activities," which are described further below.

2. Find the representativeness of the dataset for long-term behavior and find methods for determining long-term changes in ocean currents [ edit ] Specifically: Determine representative of specific WOCE data sets Identify those oceanographic parameters, indices and fields that are essential for continuing measurements in a climate observing system on decadal time scales Develop cost effective techniques suitable for deployment in an ongoing climate observing system [ 3 ] Modeling [ edit ] Models in WOCE were used for both experimental design and data analysis. Models with use of data can incorporate various properties, including thermal wind balance, maintenance of the barotropic vorticity budget, and conservation of heat, fresh water, or mass. Measurements useful for these parameters are heat, fresh water or tracer concentration; current, surface fluxes of heat and fresh water; sea surface elevation.

[ 3 ] Both inverse modeling and data assimilation were employed during WOCE. Inverse modeling is the fitting of data using a numerical least squares or maximum likelihood fitting procedure. The data assimilation technique requires data to be compared with an initial integration of a model. The model is then progressed in time using new data and repeating the process.

[ 3 ] The success of these methods requires sufficient data to fully constrain the model, hence the need for a comprehensive field program.

Field Program [ edit ] Goals for the WOCE Field Program were as follows.

[ 1 ] The experiment will be global in nature and the major observational components will be deployed in all oceans.

The requirement of simultaneity of measurements will be imposed only where essential.

The flexibility inherent in the existing arrangements for cooperative research in the worldwide oceanographic (and meteorological) community will be exploited as far as possible.

Major elements of the WOCE Field Program [ 3 ] Satellite Altimetry plans built around the availability of ERS–1 and ERS–2 (European), TOPEX /POSEIDON (US/French) to study fields of surface forcing and oceanic surface topography [ 2 ] Hydrography high quality conductivity-temperature-pressure profilers as well as free-fall instruments to provide a climatological temperature-salinity database [ 2 ] Geochemical Tracers using chemical information (such as radioactive decay and atmospheric history) of passive compounds to study the formation rates and transport of water masses on climatological timescales Ocean Surface Fluxes using in-situ and satellite measurements to quantify fluxes of heat, water and momentum (necessary for modeling thermohaline and wind-driven circulation) Satellite Winds using surface buoys, Voluntary Observing Ships (VOS) and satellite microwave scatterometer systems to measure the surface wind field Surface Meteorological Observations from VOS improvement of sampling and accuracy in surface meteorological measurements, as well increasing area coverage Upper Ocean Observations from Merchant Ships-of-Opportunity expendable bathythermograph (XBT) sampling lines to study changes in heat content of the upper ocean In-Situ Sea Level Measurements upgrading and installing new sea-level gauges to calibrate altimetry measurements Drifting Buoys and Floats surface drifting buoys provide measurements such as sea level pressure , sea-surface temperature , humidity , precipitation , surface salinity, and near-surface and mid-depth currents Moored instrumentation provides detailed temporal information at a number of sites and depths Resulting Conclusions [ edit ] This list, though not comprehensive, outlines a sampling of the most highly cited articles and books resulting from the WOCE.

Ganachaud, Alexandre; Wunsch, Carl (23 November 2000). "Improved estimates of global ocean circulation, heat transport and mixing from hydrographic data".

Nature .

408 (6811): 453– 457.

Bibcode : 2000Natur.408..453G .

doi : 10.1038/35044048 .

PMID 11100723 .

S2CID 4416105 .

Ocean Circulation and Climate, Observing and Modelling the Global Ocean, 1st Edition , Eds.

Gerold Siedler , John Gould & John Church, Academic Press, 736pp. (International Geophysics Series 77) 2001 Stammer, D. (2003).

"Volume, heat, and freshwater transports of the global ocean circulation 1993–2000, estimated from a general circulation model constrained by World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) data" (PDF) .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

108 (C1): 3007.

Bibcode : 2003JGRC..108.3007S .

doi : 10.1029/2001JC001115 .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0014-3AA4-A .

Ganachaud, Alexandre (2003). "Large-scale mass transports, water mass formation, and diffusivities estimated from World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) hydrographic data".

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans .

108 (C7): 3213.

Bibcode : 2003JGRC..108.3213G .

doi : 10.1029/2002JC001565 .

Ganachaud, Alexandre; Wunsch, Carl (December 2002).

"Oceanic nutrient and oxygen transports and bounds on export production during the World Ocean Circulation Experiment: NUTRIENT AND OXYGEN TRANSPORTS FROM WOCE" .

Global Biogeochemical Cycles .

16 (4): 5–1–5–14.

doi : 10.1029/2000GB001333 .

S2CID 15462518 .

Revisiting the South Pacific subtropical circulation: A synthesis of World Ocean Circulation Experiment observations along 32°S ,     S. E. Wijffels, J. M. Toole, R. Davis,     Journal of Geophysical Research, September 2012 See also [ edit ] Geochemical Ocean Sections Study (GEOSECS) Global Ocean Data Analysis Project (GLODAP) World Ocean Atlas (WOA) External links [ edit ] Access page to the WOCE data legacy at the National Oceanographic Data Center (US) Electronic Atlas of WOCE Data at the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research , Bremerhaven WOCE page at the Wayback Machine (archived 2009-04-17) at the National Oceanography Centre, Southampton (UK) Searchable set of WOCE data, archived in the information system PANGAEA WOCE observations 1990–1998; a summary of the WOCE global data resource, WOCE International Project Office, WOCE Report No. 179/02., Southampton, UK.

(pdf 18.9 MB) References [ edit ] ^ a b c Ocean Circulation and Climate: World Ocean Circulation Experiment. Retrieved 7 December 2013.

^ a b c The World Ocean Circulation Experiment. J.D. Woods. Retrieved 7 December 2013.

^ a b c d e Scientific Plan for the World Ocean Circulation Experiment. J.D. Woods. Retrieved 7 December 2013.

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Ocean_Circulation_Experiment&oldid=1211691551 " Categories : Oceanography Physical oceanography World Ocean Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from February 2021 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from February 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from February 2021 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 3 March 2024, at 22:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World Ocean Circulation Experiment 1 language Add topic

