Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Abstracting and indexing 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Rethinking Marxism 4 languages Deutsch Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Quarterly academic journal on Marxism A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Academic journal Rethinking Marxism Discipline economics , politics , sociology Language English Edited by Yahya M. Madra, Vincent Lyon-Callo [ 1 ] Publication details History 1988—present Publisher Routledge on behalf of the Association for Economic and Social Analysis Frequency Quarterly Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Rethink. Marx.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 0893-5696 (print) 1475-8059 (web) LCCN 88658558 OCLC no.

472814893 Links Journal homepage Online access Online archive Journal page at publisher's website Rethinking Marxism is a quarterly peer-reviewed academic journal covering Marxist analyses of economics, culture, and society. It was established in 1988 and has been published by Routledge since 2003 on behalf of the Association for Economic and Social Analysis . The editors-in-chief are Yahya M. Madra and Vincent Lyon-Callo .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Founded mainly by the professors and graduate students of the Department of Economics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst , the first issue of Rethinking Marxism appeared in 1988, just before the dissolution of the Soviet Union began. The journal quickly became an influential academic platform for Althusserian Marxism in the North American context.

[ 2 ] Even though the journal was launched by a group of economists (among others, Stephen Resnick , Richard D. Wolff , Jack Amariglio , David Ruccio) and continues to regularly publish articles in the various sub-fields of Marxist economics , such as the labor theory of value , class analysis , and crisis theory , Rethinking Marxism does not have an exclusive economics focus. It is a journal of Marxist theory that makes it a point to rethink and develop Marxist analyses of capitalism , imperialism and alternatives to capitalism.

[ 3 ] Rethinking Marxism is also known for its sustained efforts to showcase contemporary art practices. Each issue of the journal presents an original work by a contemporary artist (e.g., Martha Rosler , Mark Lombardi , Michael Rakowitz , Thomas Hirschhorn , Chto Delat).

From 1989 to 1998, the editor of the journal was Jack Amariglio . From 1998 to 2010, David Ruccio served as editor. He was succeeded by S. Charusheela (2010–2013), [ 3 ] Who was then followed by Marcus E. Green and Serap Kayatekin (2013–2019). The current editors of the journal are Yahya M. Madra and Vincent Lyon-Callo .

[ 1 ] Abstracting and indexing [ edit ] This journal is abstracted and indexed in the following databases: America: History and Life CSA Worldwide Political Science Abstracts International Bibliography of the Social Sciences VINITI Database RAS Scopus SocINDEX References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Editorial Board" .

Editorial Board .

^ See Balibar, Étienne (1994).

Masses, Classes, Ideas . New York: Routledge. p. xxii.

and also Elliott, Gregory (2006).

Althusser: The Detour of Theory . Chicago: Haymarket Books. p. xii.

^ a b The Editors (2010). "Rethinking Marxism: Legacies, Crossroads, New Directions".

Rethinking Marxism .

22 (1): 5– 19.

doi : 10.1080/08935690903411511 .

S2CID 219716683 .

{{ cite journal }} : |last1= has generic name ( help ) External links [ edit ] Official website Association for Economic and Social Analysis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rethinking_Marxism&oldid=1181006678 " Categories : Academic journals established in 1988 Economics journals Political science journals Quarterly journals Marxist journals Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from December 2020 Quarterly journals (infobox) This page was last edited on 20 October 2023, at 07:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rethinking Marxism 4 languages Add topic

