Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Neolithic period 1.2 Bronze Age 1.2.1 Early Bronze Age 1.2.2 Middle Bronze Age 1.2.3 Late Bronze Age 1.3 Iron Age 1.4 Greek and Roman periods 1.5 From the Middle Ages to present 1.5.1 Franco-Ottoman attack 1.6 20th century 2 Geography 3 Demographics 4 Geology 5 Culture and media 6 People 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Lipari 57 languages العربية تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Brezhoneg Cebuano Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Ladin Latina Lombard Magyar Malti მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Piemontèis Polski Português Română Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Vèneto Volapük Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°30′06″N 14°56′01″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.50167°N 14.93361°E ﻿ / 38.50167; 14.93361 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Lipari (disambiguation) .

38°30′06″N 14°56′01″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.50167°N 14.93361°E ﻿ / 38.50167; 14.93361 "Lipara" redirects here. For other uses, see Lipara (fly) and Lipara (mythology) .

Comune in Sicily, Italy Lipari Lìpari ( Sicilian ) Liparòs ( Greek ) Comune Comune di Lipari Lipari Coat of arms Location of Lipari Lipari Location of Lipari in Italy Show map of Italy Lipari Lipari (Sicily) Show map of Sicily Coordinates: 38°28′N 14°57′E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.467°N 14.950°E ﻿ / 38.467; 14.950 Country Italy Region Sicily Metropolitan city Messina (ME) Frazioni Alicudi , Filicudi , Panarea , Stromboli , Vulcano , Canneto , Acquacalda , Quattropani , Pianoconte , Lami Area [ 1 ] • Total 89.72 km 2 (34.64 sq mi) Population (2025) [ 2 ] • Total 12,793 • Density 140/km 2 (370/sq mi) Demonym Liparesi or Liparoti Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Patron saint Saint Bartholomew Saint day 24 August View of the town of Lipari Lipari anciently known as Aeolia (mythical island) ( Italian: [ˈliːpari] ; Sicilian : Lìpari ) is a comune including six of seven islands of the Aeolian Islands (Lipari, Vulcano , Panarea , Stromboli , Filicudi and Alicudi ) and it is located in the Tyrrhenian Sea off the northern coast of Sicily , Southern Italy ; it is administratively part of the Metropolitan City of Messina . It has 12,793 permanent residents, [ 2 ] but during the May to September tourist season, the total population may reach up to 20,000. It is also the name of the biggest island in the archipelago, where the main urban area of the comune is located.

Christopher Nolan shot The Odyssey (2026 film) throughout the Aeolian Islands [ 3 ] Lipari Sicily , filming throughout the Aeolian Islands and particularly around the island Lipari [ 4 ] referred by Homer as Eolia, mother island to the Aeolian Islands .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] Neolithic period [ edit ] In Neolithic times Lipari was, much like Sardinia , one of the few centres of trading in obsidian , a hard black volcanic glass prized by Neolithic peoples for the extremely sharp cutting edges that can be obtained. Lipari's history is rich in incidents as witnessed by the recent retrievals of several necropoli and other archaeological sites. Humans seem to have inhabited the island already in 5000 BC, though a local legend gives the eponymous name Liparus to the leader of a people coming from Campania .

[ 7 ] Bronze Age [ edit ] Early Bronze Age [ edit ] In the early Bronze Age , at the end of the third millennium BC, new settlers of Aeolian origin came from Mycenaean Greece, giving their name to the islands. They had already settled in Metapontum in Italy and used the islands as outposts for controlling trading routes through the strait of Messina .

Middle Bronze Age [ edit ] Successive domestic buildings have been excavated on the acropolis dating from the 18th c. BC and underlying the ancient Roman town.

Late Bronze Age [ edit ] In the 13th century BC, the islands were settled by Ausinian peoples from the coasts of Campania , who introduced the myth of King Liparus from whom the town’s name derives.

In the Mycenaean Period, Lipari has yielded pottery from LHI to LHIII .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Iron Age [ edit ] Lipari's continuous occupation may have been interrupted violently when in the late 9th century BC an Ausonian civilization site was burned and apparently not rebuilt. Many household objects have been retrieved from the charred site.

Greek and Roman periods [ edit ] Greek colonists from Knidos arrived at Lipara ~580 BC after their first colonization attempt in Sicily failed and their leader, Pentathlos, was killed.

[ 10 ] They settled on the site of the village now known as Castello in Magna Graecia . The colony successfully fought the Etruscans for control of the Tyrrhenian Sea .

The town was initially concentrated upon the summit of the rock which played the role of acropolis, seat of religious cults and of public life, but in the course of the first century of its existence, an increase in the population necessitated an expansion into the area at the foot of the rocky slopes and on to the top of the Civita hill. A first city wall, built sometime in the 5th century BC was erected along outcrops at the bottom of the slopes of the rock, leaving outside the modern district of Diana, which was destined from the beginning to accommodate the city necropolis. A second city wall was built in the 4th century BC to enclose the new residential area bounded to the north and south by the river-beds of Santa Lucia and Ponte, which in ancient times ran into the two bays at the foot of the rock. The city wall ran near the two river-beds and then joined on to the Acropolis and the Civita hill. The mighty fortification, of which some traces are visible today in the district of Diana, divided the town from the necropolis.

Carthaginian forces succeeded in holding the site briefly during their struggles with Dionysios I, tyrant of Syracuse in 394 BC, but once they were gone the polis entered a three-way alliance which included Dionysios' new colony at Tyndaris . Lipara prospered, but in 304 BC Agathokles took the town by treachery and is said to have lost all of his pillage from it in a storm at sea.

Lipara became a Carthaginian naval base during the first Punic War , but fell to Roman forces in 252–251 BC. It was occupied by Agrippa in Octavian 's campaign against Sextus Pompeius . Under the Roman Empire it was a place of retreat and exile and was enjoyed because of its thermal baths using natural springs. The Emperor Caracalla sent his wife, Fulvia Plautilla , and her brother, Plautius, into exile here for the rest of their lives.

Many objects recovered from old wrecks are now in the Aeolian Museum of Lipari.

From the Middle Ages to present [ edit ] The 1556 fortifications, built atop ancient Greek walls.

Lipari was probably an episcopal see from the 3rd century onward, with the first bishop being St. Agatone, who, according to tradition, had found the sacred remains in his cathedral. The presence of the relics has been attested since at least 546.

In the 9th century, Sicily was conquered by the Arabs , and soon Saracen pirates began to raid across the Tyrrhenian Sea , with dramatic effects for Lipari. In 839 the Saracens slaughtered much of the population, the relics of St. Bartholomew were moved to Benevento , and Lipari was eventually almost totally abandoned. The Normans conquered the Arabs throughout Sicily between 1060 and 1090, and repopulated the island once their rule was secure. The Lipari episcopal seat was reinstated in 1131.

Though still plagued by pirate raids, the island was continually populated from this time onward. Rule of the island was passed from the Normans to the Hohenstaufen Kings, followed by the Angevins , and then the Aragonese , until Carlos I , the Aragonese King, became the Spanish King, and was then quickly crowned Holy Roman Emperor Charles V .

Franco-Ottoman attack [ edit ] View of the 16th century Lipari castle on the old Greek acropolis as seen from Piazza Marina Corta In 1544, Hayreddin Barbarossa , together with the French fleet of Captain Polin under a Franco-Ottoman alliance , ransacked Lipari and enslaved the entire population.

[ 11 ] Jérôme Maurand lamented about the depredation to his Christian fellow men during the campaign at Lipari: "To see so many poor Christians, and especially so many little boys and girls [enslaved] caused a very great pity." He also mentioned "the tears, wailings and cries of  these poor Lipariotes, the father regarding his son and the mother her daughter... weeping while leaving their own city in order to be brought into slavery by those dogs who seemed like rapacious wolves amidst timid lambs".

[ 12 ] A number of the citizens were ransomed in Messina and eventually returned to the islands.

Charles V then had his Spanish subjects repopulate the island and build the massive city walls atop the walls of the ancient Greek acropolis in 1556.

The walls created a mighty fortress still standing today.  The acropolis, high above the main town, was a safe haven for the populace in the event of a raid. While these walls protected the main town, it was not safe to live on the rest of the island until Mediterranean piracy was largely eradicated, which did not occur until the 19th century.

20th century [ edit ] Marina Corta, the smaller harbour in the main town From the 1920s to the 1940s, the Lipari islands were used for the confinement of political prisoners, including Emilio Lussu , Curzio Malaparte , Carlo Rosselli , Giuseppe Ghetti, and Edda Mussolini . During the 1930s, the islands were used to detain exiled members of the fascist , Croatian nationalist Ustaše movement.

[ 13 ] The islands were then extensively searched by archeologists Madeleine Cavalier and Luigi Bernabò Brea after World War II .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Geography [ edit ] Lipari Island is the largest of a chain of islands in a volcanic archipelago situated in between Vesuvius and Etna .  The island has a surface area of 89.72 km 2 and is 30 km from Sicily.  Besides the main town, most of the year-round population resides in one of the four main villages: Pianoconte is almost due west across the island, Quattropani in the northwest, Acquacalda along the northern coast, whereas Canneto is on the eastern shore north of Lipari town. The highest point on the island is Monte Chirica at 602 m (1975 ft).

[ 17 ] Demographics [ edit ] Historical population Year Pop.

±% 1861 14,968 — 1871 12,463 −16.7% 1881 12,265 −1.6% 1901 15,451 +26.0% 1911 16,310 +5.6% 1921 15,280 −6.3% 1931 14,276 −6.6% 1936 14,156 −0.8% Year Pop.

±% 1951 11,799 −16.7% 1961 11,037 −6.5% 1971 10,037 −9.1% 1981 10,547 +5.1% 1991 10,382 −1.6% 2001 10,554 +1.7% 2011 11,642 +10.3% 2021 12,508 +7.4% Source: ISTAT [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Geology [ edit ] A pumice mine just east of Acquacalda.

View of Lipari.

Geologists agree on the fact that Lipari (island) was created by a succession of four volcanic movements, the most extensive of which was the third one, presumably lasting from 20,000 BC to 13,000 BC. A further vast phenomenon should have happened around 9000 BC.

[ 20 ] The last recorded eruptions occurred in the 5th century AD when airborne pumice , together with volcanic ash , covered the Roman villages of the island. The volcanoes are considered active, and steaming fumaroles and hydrothermal activity may still be seen. As a result of its volcanic origin, the island is covered with pumice and obsidian .  Pumice mining has become a large industry on Lipari, and the pale pumice from Lipari is shipped worldwide.

Culture and media [ edit ] Christopher Nolan filmed The Odyssey (2026 film) around Lipari with an epic cast Matt Damon [Anne Hathaway]] among other renowned stars.

The large archaeological museum extensively covers history of the Aeolian Islands from prehistoric to classical times, vulcanology , marine history, and the paleontology of the western Mediterranean.

[ 21 ] The geographer Strabo identified Lipari with Aeolia, the island of the winds in Homer 's Odyssey .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The ending sequence of Kaos by Paolo and Vittorio Taviani showed children sliding down the vast slopes of white pumice that flowed into the sea. Today the pumice slope stops about 1 metre (3 ft) from the sea.

[ 24 ] The annual Feasts of Saint Bartholomew .

[ 25 ] On 25 July 2013, the mayor of Lipari issued an ordinance banning the wearing of "bikinis, thongs or other swimming costumes in the town centre" to be punished with a fine of 500 euros [ 26 ] (equivalent to about $700 in 2014).

People [ edit ] Peppino Mangravite - Artist Christian Riganò - Football player Francesco Scoglio - Football coach See also [ edit ] List of volcanoes in Italy List of islands of Italy References [ edit ] ^ "Superficie di Comuni Province e Regioni italiane al 9 ottobre 2011" . Italian National Institute of Statistics . Retrieved 16 March 2019 .

^ a b "Monthly Demographic Balance" .

ISTAT .

^ Cite error: The named reference https://www.visititaly.eu/places-and-tours/odyssey-sicily-filming-locations-movie-christopher-nolan was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Cite error: The named reference https://www.vanityfair.it/article/eolie-ulisse-matt-damon-the-odyssey-set-nolan was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Cite error: The named reference FilmingLocations was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Cite error: The named reference LipariFilming was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ "Lipari (island, Italy) - Encyclopedia Britannica" .

Britannica . Retrieved 21 October 2024 .

^ Gert Jan van Wijngaarden (2002) Use and Appreciation of Mycenaean Pottery in the Levant, Cyprus and Italy (1600-1200 BC) ^ Bernabo-Brea & Cavalier 1980 ^ Diodorus Siculus 5.9, Pausanias 10.11.3-4 ^ Syed, Muzaffar Husain; Akhtar, Syed Saud; Usmani, B. D. (2011-09-14).

Concise History of Islam . Vij Books India Pvt Ltd.

ISBN 9789382573470 .

^ Piccirillo, Anthony (2012-05-10).

" "A Vile, Infamous, Diabolical Treaty": The Franco-Ottoman Alliance of Francis I and the Eclipse of the Christendom Ideal" .

DigitalGeorgetown . Retrieved 2024-05-20 .

^ Adriano, Pino; Cingolani, Giorgio (2018).

Nationalism and Terror: Ante Pavelić and Ustasha Terrorism from Fascism to the Cold War . Budapest, Hungary: Central European University Press. pp.

142– 151.

ISBN 978-9-63386-206-3 .

^ "Médaille d'argent du CNRS à Madeleine Cavalier - Centre Jean Bérard" .

centrejeanberard.cnrs.fr . Retrieved 2024-03-03 .

^ Pracanica, Alessio (2020-06-22).

"Il museo Bernabò Brea di Lipari, uno dei più ricchi e meno conosciuti musei del Mediterraneo. Foto" .

Dazebaonews (in Italian) . Retrieved 2024-03-03 .

^ Martinelli, Maria Clara; Spigo, Umberto (2014).

"Le isole Eolie dalla fondazione del Museo Archeologico Luigi Bernabò Brea alla istituzione del Parco Archeologico delle Isole Eolie: problemi di tutela e valorizzazione" .

150 anni di preistoria e protostoria in Italia. - ( Studi di preistoria e protostoria; 1) (in Italian): 561– 565.

^ "Lipari, Isole Eolie, Italy" .

^ "Popolazione residente e presente dei comuni. Censimenti dal 1861 al 1971" [Resident and present population of the municipalities. Censuses from 1861 to 1971] (PDF) (in Italian).

ISTAT . 1971-10-24.

^ "Dashboard Permanent census of population and housing" .

ISTAT .

^ Keller, J. (1969): "Die historischen Eruptionen von Volcano und Lipari".

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Geologischen Gesellschaft , vol.121, pp.179-185.

^ "The Aeolian Archaeological Museum "Luigi Bernabò Brea" " .

www.isolelipari.com . Retrieved 21 October 2024 .

^ "The Aeolian Islands and Their Ancient Greek Heritage" .

Greek Reporter . Retrieved 21 October 2024 .

^ "The Geography of the Odyssey" .

Lapham’s Quarterly . Retrieved 21 October 2024 .

^ "Kaos (1984) by Paolo and Vittorio Taviani" .

Labocine . Retrieved 21 October 2024 .

^ "Festa di San Bartolomeo a Lipari" .

www.siciliainfesta.com . Retrieved 4 March 2018 .

^ "Lipari bans swim-suit attire from town centre" . Archived from the original on 5 March 2018 . Retrieved 4 March 2018 .

Ezio Giunta, dir. (2005). "Lipari".

Estateolie 2005*The Essential Guide (English Version of Tourist Guidebook) : 2– 61.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lipari .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Lipari .

Princeton Encyclopedia of Classical Sites Website for Finding Nino Travelogue about living on Lipari, the 2008 winner of the ASTW Travel Book of the Year Award.

"Lipari" .

Global Volcanism Program .

Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved 2021-06-26 .

Portals : Geography Islands Italy v t e Aeolian Islands Main islands Alicudi Filicudi Lipari Panarea Salina Stromboli Vulcano Islets and skerries Faraglioni di Lipari [ it ] Isola Basiluzzo [ it ] Isola Bella Isola Bottaro [ it ] Isola Dattilo [ it ] Isole Panarelli [ it ] La Canna [ it ] Lisca Bianca [ it ] Lisca Nera [ it ] Pietra del Bagno [ it ] Pietra Quaglietto [ it ] Scoglio Bastimento Scoglio Faraglione [ it ] Scoglio Giafante [ it ] Scoglio Loca Scoglio Montenassari [ it ] Scoglio Nave [ it ] Scoglio Sirene [ it ] Scoglio Sorcio Scoglio Spinazzola [ it ] Strombolicchio v t e Messina History of Messina Timeline 1908 Messina earthquake Battle of the Strait of Messina Fortifications of Messina Messina Conference Senate of Messina Mategriffon Real Cittadella Vara di Messina Siege of Messina (1848) Monuments and places Church of Catalani Chiesa del Carmine Forte del Santissimo Salvatore Forte Gonzaga Messina astronomical clock Duomo di Messina Monument to John of Austria Palace of Culture Palazzo del Monte di Pietà Palazzo Trabia Port of Messina Pylons of Messina Orto Botanico Strait of Messina LaFenice Personalities Actors Adolfo Celi Tano Cimarosa Maria Grazia Cucinotta Nino Frassica Massimo Mollica Artists and designers Girolamo Alibrandi Anna Maria Arduino Antonio Barbalonga Francesco Comande Antonello da Messina Giuseppe Migneco Giovanni Quagliata Filippo Juvarra Mariano Riccio Alonzo Rodriguez Giovanni Tuccari Politicians, civil service, military Giuseppe La Farina Gaetano Martino Giuseppe Natoli Luigi Rizzo Musicians, composers Lucia Aliberti Mario Aspa Filippo Bonaffino Gens Religion Eustochia Smeralda Calafato Annibale Maria Di Francia Sports Silvia Bosurgi Tony Cairoli Vincenzo Nibali Valerio Vermiglio Researchers, academics Aristocles of Messene Dicaearchus Caio Domenico Gallo Francesco Maurolico Agostino Scilla Giuseppe Seguenza Giuseppe Sergi Parks & nature reserves Argimusco Alcantara River Park Isola Bella nature reserve Laghetti di Marinello nature reserve Nebrodi Park Natural Reserve The Mountains of Ferns and Leeks Sport events 10 Hours of Messina Baseball World Cup 1998 Baseball World Cup 2009 EuroBasket Women 1968 International Rally of Messina International Tennis Tournament of Messina Messina Grand Prix Transportation & infrastructure Messina Centrale railway station Messina Marittima railway station Category Commons v t e Sicily · Comuni of the Metropolitan City of Messina Acquedolci Alcara li Fusi Alì Alì Terme Antillo Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto Basicò Brolo Capizzi Capo d'Orlando Capri Leone Caronia Casalvecchio Siculo Castel di Lucio Castell'Umberto Castelmola Castroreale Cesarò Condrò Falcone Ficarra Fiumedinisi Floresta Fondachelli-Fantina Forza d'Agrò Francavilla di Sicilia Frazzanò Furci Siculo Furnari Gaggi Galati Mamertino Gallodoro Giardini Naxos Gioiosa Marea Graniti Gualtieri Sicaminò Itala Leni Letojanni Librizzi Limina Lipari Longi Malfa Malvagna Mandanici Mazzarrà Sant'Andrea Merì Messina Milazzo Militello Rosmarino Mirto Mistretta Mojo Alcantara Monforte San Giorgio Mongiuffi Melia Montagnareale Montalbano Elicona Motta Camastra Motta d'Affermo Naso Nizza di Sicilia Novara di Sicilia Oliveri Pace del Mela Pagliara Patti Pettineo Piraino Raccuja Reitano Roccafiorita Roccalumera Roccavaldina Roccella Valdemone Rodì Milici Rometta San Filippo del Mela San Fratello San Marco d'Alunzio San Pier Niceto San Piero Patti San Salvatore di Fitalia Santa Domenica Vittoria Sant'Agata di Militello Sant'Alessio Siculo Santa Lucia del Mela Santa Marina Salina Sant'Angelo di Brolo Santa Teresa di Riva San Teodoro Santo Stefano di Camastra Saponara Savoca Scaletta Zanclea Sinagra Spadafora Taormina Terme Vigliatore Torregrotta Torrenova Tortorici Tripi Tusa Ucria Valdina Venetico Villafranca Tirrena v t e Sicily Provinces, metropolitan cities and places Agrigento Caltanissetta Catania Enna Messina Palermo Ragusa Syracuse Trapani Islands Cities, towns and villages List of communes History Magna Graecia Sicilia province Bellum Siculum Theme of Sicily Muslim Sicily County of Sicily Kingdom of Sicily War of the Sicilian Vespers Lombards of Sicily Monarchs Viceroys Sicilian Parliament Bourbon Sicily Two Sicilies Risorgimento 1848 Sicilian revolution Dictatorship of Garibaldi Allied invasion of Sicily Sicilian nationalism Politics and government Politics of Sicily Statute of Sicily Elections in Sicily List of presidents of Sicily Sicilian Regional Assembly Culture and heritage People List of people from Sicily Cuisine List of Sicilian dishes Derby di Sicilia (football) Language Music Norman-Sicilian culture Sicilian Baroque Sicilian School Sicilian cart Coppola cap Flags Triskeles Mount Etna Economy Railway network Sulfur mining Category v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Global Volcanism Program Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lipari&oldid=1300676570 " Categories : Cities and towns in Sicily Municipalities of the Metropolitan City of Messina Aeolian Islands Islands of Sicily Stratovolcanoes of Italy Volcanoes of the Tyrrhenian Metropolitan City of Messina Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages with reference errors Pages with broken reference names CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Coordinates on Wikidata Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Sicilian-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Pages using infobox settlement with image map1 but not image map Pages with Italian IPA Commons category link is defined as the pagename Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 19:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lipari 57 languages Add topic

