Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents Toggle Contents subsection 1.1 Preface 1.2 Archimedean spiral 1.3 Trisecting an angle 1.4 Squaring the circle 2 References Toggle the table of contents On Spirals 11 languages العربية Čeština Ελληνικά Français Italiano עברית 日本語 Português Română Shqip Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek mathematics book On Spirals ( Greek : Περὶ ἑλίκων ) is a treatise by Archimedes , written around 225 BC.

[ 1 ] Notably, Archimedes employed the Archimedean spiral in this book to square the circle and trisect an angle .

Contents [ edit ] Preface [ edit ] Archimedes begins On Spirals with a message to Dositheus of Pelusium mentioning the death of Conon as a loss to mathematics. He then goes on to summarize the results of On the Sphere and Cylinder (Περὶ σφαίρας καὶ κυλίνδρου) and On Conoids and Spheroids (Περὶ κωνοειδέων καὶ σφαιροειδέων). He continues to state his results of On Spirals .

Archimedean spiral [ edit ] Main article: Archimedean spiral The Archimedean spiral with three 360° turnings on one arm The Archimedean spiral was first studied by Conon and was later studied by Archimedes in On Spirals . Archimedes was able to find various tangents to the spiral.

[ 1 ] He defines the spiral as: If a straight line one extremity of which remains fixed is made to revolve at a uniform rate in a plane until it returns to the position from which it started, and if, at the same time as the straight line is revolving, a point moves at a uniform rate along the straight line, starting from the fixed extremity, the point will describe a spiral in the plane.

[ 2 ] Trisecting an angle [ edit ] Example of how Archimedes trisected an angle in On Spirals .

The construction as to how Archimedes trisected the angle is as follows: Suppose the angle ABC is to be trisected. Trisect the segment BC and find BD to be one third of BC. Draw a circle with center B and radius BD. Suppose the circle with center B intersects the spiral at point E. Angle ABE is one third angle ABC.

[ 3 ] Squaring the circle [ edit ] The circle and the triangle are equal in area.

To square the circle, Archimedes gave the following construction: Let P be the point on the spiral when it has completed one turn. Let the tangent at P cut the line perpendicular to OP at T. OT is the length of the circumference of the circle with radius OP.

Archimedes had already proved as the first proposition of Measurement of a Circle that the area of a circle is equal to a right-angled triangle having the legs' lengths equal to the radius of the circle and the circumference of the circle. So the area of the circle with radius OP is equal to the area of the triangle OPT.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Weisstein, Eric W.

"Archimedes' Spiral" .

MathWorld .

^ Heath, Thomas Little (1921), A History of Greek Mathematics , Boston: Adamant Media Corporation, p. 64, ISBN 0-543-96877-4 , retrieved 2008-08-20 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Tokuda, Naoyuki; Chen, Liang (1999-03-18), Trisection Angles (PDF) , Utsunomiya University, Utsunomiya, Japan, pp.

5– 6, archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-22 , retrieved 2008-08-20 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "History topic: Squaring the circle" . Retrieved 2008-08-20 .

v t e Archimedes Written works Measurement of a Circle The Sand Reckoner On the Equilibrium of Planes Quadrature of the Parabola On the Sphere and Cylinder On Spirals On Conoids and Spheroids On Floating Bodies Ostomachion The Method of Mechanical Theorems Book of Lemmas (apocryphal) Discoveries and inventions Archimedean solid Archimedes's cattle problem Archimedes' principle Archimedes's screw Claw of Archimedes Miscellaneous Archimedes' heat ray Archimedes Palimpsest List of things named after Archimedes Pseudo-Archimedes Related people Euclid Eudoxus of Cnidus Apollonius of Perga Hero of Alexandria Eutocius of Ascalon Category v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal v t e Spirals , curves and helices Curves Algebraic Curvature Gallery List Topics Helices Angle Antenna Boerdijk–Coxeter Hemi Symmetry Triple Biochemistry 3 10 Alpha Beta Double Pi Polyproline Super Triple Collagen Spirals Archimedean Cotes's Epispiral Hyperbolic Poinsot's Doyle Euler Fermat's Involute List Logarithmic Golden On Spirals Padovan Pitch angle Theodorus Spirangle Ulam Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Vatican Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=On_Spirals&oldid=1285921893 " Categories : Works by Archimedes Euclidean geometry Spirals Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents On Spirals 11 languages Add topic

