Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Global use of the term 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Democratic republic 15 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी עברית 日本語 Português Simple English ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of government Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e A democratic republic is a form of government operating on principles adopted from a republic , ie: a representative democracy. As a cross between two similar systems, democratic republics may function on principles shared by both republics and direct democracies.

While not all democracies are republics ( constitutional monarchies , for instance, are not) common definitions of the terms democracy and republic often feature overlapping concerns, suggesting that many democracies function as republics, and many republics operate on democratic principles, as shown by these definitions from the Oxford English Dictionary : Republic : "A state in which supreme power is held by the people and their elected representatives, and which has an elected or nominated president rather than a monarch." [ 1 ] Democracy : "A system of government by the whole population or all the eligible members of a state, typically through elected representatives." [ 2 ] Eugene Volokh of the UCLA School of Law observes that the United States exemplifies the varied nature of a constitutional republic—a country where some decisions (often local) are made by direct democratic processes, while others (often federal) are made by democratically elected representatives.

[ 3 ] As with many large systems, US governance is incompletely described by any single term. It also employs the concept, for instance, of a constitutional republic in which a court system is involved in matters of jurisprudence .

[ 3 ] As with other democracies, not all people in a democratic republic are necessarily citizens, and not all citizens are necessarily entitled to vote.

[ 4 ] Suffrage is commonly restricted by criteria such as voting age , [ 5 ] and sometimes by felony or imprisonment status.

History [ edit ] Historically, some inconsistency around the term is frequent. Prior to the American Revolution in what is now the United States—and before the coming of age of the "crowned republics" of constitutional monarchies in the United Kingdom and other European countries— democracy and republic were "used more or less interchangeably", [ 6 ] and the concepts associated with representative democracy and hence with a democratic republic are suggested by John Adams (writing in 1784): "No determinations are carried, it is true, in a simple or representative democracy, but by consent of the majority or their representatives." [ 7 ] The Republic of China ( Taiwan ) claims to be the oldest of Asia's democratic republics, though its recent history of democratic process is largely linked only to Taiwan.

[ 8 ] Likewise, Africa's oldest democratic republic, Liberia (formed in 1822), has had its political stability rocked by periodic violence and coups.

[ 9 ] Global use of the term [ edit ] Starting in the 20th century after World War II, many countries used the term "democratic republic" in their official names—most of which were Marxist–Leninist , or socialist, one-party states [ 10 ] —that did not allow political opposition, free press or other democratic norms and institutions. These include states no longer in existence or who have changed their governmental systems and official names (almost all Marxist–Leninist): the German Democratic Republic ( East Germany ), the Democratic Kampuchea , the Somali Democratic Republic , [ 11 ] the Democratic Republic of Vietnam ( North Vietnam ), the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen ( South Yemen ), the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan , and the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia .

[ 12 ] The Republic of India declares itself a "Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic Republic" in the Preamble to its Constitution .

As of October 2024, states which use the term "Democratic Republic" in their official names include many that do not hold free elections and have been rated as "undemocratic" or "unfree" by organizations that gave such ratings.

Algeria , [ 13 ] Democratic Republic of the Congo , [ 14 ] Ethiopia , [ 15 ] North Korea , [ 16 ] Laos , [ 17 ] Nepal , [ 17 ] the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic [ citation needed ] , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan do not hold free elections and are rated as undemocratic " hybrid regimes " or " authoritarian regimes " by The Economist Democracy Index .

[ 18 ] In addition, there are a few countries which use the term "Democratic Republic" in the name and have a good record of holding free or relatively free general elections and were rated "flawed democracy" or "full democracy" in the Democracy Index, such as the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste ( East Timor ), the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe , and the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka .

See also [ edit ] Democracy Democracy indices Federal republic Liberal democracy People's republic Republic References [ edit ] ^ "republic | Definition of republic in English by Oxford Dictionaries" .

Oxford Dictionaries | English . Archived from the original on December 5, 2017 . Retrieved December 4, 2017 .

^ "democracy | Definition of democracy it English by Oxford Dictionaries" .

Oxford Dictionaries | English . Archived from the original on December 17, 2016 . Retrieved December 4, 2017 .

^ a b Volokh, Eugene (May 13, 2015).

"Is the United States of America a republic or a democracy?" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ "Characteristics of Democratic Republic" .

Government VS . softUsvista Inc.

^ "Voter Registration Age Requirements by State" .

USA.gov . Archived from the original on April 12, 2021 . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ "Democracy or republic?" .

Britannica . Retrieved July 22, 2022 .

^ Adams, John (1851).

The Works of John Adams, Second President of the United States: With a Life of the Author, Notes and Illustrations . Little, Brown. p.

109 .

... in a simple or representative democracy but by consent of the majority.

^ Yongnian, Zheng; Fook, Lye Liang; Hofmeister, Wilhelm (October 23, 2013).

Parliaments in Asia: Institution Building and Political Development . Routledge.

ISBN 9781134469659 .

^ "Elections history in Africa's oldest democratic republic: Liberia" .

euronews . October 8, 2017 . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ "Berlin Wall – Cold War" .

history.com . HISTORY TV . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ "Somali Democratic Republic" .

www.onwar.com . Archived from the original on February 23, 2019 . Retrieved December 4, 2017 .

^ Clapham, Christopher (June 1, 1987). "The constitution of the people's democratic Republic of Ethiopia".

Journal of Communist Studies .

3 (2): 192– 195.

doi : 10.1080/13523278708414865 .

ISSN 0268-4535 .

^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" .

cia.gov . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" .

cia.gov . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" .

cia.gov . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" .

cia.gov . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ a b "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" .

cia.gov . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

^ "EIU Democracy Index 2016" .

infographics.economist.com . Retrieved December 3, 2017 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Democratic_republic&oldid=1306042638 " Categories : Organizational theory Types of democracy Types of republics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 15:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Democratic republic 15 languages Add topic

