Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Implementations 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Notations 3.2 Footnotes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Generalized keyboard Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Musical keyboards with regular arrangements of keys Generalized keyboards are musical keyboards , a type of isomorphic keyboard , with regular, tile-like arrangements usually with rectangular or hexagonal keys, and were developed for performing music in different tunings . They were introduced by Robert Bosanquet in the 1870s, and since the 1960s Erv Wilson has developed new methods of using and expanding them, proposing keyboard layouts (and some notations) including any scale made of a single generator within an "octave" (or more generally, period ) of any size.

The generalized keyboard is one kind of symmetrical arrangement that represents pitches according to their relationship to each other – rather than their positions in specific scales such as in the familiar piano and organ keyboard – as well as in sequence of pitch, unlike arrangements such as duet systems for concertinas and the array system keyboard. Bosanquet used chains of fifths to generate the mapping of the keys, with the pitches transposed into the space of an octave (or more generally, period ) so that pitch determined the lateral position of keys, and the number of fifths, or any other interval used as generators , from the starting pitch its vertical position in the keyboard.

Schematic of one octave of a generalized keyboard mapped using a 700 cent generator The layout of a typical musical keyboard The coordinates of a key can be calculated using the size of the generator (in cents), where the vertical position is the number of generators away from the starting pitch, (positive or negative depending on whether they are in the sharp or flat direction), which Bosanquet rounded to the nearest semitone, giving 12 vertically aligned rows of keys in each octave. Wilson introduced alternate arrangements with combinations of seven or five (and in some cases, i.e., a division of the octave in 13 tones, eight) vertical lines of keys, and so Bosanquet keyboard sometimes is used to distinguish the original arrangement.

The angle between keys originally depended on the shape of the key and relative size of the generating fifth, but Bosanquet discovered fingering could sometimes be improved by reversing this angle; the angle can also be straightened out, or the spacing changed to better represent the keys' pitches, which alters vertical alignment. Generalized keyboards usually duplicate pitches mapped close to the front and rear edges of the arrangement in order to organize pitches for consistent fingering. This can result in very large arrangements depending on the shape of the keys and any modifications made to the basic design.

The possibility of the duplication of pitches occurs because the generalized keyboard is, in principle, a mapping of pitches onto a closed space in which intervals and chords have fixed shapes under transposition across the keyboard; thus a generalized keyboard is a useful tool for the analysis of harmonic structures.

Implementations [ edit ] Bosanquet's 1873 harmonium has rectangular keys more or less horizontal and aligned vertically with 12 lines in each octave. The width of octaves is slightly compressed from usual, and the keys are narrow and undercut at the front.

Arthur von Oettingen 's 1914 Omnitonophonium harmonium has keys similar to Bosanquet's, but which aren't undercut (like Jankó 's 1883 patent for his 12-tone keyboard).

Arthur Fickénscher patented a keyboard in 1941 with rectangular keys overlapping in 12 staggered diagonal rows each representing the same named tones.

Larry Hanson devised keyboards in 1942 with rectangular, as well as staggered "7"-shaped keys.

[ 1 ] Adriaan Fokker 's 1951 31-tone organ used relatively short rectangular keys with sides relieved toward their fronts to form T-shaped playing surfaces, as well as longer rectangular keys in a concave arrangement for a pedalboard.

Erv Wilson patented a keyboard in 1967 with five perpendicular chromatic lines of keys in an octave, using fourths as generators.

Robert Moog built a prototype with undercut round front rectangular keys.

Herman van der Horst built the first of four staggered square key Archiphones in 1970 for Anton de Beer.

George Secor 's 1974 generalized keyboards for the Motorola Scalatron used oval keys skewed in diagonal rows.

Scott Hackleman and Erv Wilson designed a 19-tone generalized keyboard clavichord with oblong hexagonal keys in 1975, and marketed it as a kit.

[ 2 ] Michel Geiss , fr:Christian Braut and Philippe Monsire built the Semantic Daniélou , a 36-tone (out of 53 just intonation notes listed in the book "Sémantique Musicale" by Alain Daniélou ) electronic instrument, on behalf of the author, using staggered square key button keyboards from two Cavagnolo Midy 20 master keyboards, where each parallel row of keys offers a transposition by one comma.

Harold Fortuin 's 1994 Clavette midi controller uses straight alternating rows of switches which can be customized for different tunings by programming and with key overlay sheets. Bert Bongers built versions with 122 and 124 keys.

Harvey Starr manufactures Wilson Microzone skewed row hexagonal key midi controllers in 248 and 810-key models that can be programmed and the key surfaces organized into generalized as well as many other arrangements.

Lumatone Inc.

manufactures a 280-key MIDI controller with skewed hexagonal keys based on designs by Siemen Terpstra. This has now become the Lumatone Keyboard .

[ 3 ] Hex is a free software MIDI sequencer, which uses a generalized keyboard in place of the standard piano keyboard. Lanes are extended from the keys and MIDI notes can be drawn into each lane, and edited, with the mouse (as in a standard MIDI sequencer like Logic, Reaper, SONAR, etc.). The layout can be sheared to ensure that the vertical height of each key (and note lane) is proportional to its pitch height—regardless of the tuning used. A wide variety of isomorphic layouts are possible, including Bosanquet and Wicki.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Isomorphic keyboard Linear temperament Pitch space Chromatic button accordion References [ edit ] Bosanquet's keyboard Notations [ edit ] R. H. M. Bosanquet (1876) An Elementary Treatise on Musical Intervals and Temperament Macmillan & Co. London R. H. M. Bosanquet (1879) "On the Hindoo division of the octave, with additions to the theory of higher orders" Proceedings of the Royal Society of London vol. 26. pp. 272–284.

Arthur Fickénscher, "Polytone Keyboard" United States Patent 2,232,600. February 18, 1941 Adriaan (Daniël) Fokker (1955) "Equal Temperament and the Thirty-one-toned Organ" Stichting Huygens-Fokker B. J. A. Pels "L'orgue accordé en cinquièmes de ton du Musée Teyler a Haarlem" Stichting Huygens-Fokker Erv Wilson (1974) "The Bosanquetian 7-rank Keyboard after Poole and Brown" Xenharmonikon v. which preceded more important papers on keyboards found in "Wilson Archives-Keyboard designs/Related to the scale tree Hanson, Larry (1989) "Development of a 53-tone Keyboard Layout" Xenharmonikon v. 12 John S. Allen (1997) "The general keyboard in the age of MIDI" Joseph A. Paradiso (1999) "Keyboard and Tactile Interfaces: American Innovations in Electronic Musical Instruments" NewMusicBox Wolfgang Fuhrmann (2001) Bevor die Musik sich ins Uferlose verliert Berliner Zeitung Online Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Wilson later identified 19-tone subsets in Hanson's mappings that could be generated by chains of minor thirds.

^ "19-tone Clavichord" .

^ Lumatone Inc.

"Lumatone Isomorphic Keyboard - Home" . Lumatone.io . Retrieved 4 March 2023 .

^ Prechtl, A., Milne, A. J., Holland, S., Laney, R., and Sharp, D. B. (2012).

A MIDI sequencer that widens access to the compositional possibilities of novel tunings . Computer Music Journal, 36(1):42–54.

External links [ edit ] Antonia Weisse, "Orthotonophonium" (Bildarchiv Preussischer Kulturbesitz) Keyboard of Bosanquet's Enharmonic Harmonium" (Science and Society Picture Library) Dave Keenan KeyboardMapper.xls (Keyboard mapping spreadsheet) Gene Ward Smith Bosanquet Lattices Stichting Huygens-Fokker Archiphone Harold Fortuin The Clavette Alain Danielou Center Semantic Daniélou Archived 19 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine Cortex Design Lumatone Isomorphic Keyboard Peter Davies Opal Chameleon v t e Microtonal music Composers Richard Barrett Béla Bartók Easley Blackwood Jr.

Heinz Bohlen Julián Carrillo Franklin Cox Mildred Couper John Eaton Brian Ferneyhough Michael Finnissy Bjørn Fongaard Alois Hába Christiaan Huygens Charles Ives Ben Johnston György Ligeti Stu Mackenzie Claus-Steffen Mahnkopf Joel Mandelbaum Joe Maneri Roger Redgate John Schneider Sevish Ezra Sims Nicola Vicentino Claude Vivier Elaine Walker Ivan Wyschnegradsky La Monte Young Inventors Glenn Branca Wendy Carlos Ivor Darreg Adriaan Fokker Lou Harrison Yuri Landman Harry Partch Tui St. George Tucker Nicola Vicentino Tunings and scales Non-octave- repeating scales Alpha scale Beta scale Gamma scale Delta scale Lambda scale (Bohlen–Pierce scale) Equal temperament 15 17 19 22 23 24 31 34 41 53 58 72 96 Just intonation Harry Partch's 43-tone scale Double diatonic Concepts and techniques Limit Otonality and Utonality Semitone Sonido 13 Xenharmonicity Tonality diamond Groups and publications Boston Microtonal Society Genesis of a Music Huygens-Fokker Foundation Compositions Beauty in the Beast quarter tone pieces just pieces Mother Sonata for Microtonal Piano Suite for Microtonal Piano Twelve Microtonal Etudes for Electronic Music Media Flying Microtonal Banana K.G.

L.W.

Other topics Enharmonic keyboard Generalized keyboard Modernism (music) v t e Musical and keyboard instruments Instruments Bowed clavier Calliope Carillon Celesta Chime Clavichord Clavicytherium Claviharp Electronic keyboard Fortepiano Harmonichord Harpsichord Keytar Melodica Organ Hammond organ Pipe organ Pump organ Theatre organ Orphica Piano Digital piano Electric piano Piano accordion Spinet Synthesizer Virginal Layouts Enharmonic keyboard Generalized keyboard Isomorphic keyboard Jankó keyboard Short octave Keys Frequencies Manual keyboard Split sharp Pedals Expression Soft Sustain Pedal keyboard Pedal piano Piano construction Acoustics Innovations Wiring Aliquot Cross Maintenance Action Piano Technicians Guild Tuning Wrench Amplifiers, speakers Keyboard amplifier Leslie speaker Miscellaneous Prepared piano Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Generalized_keyboard&oldid=1302975438 " Categories : Isomorphic keyboard layouts Microtonality Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2022 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 12:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Generalized keyboard Add languages Add topic

