Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Characteristics 3 Warm sector 4 Depiction 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Warm front 33 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Latviešu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Boundary of advancing mass of warm air Illustration of a warm front. The warm air behind the front is slowly overtaking the cold air ahead of the front, which is moving more slowly in the same direction. The warmer air, due to lower density, rises over the colder air as it moves. As a result of its increased altitude, it cools off and its moisture condenses, forming clouds and possibly precipitation.

Symbol commonly used to represent a warm front.

A warm front is a density discontinuity located at the leading edge of a homogeneous warm air mass , and is typically located on the equator-facing edge of an isotherm gradient. Warm fronts lie within broader troughs of low pressure than cold fronts , and move more slowly than the cold fronts which usually follow because cold air is denser and less easy to remove from the Earth's surface.

[ 1 ] This also forces temperature differences across warm fronts to be broader in scale.  
Clouds ahead of the warm front are mostly stratiform , and rainfall generally increases as the front approaches.

Fog can also occur preceding a warm frontal passage. Clearing and warming is usually rapid after frontal passage.  If the warm air mass is unstable, thunderstorms may be embedded among the stratiform clouds ahead of the front, and after frontal passage thundershowers may continue.  On weather maps , the surface location of a warm front is marked with a red line of semicircles pointing in the direction of travel.

[ 1 ] Development [ edit ] Different air masses that affect North America, as well as other continents, tend to be separated by frontal boundaries.

Air masses are large bodies of air with similar properties of temperature and humidity that form over source regions.  The warm air mass behind a warm front is not only warmer, but often (but not always) also higher in humidity than the colder air preceding it. Because of a warm air mass’s higher temperature and thus lesser density , mixing between the two air masses is unlikely. Being light, the warm air mass is unable to displace the cooler air mass and instead is forced upward along the upper boundary of the colder air in a process known as overrunning. The boundary between the two air masses has a gradual slope of 1:200 and lifting is slow but persistent.

As the air mass rises into regions of lower pressure, it expands and cools. As it cools, any water vapor that is present will condense and form extensive cloud cover.  The first clouds that indicate an approaching warm front tend to be mostly high cirrus at first, changing to cirrostratus as the front approaches. However, if cirrocumulus also appears, there is greater airmass instability approaching ahead of the front. When these high clouds progressively invade the sky and the barometric pressure begins to fall, precipitation associated with the disturbance is likely about 6 to 8 hours away.

[ 2 ] A thickening and lowering of these high clouds into middle-stage altostratus or altocumulus is a good sign the warm front or low has moved closer and precipitation may begin within less than six hours.  Once the clouds have thickened to 2,500 metres (8,200 ft) from the earth’s surface, precipitation can begin to fall from heavy nimbostratus .  If unstable altocumulus  castellanus accompanies or takes the place of the main altostratus layer, cumulus congestus or cumulonimbus producing showers or thunderstorms may follow.  Low stratus and stratocumulus commonly form underneath the main precipitating clouds.

A warm front is also defined as the transition zone where a warmer air mass is replacing a cooler air mass. Warm fronts generally move from southwest to northeast.  If the warmer air originates over the ocean, it is not only warmer but also more moist than the air ahead of it.

Characteristics [ edit ] If the air mass is relatively stable, rainfall will increase until the front reaches the location, at which time the clouds can extend all the way to the earth’s surface as fog .  Once the front passes, the location experiences some warming and clearing.  If the air mass is unstable, thunderstorms may precede and follow the front and temperature changes will be larger.

[ 3 ] In the northern hemisphere , a warm front causes a shift of wind blowing from southeast to southwest, and in the southern hemisphere a shift from winds blowing from northeast to northwest. Common characteristics associated with warm fronts include: Weather phenomenon Prior to the passing of the front While the front is passing After the passing of the front Temperature Cool Warming suddenly Warmer, then leveling off Atmospheric pressure Decreasing steadily Leveling off Slight rise followed by a decrease Winds South to southeast (backing) (northern hemisphere) North to northeast (veering) (southern hemisphere) Variable South to southwest (veering) (northern hemisphere) North to northwest (backing) (southern hemisphere) Precipitation Usually none, but in summer or warm temperatures, cumulus congestus may continue to exist under cirrostratus and altostratus creating light to moderate showers.

Persistent rain, usually moderate with some lighter periods and some heavier bursts. In winter, snow may turn to rain after passing through ice pellets and freezing rain .

[ 4 ] Light drizzle, gradually ceasing.

Clouds Cirrus , cirrostratus , altostratus , nimbostratus ,  then stratus .  Other clouds can also often be seen, including cirrocumulus amongst the approaching cirrus, altocumulus with or instead of altostratus (particularly if the front is weak), and occasionally cumulonimbus along with or instead of nimbostratus in summer.  Additionally, stratocumulus often appears underneath the main altostratus deck and stratus fractus typically forms in precipitation falling from the thick nimbostratus layer. Often in warm temperatures, rain bearing cumulus congestus clouds can appear under the cirrostratus, and more rarely altocumulus castellanus clouds if convection is sufficient.  In cold humid conditions, low airmass stratus or fog may obscure the main frontal clouds.

Nimbostratus , sometimes cumulonimbus Clearing with scattered stratus and stratocumulus . If the warm front is part of a depression, there is often a sheet of altostratus (often broken in places to altocumulus) above this which thickens when the cold front approaches.

Visibility Poor Poor, but improving Sunny Dew point Steady rise Steady Rise, then steady Warm sector [ edit ] The warm sector is a near-surface air mass in between the warm front and the cold front , on the equatorward side of an extratropical cyclone . With its warm and humid characteristics, this air is susceptive to convective instability and can sustain thunderstorms , especially if lifted by the advancing cold front.

A surface weather analysis for the United States on October 21, 2006.  Note the warm front in the northwest Gulf of Mexico.

Depiction [ edit ] On weather maps , the surface location of a warm front is marked with a red line of half circles pointing in the direction of the front. On colored weather maps, warm fronts are illustrated with a solid red line.

See also [ edit ] Cold front Occluded front Pseudo-warm front Weather front References [ edit ] ^ a b David Roth (2006-12-14).

"Unified Surface Analysis Manual" (PDF) .

Hydrometeorological Prediction Center . Retrieved 2010-12-17 .

^ "Mackerel sky" . Weather Online . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ Chris C. Park (2001).

The environment: principles and applications . Psychology Press. p. 309.

ISBN 978-0-415-21771-2 . Retrieved 2010-12-17 .

^ Donald, Ahrens, C. (2007).

Meteorology today : an introduction to weather, climate, and the environment (8th ed.). Belmont, Calif.: Thomson/Brooks/Cole. pp.

298– 300.

ISBN 978-0495011620 .

OCLC 66911677 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) External links [ edit ] Warm Front: transition zone from cold air to warm air Warm Fronts A film clip AIR MASSES AND FRONTS - THE WARM FRONT (1962) is available for viewing at the Internet Archive Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Warm_front&oldid=1284651356 " Category : Weather fronts Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 21:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Warm front 33 languages Add topic

