Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Tools 3 Features and terms 4 By planetary body 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Planetary geology 32 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Македонски 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geological study of planets Part of a series on Geology Index Outline Category Glossary History ( Timeline ) Key components Minerals Rock ( Igneous Sedimentary Metamorphic ) Sediment Plate tectonics Strata Weathering Erosion Geologic time scale Laws, principles, theories Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Topics Composition Geochemistry Mineralogy Sedimentology Petrology Structure of Earth Geophysics Landform structures Geomorphology Glaciology Structural Geology Volcanology Geologic history Geological history of Earth Research Branches of geology Geologist ( List) Methods Geological survey Applications Engineering Mining Forensics Military Planetary geology Lists of geological features of the Solar System Geology of solar terrestrial planets By planet and body Mercury Venus Moon Mars Vesta Ceres Io Titan Triton Pluto Charon Geology portal v t e Planetary geology , alternatively known as astrogeology or exogeology , is a planetary science discipline concerned with the geology of celestial bodies such as planets and their moons , asteroids , comets , and meteorites .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Although the geo- prefix typically indicates topics of or relating to Earth , planetary geology is named as such for historical and convenience reasons; due to the subject matter, it is closely linked with more traditional Earth-based geology.

[ 3 ] Planetary geology includes such topics as determining the properties and processes of the internal structure of the terrestrial planets , surface processes such as volcanism , impact craters , even fluvial and aeolian action where applicable. Despite their outermost layers being dominated by gases, the giant planets are also included in the field of planetary geology, especially when it comes to their interiors. Fields within Planetary geology are largely derived from fields in the traditional geological sciences , such as geophysics , geomorphology , and geochemistry .

History [ edit ] Planetary geologist and NASA astronaut Harrison "Jack" Schmitt collecting lunar samples during the Apollo 17 mission in early-December 1972 Surface of Mars in a false-color photograph by the Viking 2 lander, December 9, 1977 The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( January 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Eugene Merle Shoemaker is credited with bringing geologic principles to planetary mapping and creating the branch of planetary science in the early 1960s, the Astrogeology Research Program , within the United States Geological Survey . He made important contributions to the field and the study of impact craters , selenography (study of the Moon), asteroids, and comets.

[ 4 ] Major centers for planetary science research include the Lunar and Planetary Institute , Applied Physics Laboratory , Planetary Science Institute , Jet Propulsion Laboratory , Southwest Research Institute , and Johnson Space Center .  Additionally, several universities conduct extensive planetary science research, including Montana State University , Brown University , the University of Arizona , California Institute of Technology , University of Colorado , Western Michigan University , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , and Washington University in St. Louis . Planetary geologists usually study either geology , astronomy , planetary science , geophysics , or one of the earth sciences at the graduate level.

[ citation needed ] Tools [ edit ] Simulated interplanetary missions performed on Earth have studied procedures and tools for planetary geology. Various tools, including common archaeological tools such as hammers, shovels, brushes, were evaluated for use by planetary geologists.

[ 5 ] Along with these common tools, new advanced technologies have become available. These include spectroscopic databases, and data (such as mission logs, images and mapping) from previous unmanned interplanetary missions.

[ 6 ] Scientists use maps, images, telescopes on Earth, and orbiting telescopes (such as the Hubble Space Telescope ).

[ 7 ] The maps and images are stored in the NASA Planetary Data System where tools such as the Planetary Image Atlas help to search for certain items such as geological features including mountains, ravines, and craters.

[ 8 ] Features and terms [ edit ] Main article: Planetary nomenclature Planetary geology uses a wide variety of standardized terms for features.

[ 9 ] All planetary feature names recognized by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) combine one of these terms with a possibly unique identifying name. The conventions which decide the more precise name are dependent on which planetary body the feature is on, but there are standard descriptors common to all astronomical planetary bodies. New terms must be recognized by the IAU Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature, and are commonly added as features are mapped and described by new planetary missions.

[ 10 ] This means that in some cases, names may change as improved imagery becomes available, [ 10 ] or in other cases widely adopted informal names are changed to be in line with the rules.

[ 11 ] The standard names are chosen to consciously avoid interpreting the underlying cause of the feature, but rather to describe only its appearance.

[ 9 ] By planetary body [ edit ] Geological features of the Solar System Geological history of Earth Geology of Mercury Geology of Venus Geology of the Moon Geology of Mars Geology of Vesta Geology of Ceres Geology of Io Geology of Titan Geology of Triton Geology of Pluto Geology of Charon See also [ edit ] Astrobiology – Science concerned with life in the universe Exoplanet – Planet outside of the Solar System Exoplanetology Planetary habitability – Known extent to which a planet is suitable for life References [ edit ] ^ James F. III, Bell; Campbell, Bruce A.; Robinson, Mark S.

"What is planetary geology?" .

Cornell University . Archived from the original on Oct 25, 2015 . Retrieved 6 October 2015 .

^ "GEOL212: Planetary Geology" . University of Maryland Department of Geology . Retrieved 6 October 2015 .

^ McSween, Harry (11 July 2019).

Planetary Geoscience (1 ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

3– 19.

ISBN 978-1107145382 .

^ Chapman, Mary G.

"Gene Shoemaker - Founder of Astrogeology" .

United States Geological Survey Astrogeology Science Center . Retrieved 21 May 2012 .

^ Young, Kelsey; Hurtado, José M.; Bleacher, Jacob E.; Brent Garry, W.; Bleisath, Scott; Buffington, Jesse; Rice, James W. (2013-10-01). "Tools and technologies needed for conducting planetary field geology while on EVA: Insights from the 2010 Desert RATS geologist crewmembers".

Acta Astronautica . NASA's 2010 Desert Research and Technology Studies Mission Objectives and Results.

90 (2): 332– 343.

Bibcode : 2013AcAau..90..332Y .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2011.10.016 .

hdl : 2060/20120012887 .

ISSN 0094-5765 .

S2CID 85509925 .

^ "Planetary Science Tools" .

PDS Geoscience Node . Retrieved 2019-11-12 .

^ "Astrogeology Science Center" .

United States Geological Survey . Retrieved 2019-11-12 .

^ "Cartography and Imaging Sciences Node of NASA Planetary Data System" .

www.usgs.gov . Retrieved 2019-11-12 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b "Descriptor Terms (Feature Types)" .

Planetary Names . Retrieved 9 April 2018 .

^ a b Morton, Oliver. Mapping Mars: science, imagination, and the birth of a world. Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2002.

^ "AAS Committee on the Status of Women" (PDF) .

American Astronomical Society . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 9 April 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] J. F. Bell III; B. A. Campbell; M. S. Robinson (2004).

Remote Sensing for the Earth Sciences: Manual of Remote Sensing (3rd ed.).

John Wiley & Sons . Archived from the original on Sep 16, 2016 . Retrieved 2006-08-23 .

Roberge, Aki (1998-04-21).

"The Planets After Formation" . Department of Terrestrial Magnetism. Archived from the original on 2006-08-13 . Retrieved 2006-08-23 .

Hauber E et al. (2019) Planetary geologic mapping. In: Hargitai H (ed ) Planetary Cartography and GIS . Springer.

Hargitai H et al. (2015) Classification and Characterization of Planetary Landforms.

In: Hargitai H, Kerszturi Á (eds) Encyclopedia of Planetary Landforms. Springer.

Rossi, Angelo Pio; Gasselt, Stephan van, eds. (2018).

Planetary Geology . Astronomy and Planetary Sciences. Springer International Publishing.

ISBN 978-3-319-65177-4 .

Portals : Astronomy Geology Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System v t e Planetary Geology Terrestrial planets Mercury Venus Earth Moon Mars Dwarf Planets and asteroids Ceres Pluto Charon 4 Vesta Moons of giant planets Io Titan Triton Geology of solar terrestrial planets Category v t e Major subfields of astronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astrometry Astrophysics Cosmochemistry Cosmology Extragalactic astronomy Galactic astronomy Orbital mechanics Physical cosmology Planetary geology Planetary science Solar astronomy Stellar astronomy v t e Geology Overviews Outline of geology Glossary of geology History of geology Index of geology articles History of geology Geochronology Geological history of Earth Timeline of geology Composition and structure Cosmochemistry Crystallography Geochemistry Mineralogy Petrology Sedimentology Historical geology Stratigraphy Paleontology Paleoclimatology Palaeogeography Dynamic Earth Structural geology Geodynamics Plate tectonics Geomorphology Volcanology Water Glaciology Hydrogeology Marine geology Geodesy Cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity of Earth Planetary geodesy Remote sensing Geopositioning Geophysics Geomagnetism Geophysical survey Planetary geophysics Seismology Tectonophysics Applications Biogeology Economic geology Engineering geology Environmental geology Planetary geology Geobiology Geologic modelling Forensic geology Forensic geophysics Meteoritics Mining geology Mineral physics Occupations Geologist Petroleum geologist Volcanologist Geology portal Geology Geology Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Planetary_geology&oldid=1277874077 " Categories : Planetary geology Space science Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2014 United States-centric All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 05:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Planetary geology 32 languages Add topic

