Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Knots, links, braids Toggle Knots, links, braids subsection 2.1 General knot types 2.2 Links 2.3 Tangles 2.4 Braids 3 Operations Toggle Operations subsection 3.1 Elementary treatment using polygonal curves 4 Invariants and properties 5 Mathematical problems Toggle Mathematical problems subsection 5.1 Theorems 6 Lists Toggle the table of contents List of knot theory topics Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Knot theory is the study of mathematical knots . While inspired by knots which appear in daily life in shoelaces and rope, a mathematician's knot differs in that the ends are joined so that it cannot be undone.  In precise mathematical language, a knot is an embedding of a circle in 3-dimensional Euclidean space , R 3 .  Two mathematical knots are equivalent if one can be transformed into the other via a deformation of R 3 upon itself (known as an ambient isotopy ); these transformations correspond to manipulations of a knotted string that do not involve cutting the string or passing the string through itself.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of knot theory Knots, links, braids [ edit ] Knot (mathematics) gives a general introduction to the concept of a knot.

Two classes of knots: torus knots and pretzel knots Cinquefoil knot also known as a (5, 2) torus knot.

Figure-eight knot (mathematics) the only 4-crossing knot Granny knot (mathematics) and Square knot (mathematics) are a connected sum of two Trefoil knots Perko pair , two entries in a knot table that were later shown to be identical.

Stevedore knot (mathematics) , a prime knot with crossing number 6 Three-twist knot is the twist knot with three-half twists, also known as the 5 2 knot.

Trefoil knot A knot with crossing number 3 Unknot Knot complement , a compact 3 manifold obtained by removing an open neighborhood of a proper embedding of a tame knot from the 3-sphere.

Notation used in knot theory: Conway notation Dowker–Thistlethwaite notation ( DT notation ) Gauss code (see also Gauss diagrams ) continued fraction General knot types [ edit ] 2-bridge knot Alternating knot ; a knot that can be represented by an alternating diagram (i.e. the crossing alternate over and under as one traverses the knot).

Berge knot a class of knots related to Lens space surgeries and defined in terms of their properties with respect to a genus 2 Heegaard surface.

Cable knot , see Satellite knot Chiral knot is knot which is not equivalent to its mirror image.

Double torus knot , a knot that can be embedded in a double torus (a genus 2 surface).

Fibered knot Framed knot Invertible knot Prime knot Legendrian knot are knots embedded in R 3 {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} ^{3}} tangent to the standard contact structure .

Lissajous knot Ribbon knot Satellite knot Slice knot Torus knot Transverse knot Twist knot Virtual knot Wild knot Links [ edit ] Borromean rings , the simplest Brunnian link Brunnian link , a set of links which become trivial if one loop is removed Hopf link , the simplest non-trivial link Solomon's knot , a two-ring link with four crossings.

Whitehead link , a twisted loop linked with an untwisted loop.

Unlink General types of links: Algebraic link Hyperbolic link Pretzel link Split link String link Tangles [ edit ] Tangle (mathematics) Algebraic tangle Tangle diagram Tangle product Tangle rotation Tangle sum Inverse of a tangle Rational tangle Tangle denominator closure Tangle numerator closure Reciprocal tangle Braids [ edit ] Braid theory Braid group Operations [ edit ] Band sum Flype Fox n -coloring Tricolorability Knot sum Reidemeister move Elementary treatment using polygonal curves [ edit ] elementary move (R1 move, R2 move, R3 move) R-equivalent delta-equivalent Invariants and properties [ edit ] Knot invariant is an invariant defined on knots which is invariant under ambient isotopies of the knot.

Finite type invariant is a knot invariant that can be extended to an invariant of certain singular knots Knot polynomial is a knot invariant in the form of a polynomial whose coefficients encode some of the properties of a given knot.

Alexander polynomial and the associated Alexander matrix ; The first knot polynomial (1923). Sometimes called the Alexander–Conway polynomial Bracket polynomial is a polynomial invariant of framed links. Related to the Jones polynomial. Also known as the Kauffman bracket.

Conway polynomial uses Skein relations .

Homfly polynomial or HOMFLYPT polynomial .

Jones polynomial assigns a Laurent polynomial in the variable t 1/2 to the knot or link.

Kauffman polynomial is a 2-variable knot polynomial due to Louis Kauffman.

Arf invariant of a knot Average crossing number Bridge number Crosscap number Crossing number Hyperbolic volume Kontsevich invariant Linking number Milnor invariants Racks and quandles and Biquandle Ropelength Seifert surface Self-linking number Signature of a knot Skein relation Slice genus Tunnel number , the number of arcs that must be added to make the knot complement a handlebody Writhe Mathematical problems [ edit ] Berge conjecture Birman–Wenzl algebra Clasper (mathematics) Eilenberg–Mazur swindle Fáry–Milnor theorem Gordon–Luecke theorem Khovanov homology Knot group Knot tabulation Knotless embedding Linkless embedding Link concordance Link group Link (knot theory) Milnor conjecture (topology) Milnor map Möbius energy Mutation (knot theory) Physical knot theory Planar algebra Smith conjecture Tait conjectures Temperley–Lieb algebra Thurston–Bennequin number Tricolorability Unknotting number Unknotting problem Volume conjecture Theorems [ edit ] Schubert's theorem Conway's theorem Alexander's theorem Lists [ edit ] List of mathematical knots and links List of prime knots v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_knot_theory_topics&oldid=1297545599 " Categories : Mathematics-related lists Knot theory Outlines of mathematics and logic Outlines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 21:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of knot theory topics Add languages Add topic

