Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Image 3 Disadvantages 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Stiletto heel 20 languages العربية বাংলা Чӑвашла Dansk Deutsch Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Stiletto heels ) Shoe with a tall, thin heel For other uses, see Stiletto (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Stiletto heel" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Stiletto heels can be found on almost every type of shoes, such as these ankle boots.

A stiletto heel , or just stiletto , is a shoe with a long, thin, high heel . It is named after the stiletto dagger.

Stiletto heels may vary in length from 2.5 centimetres (1 inch) to 25 cm (10 inches) or more if a platform sole is used, and are sometimes defined as having a diameter at the ground of less than 1 cm (slightly less than half an inch). Stiletto-style heels 5 cm (2.0 in) or shorter are called kitten heels .

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] 1952 newspaper ad for stiletto heels High-heeled shoes were worn by men and women courtiers until the French Revolution . When high heels came back in style in the late 1800s, they were worn only by women.

[ 1 ] The stiletto heel came with the advent of technology using a supporting metal shaft or stem embedded into the heel, instead of wood or other, weaker materials that required a wide heel.

[ 1 ] Italian shoe designer Salvatore Ferragamo paved the way for stilettos by inventing the steel arch. Some historians also credit him with inventing the stiletto heel, while others credit French fashion designer Charles Jourdan . French designers such as Roger Vivier and André Perugia popularized the stiletto design in the 1950s, which quickly spread across Europe and the United States.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] After an initial wave of popularity in the 1950s, the heels reached their most refined shape in the early 1960s, when the toes of the shoes which bore them became as slender and elongated as the stiletto heels themselves. As a result of the overall sharpness of outline, it was customary for women to refer to the whole shoe as a "stiletto", not just the heel, via synecdoche ( pars pro toto ). Although they faded from the scene after the Beatles era began, their popularity continued at street level, and women stubbornly refused to give them up even after they could no longer readily find them in the mainstream shops. A version of the stiletto heel was reintroduced in 1974 by Manolo Blahnik , who dubbed his "new" heel the "Needle". Similar heels were stocked at the big Biba store in London, by Russell & Bromley and by smaller boutiques. Old, unsold stocks of pointed-toe stilettos and contemporary efforts to replicate them (lacking the true stiletto heel because of changes in the way heels were by then being mass-produced) were sold in street fashion markets and became popular with punks and with other fashion "tribes" of the late 1970s until supplies of the inspirational original styles dwindled in the early 1980s. Subsequently, round-toe shoes with slightly thicker (sometimes cone-shaped) semi-stiletto heels, often very high in an attempt to convey slenderness were frequently worn at the office with wide-shouldered power suits . The style survived through much of the 1980s but almost completely disappeared during the 1990s when professional and college-age women took to wearing shoes with thick, block heels. The slender stiletto heel staged a major comeback after 2000 when young women adopted the style for dressing up office wear or adding a feminine touch to casual wear, like jeans.

[ citation needed ] Image [ edit ] Stilettos, like all similar high-heeled shoes , give the optical illusion of a longer, slimmer leg, a smaller foot, and overall greater height. They alter the wearer's posture and gait, [ 3 ] flexing the calf muscles and making the bust and buttocks more prominent.

[ 4 ] Stiletto heels are particularly associated with the image of the femme fatale . They are often considered to be a seductive item of clothing, and are even fetishized as an erotic object by some.

[ citation needed ] Disadvantages [ edit ] All high heels counter the natural functionality of the foot, sometimes causing skeletal and muscular problems if users wear them excessively; such shoes are a common cause of venous complaints such as pain, fatigue, and heavy-feeling legs, and have been found to provoke venous hypertension in the lower limbs.

[ 5 ] Stiletto heels concentrate a large amount of force into a small area. The great pressure under such a heel, which is greater than that under the feet of an elephant, [ 6 ] can cause damage to carpets and floors. The stiletto heel, unless equipped with a "heel stopper" to enlarge the floor contact area, can be impractical for outdoor wear on soft ground (such as grass, sand or mud), or in environments where floor damage is unacceptable.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] List of shoe styles References [ edit ] ^ a b c DeMello, Margo (2009).

Feet and Footwear: A Cultural Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, California: Greenwood Press. pp.

307– 309.

ISBN 9780313357145 .

^ "A short history of the high heel" . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 12 November 2017 . Retrieved 14 October 2020 .

^ Bering, Jesse (23 July 2014).

"The High-Heel Hottie Effect: The Evolutionary Psychology of Women's Shoes" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2015.

By exaggerating the normal female gait, high heels serve to falsely enhance our perception of the wearer's femininity.

^ Betts, Hannah (27 October 2008).

"Are we just masochists?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2015.

Heels alter the angle of the buttocks by 20 or 30 degrees to create a more youthful and thus fertile-looking body.

^ Wagner, T.F.; et al. (October 2012).

"Influence of high-heeled shoes on venous function in young women" .

Journal of Vascular Surgery .

56 (4).

Society for Vascular Surgery : 1039– 1044.

doi : 10.1016/j.jvs.2012.01.039 .

PMID 22483354 .

^ Green, Jack (2003).

"Pressure Under High Heels" . The Physics Factbook . Retrieved 20 December 2012 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bergstein, Rachelle (2012).

Women from the Ankle Down – The Story of Shoes and How They Define Us (Hardback). New York: HarperCollins . pp.

284 .

ISBN 978-0-06-196961-4 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Stilettos (shoes) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Footwear List of shoe styles List of boots Shoe Shoemaking Shoe size Dress shoes Blucher Brogues Brothel creepers Derby Monks Oxfords Spectator shoes (Co-respondent shoes) Winklepickers Wholecuts Slip-on shoes Court shoes Prince Albert slippers Loafers Venetian-style shoes Women's Ballet flats High-heeled footwear Mary Janes Mojari Mules Peep-toe shoes Saddle shoes Slingbacks T-bar sandals Other shoes Driving moccasins Flip-flops Galoshes Platform shoes Sandals Self-tying shoes Slides Slippers ( Uwabaki ) Tiger-head shoes Veldskoens Zōri Wooden footwear Bakya British clogs Cantabrian albarcas Clogs Geta Klompen Namaksin Okobo Padukas Pattens Sabot Träskor Boots Military Ammunition Bunny Combat Jack Jump Jungle Patauga Tanker Trench Work Australian work Cowboy Engineer Hip Jika-tabi Rigger Steel-toe Waders Fashion boots Chelsea ( Beatle ) Chukka Go-go Knee-high Over-the-knee Platform Thigh-high Ugg Other Jodhpur Wellington Ballet Bean Sport-related footwear Ballet shoes Boat shoes Climbing shoes Cross country running shoes Cycling shoes Football boots Ghillies Hiking boots Ice skates Inline skates Kung fu shoes Minimalist shoes Motorcycle boots Mountaineering boots Plimsolls Pointe shoes Racing flats Racing shoes Riding boots Roller shoes Roller skates Sabatons Safari boots Skate shoes Ski boots Sneakers Swimfins Water shoes Wrestling shoes Folk footwear Abacas Abarkas Alpargatas Avarcas Balghas Bast shoes Ciocie Clogs Espadrilles Furlane Galesh Geta Giveh Haferlschuh Hnyat-phanats Huarache Hwa Jipsin Jorabs Kamiks Kolhapuri chappals Moccasins Mojaris Mukluks Nalins Okobo Opanci Peshawari chappals Snowshoes Tsarouchi Takunya Upanah Valenkis Waraji Zōri Historical footwear Areni-1 shoes Buskins Calcei Caligae Carbatina Cavalier boots Chinese styles Chopines Duckbill shoes Flowerpot shoes Hessians Lotus shoes Pampooties Pigaches Poulaines Socci Turnshoes Shoe construction Bespoke shoes Blake construction Goodyear welt Shoe buckle Shoelaces Toe box High heels Clear heels Kitten heels Spool heels Stiletto heels Wedges Hosiery Anklets Bobby socks Dress socks Footwraps Knee highs Pantyhose Sock Stocking Tights Toe socks Tabi Related Abandoned footwear Spats Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stiletto_heel&oldid=1289915714 " Categories : 1990s fashion 2000s fashion 2010s fashion Clubwear Fetish clothing High-heeled footwear Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Articles needing additional references from April 2019 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 17:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stiletto heel 20 languages Add topic

