Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Climate 3 Flora 4 Fauna 5 Protected areas 6 See also 7 External links 8 References Toggle the table of contents Baja California desert 21 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig Interlingua Italiano ქართული Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Desert ecoregion of the Baja California Peninsula of Mexico Baja California desert Baja California desert near Cataviña Location of the Baja California desert Ecology Realm Nearctic Biome Deserts and xeric shrublands Borders California coastal sage and chaparral Gulf of California xeric scrub Sierra Juárez and San Pedro Mártir pine–oak forests , Sonoran Desert Geography Area 76,296 km 2 (29,458 sq mi) Country Mexico States Baja California Baja California Sur Conservation Conservation status Relatively stable/intact Global 200 Yes Protected 45,940 km 2 (60%) [ 1 ] The Baja California desert ( Spanish : desierto de Baja California ) is a desert ecoregion of Mexico 's Baja California peninsula .

[ 2 ] This ecoregion occupies the western portion of the Baja California peninsula, and occupies most of the Mexican states of Baja California Sur and Baja California . It covers 77,700 square kilometers (30,000 square miles). The climate is dry, but its proximity of the Pacific Ocean provides humidity and moderates the temperature. The flora mostly consists of xeric shrubs and over 500 species of recorded vascular plants .

Geography [ edit ] The Baja California desert ecoregion lies on the western portion of the Baja California peninsula and occupies most of the Mexican states of Baja California and Baja California Sur . The ecoregion covers 77,700 square kilometers (30,000 square miles) and includes most of the Peninsula's western slope. It is bounded on the west by the Pacific Ocean and on the east by the Peninsular Ranges , and extends from approximately 31º to 24º north. Elevations vary, and include mountain ranges on the western central part (1,000 to 1,500 metres or 3,300 to 4,900 feet), plains of middle elevation (300 to 600 metres or 1,000 to 2,000 feet), and vast extensions of coastal dunes.

North of 30° north latitude on the Pacific slope, the Baja California desert transitions to the California coastal sage and chaparral . The Sierra Juárez and San Pedro Mártir pine–oak forests occupy the higher Peninsular Ranges to the north, where a number of tree species are found including the near-threatened California fan palm .

[ 3 ] The Sonoran Desert lies to the northeast. The Gulf of California xeric scrub lies east of the Peninsular Ranges and to the south.

Climate [ edit ] The climate is dry and mostly subtropical with the southernmost parts being tropical . Although rainfall is low, the Pacific Ocean provides some humidity and moderates the temperature compared to the Sonoran Desert , which lies on the east slope of the Peninsular Ranges.

Flora [ edit ] The ecoregion is mostly covered by xeric shrubs , which create varying associations based on elevation and soil conditions. The ecoregion has close to 500 species of vascular plants , of which a number are endemic , for example the Boojum tree ( Fouquieria columnaris ) or Creeping Devil ( Stenocereus eruca ).

Fauna [ edit ] Red diamond rattlesnake ( Crotalus ruber ), a common reptile native to the desert The ecoregion has about 50 species of mammals. Large mammals include mule deer ( Odocoileus hemionus ), desert bighorn sheep ( Ovis canadensis nelsoni ), puma ( Puma concolor ), and the critically endangered Baja California pronghorn ( Antilocapra americana peninsularis ). The San Quintin kangaroo rat ( Dipodomys gravipes ) and Baja California rock squirrel ( Otospermophilus atricapillus ) are endemic to the ecoregion.

[ 4 ] There are about 200 native bird species, including golden eagle ( Aguila chrysaetos ), peregrine falcon ( Falco peregrinus ), crested caracara ( Caracara cheriway ), osprey ( Pandion haliaeutus ), and burrowing owl ( Athene cunicularia ). Millions of ducks and geese over-winter in the coastal lagoons, including Ojo de Liebre Lagoon , San Ignacio Lagoon , and Magdalena Bay .

[ 4 ] Protected areas [ edit ] A 2017 assessment found that 45,940 kilometers squared, or 60 percent, of the ecoregion is in protected areas.

[ 1 ] Protected areas include El Vizcaíno Biosphere Reserve and Valle de los Cirios Flora and Fauna Protection Area ; both protected areas extend into the adjacent Gulf of California xeric scrub ecoregion.

See also [ edit ] List of ecoregions in Mexico External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Baja California Desert .

"Baja California desert" .

Terrestrial Ecoregions . World Wildlife Fund.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Eric Dinerstein, David Olson, et al. (2017). An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm, BioScience, Volume 67, Issue 6, June 2017, Pages 534–545; Supplemental material 2 table S1b.

[1] ^ Taylor H. Ricketts, Eric Dinerstein, David M. Olson, Colby J. Loucks, et al. 1999.

Terrestrial Ecoregions of North America: a Conservation Assessment . Island Press, Washington DC.

^ C. Michael Hogan. 2009.

California Fan Palm: Washingtonia filifera , GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. Nicklas Stromberg ^ a b "Baja California desert" .

Terrestrial Ecoregions . World Wildlife Fund.

v t e World deserts Desert Desertification Polar desert List of deserts List of deserts by area Desert exploration Africa Algerian Bayuda Black Desert Blue Chalbi Danakil Djurab Eastern Ferlo Farafra (White) Kalahari Libyan Moçâmedes Namib Nubian Nyiri Plaine des Sables Richtersveld Sahara Tanezrouft Ténéré Western Asia Arabian Peninsula Ad-Dahna Nefud Arabian Judaean Negev Ramlat al-Sab'atayn Rub' al Khali Syrian Wahiba Sands Central Asia Aral Karakum Aralkum Barsuki Betpak-Dala Dasht-e Naomid Karakum Kyzylkum Moiynkum Ryn Saryesik-Atyrau Sarykum Taukum Ustyurt East Asia Badain Jaran Gobi Gurbantünggüt Hami Lop Kumtag Ordos Kubuqi Mu Us Qaidam Taklamakan Tengger South Asia Cholistan Indus Valley Katpana Kharan Thal Thar Iranian plateau Kavir Khash Leili Lut Margo Naomid Polond Registan Southeast Asia La Paz Europe Bardenas Reales Cabo de Gata Monegros Oleshky Tabernas Deliblato North America Alvord Amargosa Baja California Black Rock Carcross Carson Channeled scablands Chihuahuan Colorado Escalante Forty Mile Gran Desierto de Altar Great Basin Great Salt Lake Great Sandy Jornada del Muerto Kaʻū Lechuguilla Mojave North American Arctic Owyhee Painted Desert Red Desert Sevier Smoke Creek Sonoran Tonopah Desert Tule (Arizona) Tule (Nevada) Yuha Yuma Oceania Australia Gibson Great Sandy Great Victoria Little Sandy Nullarbor Plain Painted Pedirka Simpson Strzelecki Sturt Stony Tanami Tirari New Zealand Rangipo South America Atacama La Guajira Los Médanos de Coro Monte Patagonian Sechura Tatacoa Polar regions Antarctic Antarctica Meyer Desert Arctic North American Arctic Greenland Russian Arctic Project Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baja_California_desert&oldid=1253246963 " Categories : Deserts and xeric shrublands Deserts of Mexico Ecoregions of Mexico Baja California Peninsula Flora of Baja California Flora of Baja California Sur Flora of the California desert regions Natural history of Baja California Natural history of Baja California Sur North American desert flora Nearctic ecoregions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 October 2024, at 01:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baja California desert 21 languages Add topic

