Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Brief history Toggle Brief history subsection 1.1 Nationalism and revolution 1.2 Conservatism and revolution in the 19th century 1.3 Folk culture 1.4 National epics 2 German Romantic nationalism 3 Polish nationalism and messianism 4 Arts Toggle Arts subsection 4.1 Claims of primacy or superiority 4.2 Twentieth-century political developments 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Romantic nationalism 37 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Português Русский Shqip کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of nationalism This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Liberty Leading the People , embodying the Romantic view of the French Revolution of 1830 , also known as the July Revolution ; its painter Eugène Delacroix also served as an elected deputy The Dream of Worldwide Democratic and Social Republics – The Pact Between Nations, a print prepared by Frédéric Sorrieu, 1848 Brudeferd i Hardanger (Bridal procession in Hardanger), a monumental piece within Norwegian romantic nationalism . Painted by Hans Gude and Adolph Tidemand .

Romantic nationalism (also national romanticism , organic nationalism , identity nationalism ) is the form of nationalism in which the state claims its political legitimacy as an organic consequence of the unity of those it governs. This includes such factors as language, race , ethnicity, culture, religion, and customs of the nation in its primal sense of those who were born within its culture. It can be applied to ethnic nationalism as well as civic nationalism . Romantic nationalism arose in reaction to dynastic or imperial hegemony , which assessed the legitimacy of the state from the top down, emanating from a monarch or other authority, which justified its existence. Such downward-radiating power might ultimately derive from a god or gods
(see the divine right of kings and the Mandate of Heaven ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Among the key themes of Romanticism , and its most enduring legacy, the cultural assertions of romantic nationalism have also been central in post-Enlightenment art and political philosophy. From its earliest stirrings, with their focus on the development of national languages and folklore , and the spiritual value of local customs and traditions, to the movements that would redraw the map of Europe and lead to calls for self-determination of nationalities, nationalism was one of the key issues in Romanticism, determining its roles, expressions and meanings. Romantic nationalism, resulting from this interaction between cultural production and political thought, became "the celebration of the nation (defined in its language, history and cultural character) as an inspiring ideal for artistic expression; and the instrumentalization of that expression in political consciousness-raising".

[ 3 ] Historically in Europe, the watershed year for romantic nationalism was 1848, [ citation needed ] when a revolutionary wave spread across the continent; numerous nationalistic revolutions occurred in various fragmented regions (such as Italy) or multinational states (such as the Austrian Empire ).  While initially the revolutions fell to reactionary forces and the old order was quickly re-established, the many revolutions would mark the first step towards liberalisation and the formation of modern nation states across much of Europe.

Part of a series on Nationalism Nation forming Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Church Colours Emblem Father Flag Epic God Identity Persona Language Myth Sport State Symbol Treasure Animal Core values Allegiance Independence Patriotism Self-determination Solidarity Types Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Communist Constitutional patriotism Corporate Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic Ethnopluralism Expansionist Homosexual Indigenism Integral Left-wing ( populism ) Musical Mystic Neo- Pan- Racial Religious Clerical Resource Revolutionary National syndicalist National Bolshevik Fascism Nazism Ethnocacerism Romantic Technological Territorial Trans- Ultra- Organizations List of nationalist organizations Related concepts Anationalism Anti-nationalism Anti-globalization movement Anti-imperialism Banal nationalism Civil religion Communitarianism Cosmopolitanism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Ethnocentrism Francoism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Globalism Historiography and nationalism Imagined community Imperialism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Localism Militarism National indifference Nationalism studies Nativism Plurinationalism Post- Racism Revanchism Right-wing populism Seasonal or cultural festival Subsidiarity in Catholicism Trumpism Xenophobia Politics portal v t e Brief history [ edit ] Nationalism and revolution [ edit ] Romanticized painting of the Battle of Rancagua during the Chilean War of Independence by Pedro Subercaseaux In the Balkans, Romantic views of a connection with classical Greece , which inspired Philhellenism infused the Greek War of Independence (1821–30), in which the Romantic poet Lord Byron died of high fever.

Rossini 's opera William Tell (1829) marked the onset of the Romantic opera , using the central national myth unifying Switzerland; and in Brussels, a riot (August 1830) after an opera that set a doomed romance against a background of foreign oppression ( Auber 's La Muette de Portici ) sparked the Belgian Revolution of 1830–31, the first successful revolution in the model of Romantic nationalism.

Verdi 's opera choruses of an oppressed people inspired two generations of patriots in Italy, especially with "Va pensiero" ( Nabucco , 1842). Under the influence of romantic nationalism, among economic and political forces, both Germany and Italy found political unity, and movements to create nations similarly based upon ethnic groups. It would flower in the Balkans (see for example, the Carinthian Plebiscite , 1920), along the Baltic Sea, and in the interior of Central Europe, where in the eventual outcome, the Habsburgs succumbed to the surge of Romantic nationalism.

[ 4 ] In Norway , romanticism was embodied, not in literature, but in the movement toward a national style, both in architecture and in ethos .

[ 5 ] Earlier, there was a strong romantic nationalist element mixed with Enlightenment rationalism in the rhetoric used in North America , in the American colonists' declaration of independence from Great Britain and the drafting of the U.S. Constitution of 1787, as well as the rhetoric in the wave of rebellions , inspired by new senses of localized identities, which swept the American colonies of Spain, one after the other, from the May Revolution of Argentina in 1810.

[ citation needed ] Conservatism and revolution in the 19th century [ edit ] See also: Concert of Nations and Revolutions of 1848 Following the ultimate collapse of the First French Empire with the fall of Napoleon, conservative elements took control in Europe, led by the Austrian noble Klemens von Metternich , ideals of the balance of power between the great powers of Europe dominated continental politics of the first half of the 19th century.  Following the Congress of Vienna , and subsequent Concert of Europe system, several major empires took control of European politics.  Among these were the Russian Empire , the restored French monarchy , the German Confederation , under the dominance of Prussia , the Austrian Empire , and the Ottoman Empire .

[ citation needed ] The conservative forces held sway until the Revolutions of 1848 swept across Europe and threatened the old order.  Numerous movements developed around various cultural groups, who began to develop a sense of national identity.  While initially, all of these revolutions failed, and reactionary forces would re-establish political control, the revolutions marked the start of the steady progress towards the end of the Concert of Europe under the dominance of a few multi-national empires and led to the establishment of the modern nation state in Europe; a process that would not be complete for over a century and a half.

Central and Eastern Europe 's political situation was partly shaped by the two World Wars , while many national identities in these two regions formed modern nation states when the collapse of the Soviet Union and the multinational states Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia led to numerous new states forming during the last decade of the 20th century.

[ citation needed ] John Gast , American Progress, (circa 1872) celebrates U.S.

romantic nationalism in the form of westward expansion – an idea known as " Manifest Destiny ".

Folk culture [ edit ] Romantic nationalism inspired the collection of folklore by such people as the Brothers Grimm .  The view that fairy tales, unless contaminated from outside literary sources, were preserved in the same form over thousands of years, was not exclusive to Romantic Nationalists, but it fit in well with their views that such tales expressed the primordial nature of a people.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Brothers Grimm were criticized because their first edition was insufficiently German, and they followed the advice.  They rejected many tales they collected because of their similarity to tales by Charles Perrault , which they thought proved they were not truly German tales; Sleeping Beauty survived in their collection because the tale of Brynhildr convinced them that the figure of the sleeping princess was authentically German. They also altered the language used, changing each "Fee" (fairy) to an enchantress or wise woman, every "prince" to a "king's son", every "princess" to a "king's daughter".

[ 8 ] Discussing these views in their third editions, they particularly singled out Giambattista Basile 's Pentamerone as the first national collection of fairy tales, and as capturing the Neapolitan voice.

[ 9 ] The work of the Brothers Grimm influenced other collectors, both inspiring them to collect tales and leading them to similarly believe that the fairy tales of a country were particularly representative of it, to the neglect of cross-cultural influence.  Among those influenced were the Russian Alexander Afanasyev , the Norwegians Peter Christen Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe , and the Australian Joseph Jacobs .

[ 10 ] National epics [ edit ] A painting of an episode from the Song of Roland , a French national epic Main article: National epic The concept of a " national epic ", an extensively mythologized legendary work of poetry of defining importance to a certain nation, is another product of Romantic nationalism. The "discovery" of Beowulf in a single manuscript, first transcribed in 1818, came under the impetus of Romantic nationalism, after the manuscript had lain as an ignored curiosity in scholars' collections for two centuries.

Beowulf was felt to provide people self-identified as " Anglo-Saxon " with their missing "national epic", [ 11 ] just when the need for it was first being felt: the fact that Beowulf himself was a Geat was easily overlooked. The pseudo-Gaelic literary forgeries of " Ossian " had failed, finally, to fill the need for the first Romantic generation.

[ citation needed ] The first publication of The Tale of Igor's Campaign coincided with the rise in Russian national spirit in the wake of the Napoleonic wars and Suvorov 's campaigns in Central Europe. The unseen and unheard Song of Roland had become a dim memory, until the antiquary Francisque Michel transcribed a worn copy in the Bodleian Library and put it into print in 1837; it was timely: French interest in the national epic revived among the Romantic generation. In Greece, the Iliad and Odyssey took on new urgency during the Greek War of Independence . Amongst the world's Jewish community, the early Zionists considered the Bible a more suitable national epic than the Talmud .

[ 12 ] Many other "national epics", epic poetry considered to reflect the national spirit, were produced or revived under the influence of Romantic nationalism: particularly in the Russian Empire , national minorities seeking to assert their own identities in the face of Russification produced new national poetry – either out of whole cloth, or from cobbling together folk poetry, or by resurrecting older narrative poetry. Examples include the Estonian Kalevipoeg , Finnish Kalevala , Polish Pan Tadeusz , Latvian Lāčplēsis , Armenian Sasuntzi Davit by Hovhannes Tumanyan , Georgian The Knight in the Panther's Skin and Greater Iran , Shahnameh .

German Romantic nationalism [ edit ] The Romantic movement was essential in spearheading the upsurge of German nationalism in the 19th century and especially the popular movement aiding the resurgence of Prussia after its defeat to Napoleon in the 1806 Battle of Jena .

Johann Gottlieb Fichte 's 1808 Addresses to the German Nation , Heinrich von Kleist 's fervent patriotic stage dramas before his death, and Ernst Moritz Arndt 's war poetry during the anti-Napoleonic struggle of 1813–15 were all instrumental in shaping the character of German nationalism for the next one-and-a-half century in a racialized ethnic rather than civic nationalist direction. Romanticism also played a role in the popularization of the Kyffhäuser myth , about the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa sleeping atop the Kyffhäuser mountain and being expected to rise in a given time and save Germany) and the legend of the Lorelei (by Brentano and Heine ) among others.

The Nazi movement later appropriated the nationalistic elements of Romanticism, with Nazi chief ideologue Alfred Rosenberg writing: "The reaction in the form of German Romanticism was therefore as welcome as rain after a long drought. But in our own era of universal internationalism , it becomes necessary to follow this racially linked Romanticism to its core, and to free it from certain nervous convulsions which still adhere to it." [ 13 ] Joseph Goebbels told theatre directors on 8 May 1933, just two days before the Nazi book burnings in Berlin, that: "German art of the next decade will be heroic, it will be like steel, it will be Romantic, non-sentimental, factual; it will be national with great pathos, and at once obligatory and binding, or it will be nothing." [ 14 ] Of this phenomenon, the Soviet literary scholar Naum Berkovsky wrote: German fascism extracted Romanticism from the naphthalene of the past, established its ideological kinship with it, included it in its canon of forerunners, and after some cleansing on racial grounds, absorbed it into the system of its ideology and thereby gave this trend, which in its time was not apolitical, a purely political and topical meaning ...

Schelling , Adam Müller and others thanks to the fascists again became our contemporaries, though in the specific sense in which every corpse taken out of its century-old coffin for any need becomes a "contemporary". In his book The Tasks of National Socialist Literary Criticism , Walther Linden, who revised the history of German literature from a fascist point of view, considers the most valuable for fascism that stage in the development of German Romanticism when it freed itself from the influences of the French Revolution and thanks to Adam Müller, Görres , Arnim and Schelling began to create truly German national literature on the basis of German medieval art , religion and patriotism.

[ 15 ] This made scholars and critics like Fritz Strich , Thomas Mann and Victor Klemperer , who before the war were supporters of Romanticism, to reconsider their stance after the war and the Nazi experience and to adopt a more anti-Romantic position.

[ 16 ] Heinrich Heine parodied such Romantic modernizations of medieval folkloric myths in the " Barbarossa " chapter of his large 1844 poem Germany. A Winter's Tale : Forgive, O Barbarossa , my hasty words!

I do not possess a wise soul Like you, and I have little patience, So, please, come back soon, after all!

Retain the old methods of punishment, If you judge the guillotine unpleasant: The sword for the nobleman , and the cord For the townsman and vulgar peasant.

But, do switch things around, now and then: Peasants and townsmen should die by the sword, And noblemen should hang on a rope.

We’re all the creatures of the Lord !

Bring back the laws of Charles the Fifth , With the hanging courts restoration, And divide the people, as before, Into guild, estate and corporation.

Restore the old Holy Roman Empire , As it was, whole and immense.

Bring back all its musty junk, And all its foolish nonsense.

The Middle Ages I’ll endure, If you bring back the genuine item; Just rescue us from this bastard state, And from its farcical system, From that mongrel chivalry, Such a nauseating dish Of Gothic fancies and modern deceit, That is neither flesh nor fish.

Shut down all the theatres, And chase their comedians pack, Who parody the olden days.

O, Emperor, do come back!

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Polish nationalism and messianism [ edit ] The November Uprising (1830–31), in the Kingdom of Poland , against the Russian Empire Romanticism played an essential role in the national awakening of many Central European peoples lacking their own national states, not least in Poland, which had recently failed to restore its independence when Russia's army crushed the Polish Uprising under Nicholas I . Revival and reinterpretation of ancient myths, customs and traditions by Romantic poets and painters helped to distinguish their indigenous cultures from those of the dominant nations and crystallise the mythography of Romantic nationalism. Patriotism, nationalism, revolution and armed struggle for independence also became popular themes in the arts of this period. Arguably, the most distinguished Romantic poet of this part of Europe was Adam Mickiewicz , who developed an idea that Poland was the Messiah of Nations , predestined to suffer just as Jesus had suffered to save all the people. The Polish self-image as a " Christ among nations " or the martyr of Europe can be traced back to its history of Christendom and suffering under invasions. During the periods of foreign occupation, the Catholic Church served as bastion of Poland's national identity and language, and the major promoter of Polish culture . The partitions came to be seen in Poland as a Polish sacrifice for the security for Western civilization . Adam Mickiewicz wrote the patriotic drama Dziady (directed against the Russians), where he depicts Poland as the Christ of Nations. He also wrote "Verily I say unto you, it is not for you to learn civilization from foreigners, but it is you who are to teach them civilization ... You are among the foreigners like the Apostles among the idolaters". In Books of the Polish Nation and Polish Pilgrimage Mickiewicz detailed his vision of Poland as a Messias and a Christ of Nations, that would save mankind. Dziady is known for various interpretation. The most known ones are the moral aspect of part II, individualist and romantic message of part IV, as well as deeply patriotic, messianistic and Christian vision in part III of the poem. Zdzisław Kępiński, however, focuses his interpretation on Slavic pagan and occult elements found in the drama. In his book Mickiewicz hermetyczny he writes about hermetic , theosophic and alchemical philosophy on the book as well as Masonic symbols.

Arts [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Church of the Savior on Blood , St Petersburg , 1883–1907 See also: Neo-romanticism , musical nationalism , and National Romantic style After the 1870s "national romanticism", as it is more usually called, became a familiar movement in the arts. Romantic musical nationalism is exemplified by the work of Bedřich Smetana , especially the symphonic poem " Vltava ". In Scandinavia and the Slavic parts of Europe especially, "national romanticism" provided a series of answers to the 19th-century search for styles that would be culturally meaningful and evocative, yet not merely historicist. When a church was built over the spot in St Petersburg where Tsar Alexander II of Russia had been assassinated, the " Church of the Savior on Blood ", the natural style to use was one that best evoked traditional Russian features ( illustration, left ). In Finland, the reassembly of the national epic, the Kalevala , inspired paintings and murals in the National Romantic style that substituted there for the international Art Nouveau styles. The foremost proponent in Finland was Akseli Gallen-Kallela ( illustration, below right ).

The Defense of the Sampo , Akseli Gallen-Kallela By the turn of the century, ethnic self-determination had become an assumption held as being progressive and liberal. There were romantic nationalist movements for separation in Finland , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , the Kingdom of Bavaria held apart from a united Germany, and Czech and Serb nationalism continued to trouble Imperial politics. The flowering of arts which drew inspiration from national epics and song continued unabated. The Zionist movement revived Hebrew, and began immigration to Eretz Yisrael , and Welsh and Irish tongues also experienced a poetic revival.

Claims of primacy or superiority [ edit ] At the same time, linguistic and cultural nationality, colored with pre-genetic concepts of race, bolstered two rhetorical claims used to this day: claims of primacy and claims of superiority. Primacy is the claimed inalienable right of a culturally and racially defined people to a geographical terrain, a "heartland" (a vivid expression) or homeland .

Richard Wagner notoriously argued that those who were ethnically different could not comprehend the artistic and cultural meaning inherent in national culture. Identifying "Jewishness" even in musical style, [ 20 ] he specifically attacked the Jews as being unwilling to assimilate into German culture, and thus unable to truly comprehend the mysteries of its music and language. Sometimes "national epics" such as the Nibelunglied have had a galvanizing effect on social politics.

Twentieth-century political developments [ edit ] Frog Tsarevna , by Viktor Vasnetsov , 1918 In the first two decades of the 20th century, Romantic Nationalism as an idea was to have crucial influence on political events. Following the Panic of 1873 that gave rise to a new wave of antisemitism and racism in the German Empire politically ruled by an authoritarian, militaristic conservatism under Otto von Bismarck and in parallel with the Fin de siècle (which was also reflected to a degree in the contemporary art movements of symbolism , the Decadent movement , and Art Nouveau ), the racialist völkisch movement which grew out of romantic nationalism in Germany in the late 19th century.

[ 21 ] The rising nationalistic and imperialistic tensions between the European nations throughout the Fin de siècle period eventually erupted in the First World War . After Germany had lost the war and undergone the tumultuous German Revolution , the völkisch movement drastically radicalized itself in Weimar Germany under the harsh terms of the Treaty of Versailles , and Adolf Hitler would go on to say that "the basic ideas of National-Socialism are völkisch , just as the völkisch ideas are National-Socialist".

See also [ edit ] Chosen people / People of God Jews as the chosen people Conservatism Scandinavism Norwegian romantic nationalism Danish Golden Age German question Gothicism Hindutva Pochvennichestvo Britishness Ethnic nationalism Civil religion Polytheistic reconstructionism National epic National treasure National anthem Nationalism Patriotism Rise of nationalism in Europe Historiography and nationalism Musical nationalism References [ edit ] ^ Joseph Theodoor Leerssen, Anne Hilde van Baal, and Jan Rock, eds.

Encyclopedia of romantic nationalism in Europe (Amsterdam University Press, 2018.) ^ Joep Leerssen, "Notes toward a Definition of Romantic Nationalism." Romantik: Journal for the study of Romanticisms 2.1 (2013): 9-35.

online ^ Joep Leerssen , "Notes towards a Definition of Romantic Nationalism", Romantik: Journal for the Study of Romanticisms , 2.1 (2013): 9-25 (28).

^ Miroslav Hroch , "Introduction: National romanticism", in Balázs Trencsényi and Michal Kopeček, eds.

Discourses of collective identity in Central and Southeast Europe , vol. II National Romanticism: The Formation of National Movements , 2007:4ff.

^ Oscar Julius Falnes, National romanticism in Norway , 1968.

^ "The Brothers Grimm - National Acclaim" .

^ "Why Did the Grimm's Fairy Tales Get Linked to Nationalism?" . 17 September 2023.

^ Maria Tatar , The Hard Facts of the Grimms' Fairy Tales , p31, ISBN 0-691-06722-8 ^ Benedetto Croce, "The Fantastic Accomplishment of Giambattista Basile and His Tale of Tales ", Jack Zipes, ed., The Great Fairy Tale Tradition: From Strap Arola and Basile to the Brothers Grimm , p 888-9, ISBN 0-393-97636-X ^ Jack Zipes, The Great Fairy Tale Tradition: From Straparola and Basile to the Brothers Grimm , p 846, ISBN 0-393-97636-X ^ The section "III.Early National Poetry" of The Cambridge History of English and American Literature (1907–21) begins "By far the most important product of the national epos is Beowulf ...

^ Moshe Halbertal (1997), People of the Book: Canon, Meaning, and Authority , p.132: "With the rise of Jewish nationalism, the relation of many Jews to the Bible and the Talmud took another turn. The Zionists preferred the Bible to the Talmud as the national literature, for the Bible tells a heroic story of the national drama whose focus is the Land of Israel. While they objected to the Haskalah politics of emancipation, Zionist thinkers also stressed the role of the Bible, but they thought of it as an element in building a particular national consciousness rather than as the basis of a shared Judeo-Christian heritage enabling the integration of Jews in Europe. Unlike the Talmud, they held, the Bible had the potential to become a national epic. Its drama unfolded in the hills of Judea, and it connected the national claim to the land with a historical past. Nothing in the Talmud, in contrast, appealed to the romanticism vital to national movements. It does not tell the glorious story of a nation, it has no warriors and heroes, no geography which arouses longing in the reader or a sense of connection to an ancient home." ^ Rosenberg, Alfred (1982) [1930].

"Book I: The Conflict of Values, Chapter I. Race and Race Soul" (PDF) .

The Myth of the Twentieth Century: An Evaluation of the Spiritual-Intellectual Confrontations of Our Age . Translated by Bird, Vivian. Torrance, California: Noontide Press.

^ Gadberry, Glenn W. (1995).

"Introduction" .

Theatre in the Third Reich, the Prewar Years: Essays on Theatre in Nazi Germany (Contributions to the Study of World History) . Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Publishers.

ISBN 9780313295164 .

^ Berkovsky, Naum Yakovlevich (1935).

"От издательства" (PDF) .

Немецкая романтическая повесть. Том I . Moscow and Leningrad: Academia .

^ "Reactionary German Romanticism" .

Anasintaxi Newspaper, issue 385 . 2013.

^ Heine, Heinrich (2007) [1844].

"Caput XVII" .

Germany. A Winter's Tale . Translated by Bowring, Edgar Alfred. New York: Montial.

^ Lukács, György (1980) [1952].

"Schelling's Later Philosophy" (PDF) .

The Destruction of Reason . Translated by Palmer, Peter R. London: Merlin Press.

^ Lukács, György (1947).

"Romanticism (Die Romantik als Wendung in der deutschen Literatur)" .

Fortschritt und Reaktion in der deutschen Literatur . Translated by P., Anton. Berlin: Aufbau-Verlag.

^ Wagner, Das Judenthum in der Musik 1850.

^ Poewe, Karla; Hexham, Irving (2009). "The Völkisch Modernist Beginnings of National Socialism: Its Intrusion into the Church and Its Antisemitic Consequence".

Religion Compass .

3 (4): 676– 696.

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8171.2009.00156.x .

ISSN 1749-8171 .

Sources [ edit ] Adam Zamoyski; Holy Madness: Romantics, Patriots and Revolutionaries 1776-1871; (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1999); Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Thirteenth Address, Addresses to the Gerrnan Nation, ed. George A. Kelly (New York: Harper Torch Books, 1968).

Encyclopedia of Romantic Nationalism in Europe , ed.

Joep Leerssen (2 vols.; Amsterdam University Press, 2018) ISBN 9789462981188 External links [ edit ] Encyclopedia of Romantic Nationalism in Europe , online encyclopedia and source materials edited by Joep Leerssen .

"Encyclopedia of 1848 Revolutions" , comprehensive collection of new articles by modern scholars v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐wtp7m
Cached time: 20250812015809
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.528 seconds
Real time usage: 0.679 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2910/1000000
Revision size: 32562/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 171891/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4998/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84546/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.276/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7435114/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  476.376      1 -total
 27.83%  132.579      1 Template:Reflist
 16.27%   77.522      1 Template:Nationalism_sidebar
 15.78%   75.172      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.02%   66.785      4 Template:Navbox
 13.96%   66.507      2 Template:Cite_web
 12.58%   59.909      1 Template:Short_description
 10.45%   49.764      1 Template:Romanticism
  8.81%   41.974      1 Template:Original_research
  8.40%   40.011      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26096:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015809 and revision id 1288477046. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Romantic_nationalism&oldid=1288477046 " Categories : Romantic nationalism Nationalism Themes of the Romantic Movement National mysticism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from September 2024 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles needing additional references from September 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 22:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Romantic nationalism 37 languages Add topic

