Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Definitions 3 Impact 4 Fashion 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Geek 39 languages العربية Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego گیلکی 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Expert or enthusiast obsessed with a hobby or intellectual pursuit For other uses, see Geek (disambiguation) .

A geek girl at the Geek Picnic ( Moscow ) wearing a Geek shirt and a VR headset The word geek is a slang term originally used to describe eccentric or non-mainstream people; in current use, the word typically connotes an expert or enthusiast obsessed with a hobby or intellectual pursuit. In the past, it had a generally pejorative meaning of a "peculiar person, especially one who is perceived to be overly intellectual, unfashionable, boring, or socially awkward".

[ 1 ] In the 21st century, it was reclaimed and used by many people, especially members of some fandoms , as a positive term.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Some use the term self-referentially without malice or as a source of pride, [ 5 ] often referring simply to "someone who is interested in a subject (usually intellectual or complex) for its own sake".

Etymology [ edit ] The word comes from English dialect geek or geck (meaning a "fool" or " freak "; from Middle Low German Geck ).

Geck is a standard term in modern German and means "fool" or "fop".

[ 6 ] The root also survives in the Dutch and Afrikaans adjective gek ("crazy"), as well as some German dialects , like the Alsatian word Gickeleshut (" jester 's hat"; used during carnival).

[ 1 ] In 18th century Austria , Gecken were freaks on display in some circuses . In 19th century North America, the term geek referred to a performer in a geek show in a circus, traveling carnival or travelling funfair sideshows (see also freak show ).

[ 7 ] The 1976 edition of the American Heritage Dictionary included only the definition regarding geek shows.

[ clarification needed ] This is the sense of "geek" in William Lindsay Gresham 's 1946 novel Nightmare Alley , twice adapted for the screen in 1947 and 2021.

Definitions [ edit ] The 1975 edition of the American Heritage Dictionary, published a decade before the Digital Revolution , gave only one definition: "Geek [noun, slang]. A carnival performer whose act usually consists of biting the head off a live chicken or snake." The tech revolution found new uses for this word, but it still often conveys a derogatory sting. In 2017, Dictionary.com gave five definitions, the fourth of which is "a carnival performer who performs sensationally morbid or disgusting acts, as biting off the head of a live chicken." [ 8 ] The term nerd has a similar, practically synonymous meaning as geek, but many choose to identify different connotations among these two terms, although the differences are disputed.

[ 9 ] In a 2007 interview on The Colbert Report , Richard Clarke said the difference between nerds and geeks is "geeks get it done" or "ggid".

[ 10 ] Julie Smith defined a geek as "a bright young man turned inward, poorly socialized, who felt so little kinship with his own planet that he routinely traveled to the ones invented by his favorite authors, who thought of that secret, dreamy place his computer took him to as cyberspace —somewhere exciting, a place more real than his own life, a land he could conquer, not a drab teenager's room in his parents' house." [ 11 ] Impact [ edit ] Technologically oriented geeks, in particular, now exert a powerful influence over the global economy and society.

[ 12 ] Whereas previous generations of geeks tended to operate in research departments, laboratories and support functions, now they increasingly occupy senior corporate positions, and wield considerable commercial and political influence. When U.S. President Barack Obama met with Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg and the CEOs of the world's largest technology firms at a private dinner in Woodside, California on February 17, 2011, New York magazine ran a story titled "The world's most powerful man meets President Obama".

[ 13 ] At the time, Zuckerberg's company had grown to over one billion users.

According to Mark Roeder the rise of the geek represents a new phase of human evolution. In his book, Unnatural Selection: Why The Geeks Will Inherit The Earth [ 14 ] he suggests that "the high-tech environment of the Anthropocene favours people with geek-like traits, many of whom are on the autism spectrum , ADHD , or dyslexia . Previously, such people may have been at a disadvantage, but now their unique cognitive traits enable some of them to resonate with the new technological zeitgeist and become very successful." The Economist magazine observed, on June 2, 2012, "Those square pegs (geeks) may not have an easy time in school. They may be mocked by jocks and ignored at parties. But these days no serious organisation can prosper without them." [ 15 ] Fashion [ edit ] " Geek chic " refers to a minor fashion trend that arose in the mid 2000s  (decade), in which young people adopted "geeky" fashions, such as oversized black horn-rimmed glasses or browline glasses , suspenders / braces , and capri pants . The glasses quickly became the defining aspect of the trend, with the media identifying various celebrities as "trying geek" or "going geek" for wearing such glasses, such as David Beckham and Justin Timberlake . Meanwhile, in the sports world, many NBA players wore "geek glasses" during post-game interviews , drawing comparisons to Steve Urkel .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The term "geek chic" was appropriated by some self-identified "geeks" to refer to a new, socially acceptable role in a technologically advanced society.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Akiba-kei and Otaku , Japanese slang Anorak and boffin , British slang Battleboarding Dweeb Furry Gamer Gamer girl Geek Code Geek girl Geek Pride Day Geek rock Geekcorps Girl Geek Dinners Greaser Grok Internet culture Jock Neckbeard (slang) Nerd Preppy Reappropriation Trekkie Video game culture References [ edit ] ^ a b "Geek" .

Dictionary.com-Merriam-Webster entry . Retrieved January 2, 2016 .

^ Are 'geek' and 'nerd' now positive terms?

- BBC News ^ Geek Is Now A Praiseword, Not An Insult Apparently - Forbes ^ The transformation of the word geek - Columbia Journalism Review ^ Olivri, Thomas (November 4, 2014).

Geek-Art: An Anthology: Art, Design, Illustration & Pop Culture . Chronicle Books. p. 4.

ISBN 9781452140483 – via Google Books.

^ "Duden | Geck | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition, Synonyme, Herkunft" (in German). Duden.de. October 30, 2012 . Retrieved June 30, 2014 .

^ "Geek" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved May 3, 2013 .

^ "Dictionary.com: Geek" . Retrieved May 10, 2017 .

^ Kaestle, Thomas (April 14, 2016).

"The story of Traceroute, about a Leitnerd's quest" .

Boing Boing . Retrieved January 28, 2019 .

^ The Colbert Report 17th of January video interview Richard Clarke ^ "Reconstruction 6.1 (Winter 2006)" . Reconstruction.eserver.org. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007 . Retrieved June 30, 2014 .

^ Beckett, Jamie (October 24, 2012).

"Study shows Stanford alumni create nearly $3 trillion in economic impact each year" .

Stanford News . Archived from the original on September 21, 2020 . Retrieved July 12, 2014 .

^ Amira, Dan (February 18, 2011).

"The world's most powerful man meets President Obama" .

New York Magazine .

^ "Unnatural Selection by Mark Roeder" . Archived from the original on March 12, 2014 . Retrieved September 7, 2013 .

^ "In praise of misfits" .

The Economist . June 2, 2012.

^ "Whacky NBA Playoff Fashion!" . YouTube. May 29, 2012.

Archived from the original on November 7, 2021 . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ Cacciola, Scott (June 14, 2012).

"NBA Finals: LeBron James, Dwyane Wade and Other Fashion Plates of the NBA Make Specs of Themselves" . Online.wsj.com . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ Lambert, Katie (July 15, 2007).

"How Stuff works: Geek Chic" . People.howstuffworks.com . Retrieved June 30, 2014 .

Further reading [ edit ] Reagle, Joseph (January 1, 2018).

"Nerd vs. bro: Geek privilege, idiosyncrasy, and triumphalism" .

First Monday .

23 (1).

doi : 10.5210/fm.v23i1.7879 .

ISSN 1396-0466 .

External links [ edit ] Look up geek in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Geek .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Geeks .

Geek Culture: The Third Counter-Culture , an article discussing geek culture as a new kind of counter-culture.

The Origins of Geek Culture: Perspectives on a Parallel Intellectual Milieu , an article about geek culture seen in a cultural historical perspective.

Hoevel, Ann. " Are you a nerd or a geek?

" CNN . December 2, 2010.

"Geek Chic" , USA Today , October 22, 2003 "How Geek Chic Works" v t e Fandoms By type Genre Boys' love fandom Fantasy fandom Furry fandom Science fiction fandom Medium-specific Anime and manga fandom in Poland Cinephilia Disney fandom Disney adults Disneyland social club Donaldism Gamer Sports fandom Production-specific AFOL A Song of Ice and Fire Beatlemania Deadhead Doctor Who Dragon Ball EarthBound Harry Potter James Bond Janeite Juggalo Larries Moonwalker My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic art charity criticism fan fiction music online communities slang MSTies Sherlock Holmes Star Wars Stargate Shrek Sonic the Hedgehog Swiftie Tolkien Trekkie Twilight Demographics Anorak Anti-fan Bookworm Celebrity worship syndrome Cult following Fan Furry Kemonā Geek Groupie Nerd Otaku Sasaeng Tifosi Ultras Organizations and events Amateur press association Car club Boy racer Cruising Import scene Hot rodding Kustom Kulture Lowrider Club Supercar Season Cosplay Fan club Fan convention Fandom names Historical reenactment Live action role-playing game Motorcycle club Harley Owners Group Organization for Transformative Works Railfan Stan Twitter Publications and activities Anime music video Autograph collecting Doujin Doujin music Doujinshi Fan art Fan edit Fan fiction Fan film Fan labor Fan mail Fan rice Fan translation Fanac Fan game Doujin soft Mod Fansite Fan wiki list Fanspeak Fanzine Filk music Real person fiction Vidding Zine Conventions Anime and manga list Comic book list defunct Doujinshi Furry Gaming list Horror Multigenre My Little Pony Professional wrestling Science fiction list by date of establishment Topics Cringe culture Fan loyalty Fan service Odagiri effect Original character Ponysona Shipping Shipping discourse Waifu Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geek&oldid=1303794785 " Categories : 2000s fashion 2010s fashion 2020s fashion 2000s slang 2010s slang Computing culture English-language slang Epithets related to nerd culture Fashion aesthetics History of subcultures Internet culture Nerd culture Stereotypes Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geek 39 languages Add topic

