Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and usage 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Convent 35 languages Aragonés Asturianu Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Lingála Nederlands Português Русский Sicilianu Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Convent (disambiguation) .

Religious community or the building used by such a community Convent of the Conceptionists in Ágreda A convent is an enclosed community of monks , nuns , friars or religious sisters . Alternatively, convent means the building used by the community.

The term is particularly used in the Catholic Church , Lutheran churches , and the Anglican Communion .

[ 1 ] Etymology and usage [ edit ] The term convent derives via Old French from Latin conventus , perfect participle of the verb convenio , meaning "to convene, to come together". It was first used in this sense when the eremitical life began to be combined with the cenobitical. The original reference was to the gathering of mendicants who spent much of their time travelling. Technically, a monastery is a secluded community of monastics, whereas a friary or convent is a community of mendicants (which, by contrast, might be located in a city), and a canonry is a community of canons regular . The terms abbey and priory can be applied to both monasteries and canonries; an abbey is headed by an abbot , and a priory is a lesser dependent house headed by a prior . In the Middle Ages , convents often provided to women a way to excel, as they were considered inferior to men.

[ 2 ] In convents, women were educated and were able to write books and publish works on gardening or musicology [ 2 ] or on religion and philosophy. The abbess of a convent was often also involved in decisions of secular life and interacted with politicians and businessmen.

[ 2 ] Unlike an abbey , a convent is not placed under the responsibility of an abbot or an abbess, but of a superior or prior.

In modern English usage, since about the 19th century, the term convent almost invariably refers to a community of women, [ 3 ] while monastery and friary are used for communities of men. In historical usage they are often interchangeable, with convent especially likely to be used for a friary. When applied to religious houses in Eastern Orthodoxy and Buddhism , English refers to all houses of male religious as monasteries and of female religious as convents.

History [ edit ] The mendicant orders appeared at the beginning of the 13th century with the growth of cities; they include in particular the Dominicans , the Franciscans , the Carmelites , and the Augustinians . While the Benedictine monks and their various variants devoted themselves to their agricultural properties, the mendicant friars settled from the start in the cities, or in the suburbs thereof, preferably in the poorer and more densely populated districts. They therefore had to adapt their buildings to these new constraints.

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Christian monasticism Enclosed religious orders Former Carmelite Convent at Nantes References [ edit ] ^ Evangelisti, Silvia (2008).

Nuns: A History of Convent Life, 1450–1700 .

Oxford University Press . pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 9780199532056 .

Finally, irrespective of religious beliefs, convents remained a possible model for women—Catholic as well as Protestant—to pursue. In Protestant Germany, forms of female religious associative life did not die out, but instead survived in the shape of Protestant convents. These could be governed by a Lutheran abbess, and inhabited by Lutheran nuns in religious habits who claimed membership of a monastic order, paradoxical though this may seem.

^ a b c Hunt, Julie (21 July 2020).

"Nuns: powerful women of the Middle Ages" .

Swissinfo . Retrieved 2022-09-26 .

^ See Etym on line External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Convents .

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Convent" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Carmelite Monastery of the Sacred Hearts — an example of a modern-day convent Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Convent" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

v t e Consecrated life in the Catholic Church Types Consecrated virgin Hermit Religious institute Orders Monastic Cenobitic Chapter Enclosed Idiorrhythmic Canons regular Mendicants Second orders Cleric regular Congregations Secular institute Society of apostolic life Vows Evangelical counsels Poverty Chastity Obedience Profession Solemn vow Vow of silence Vow of enclosure Monastery ( List ) Abbey Chapter house Cloister Convent Double Hermitage Priory Refectory Scriptorium Prayer Contemplation Liturgy of the Hours Mass Meditation Rosary Habit Clerical clothing Coif Cornette Scapular Vestment Members Superior General Provincial Abbot / Abbess Prior / Prioress Grand master Rector Brother Friar Monk Basilian Sister Nun Hermit Anchorite Novice Master Oblate Postulant Lay brother Porter Other Asceticism Foolishness for Christ Tonsure Vocational discernment Monastic cell List of religious institutes Catholicism portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Convent&oldid=1286110065 " Categories : Christian buildings and structures Convents Types of communities Nunneries Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 20:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Convent 35 languages Add topic

