Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 Notes 4 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Neopythagoreanism 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of Hellenistic and Roman philosophy Apollonius of Tyana ( c. 15?–c. 100? AD), one of the most important representatives of Neopythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism (or neo-Pythagoreanism ) was a school of Hellenistic and Ancient Roman philosophy which revived Pythagorean doctrines . Neopythagoreanism was influenced by middle Platonism and in turn influenced Neoplatonism . It originated in the 1st century BC and flourished during the 1st and 2nd centuries AD. The Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition describes Neopythagoreanism as "a link in the chain between the old and the new" within Hellenistic philosophy. Central to Neopythagorean thought was the concept of a soul and its inherent desire for a unio mystica with the divine.

[ 1 ] The word Neopythagoreanism is a modern (19th century) term, [ 2 ] coined as a parallel of "Neoplatonism".

History [ edit ] In the 1st century BC Cicero 's friend Nigidius Figulus made an attempt to revive Pythagorean doctrines, but the most important members of the school were Apollonius of Tyana and Moderatus of Gades in the 1st century AD. Other important Neopythagoreans include mathematician Nicomachus , who wrote about the mystical properties of numbers. In the 2nd century, Numenius of Apamea sought to fuse additional elements of Platonism into Neopythagoreanism, prefiguring the rise of Neoplatonism . ( Iamblichus in particular was influenced by Neopythagoreanism.) Neopythagoreanism was an attempt to re-introduce a mystical religious element into Hellenistic philosophy in place of what had come to be regarded as an arid formalism. The founders of the school sought to invest their doctrines with the halo of tradition by ascribing them to Pythagoras and Plato . They went back to the later period of Plato's thought, the period when Plato endeavoured to combine his theory of forms with Pythagorean number theory , and identified the good with the monad (which would give rise to the Neoplatonic concept of " the One "), the source of the duality of the infinite and the measured with the resultant scale of realities from the one down to the objects of the material world.

They emphasized the fundamental distinction between the soul and the body .

God must be worshipped spiritually by prayer and the will to be good, not in outward action . The soul must be freed from its material surrounding, the "muddy vesture of decay," by an ascetic habit of life. Bodily pleasures and all sensuous impulses must be abandoned as detrimental to the spiritual purity of the soul. God is the principle of good and matter the groundwork of evil . In this system can be distinguished not only the asceticism of Pythagoras and the later mysticism of Plato, but also the influence of Orphism and of Oriental philosophy . The Platonic forms are no longer self-subsistent entities but are the elements which constitute the content of spiritual activity. The non-material universe is regarded as the sphere of mind or spirit .

The Porta Maggiore Basilica , where Neopythagoreans held their meetings in the 1st century BC, is believed to have been constructed by the Statilia gens .

[ 3 ] It was discovered in 1915 near Porta Maggiore on Via Praenestina in Rome .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Allegorical interpretations of Plato School of the Sextii Notes [ edit ] ^ Calvin J. Roetzel, The World That Shaped the New Testament , 2002, p. 68 .

^ Definition of Neo-pythagoreanism by Merriam-Webster ^ The Family of Statilius Taurus, Herbert W. Benario, The Classical World, Vol. 64, No. 3 (Nov., 1970), pp. 73–76 ^ Secret pagan basilica in Rome emerges from the shadows after 2,000 years, Nick Squires, The Telegraph, 19 Nov 2015 ^ The neopythagoreans at the Porta Maggiore in Rome, Lisa Spencer, Rosicrucian Digest No. 1 2009. p36-44 ^ Underground basilica of Porta Maggiore map Bibliography [ edit ] Charles H. Kahn , Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans: A Brief History , Indianapolis: Hackett 2001 ISBN 0-87220-575-4 ISBN 978-0872205758 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Neopythagoreanism ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Neopythagoreanism at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neopythagoreanism&oldid=1303716149 " Category : Neopythagoreanism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 17:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neopythagoreanism 25 languages Add topic

