Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mechanism of activation in humans 2 Macula densa 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Osmoreceptor 8 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Italiano Bahasa Melayu Монгол Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sensory neuron that detects osmotic pressure changes in warm-blooded organisms This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An osmoreceptor is a sensory receptor primarily found in the hypothalamus of most homeothermic organisms that detects changes in osmotic pressure . Osmoreceptors can be found in several structures, including two of the circumventricular organs – the vascular organ of the lamina terminalis , and the subfornical organ . They contribute to osmoregulation , controlling fluid balance in the body.

[ 1 ] Osmoreceptors are also found in the kidneys where they also modulate osmolality .

Mechanism of activation in humans [ edit ] Osmoreceptors are located in two of the circumventricular organs — the vascular organ of lamina terminalis (VOLT) and the subfornical organ . These two circumventricular organs are located along the anteroventral region of the third ventricle, called the AV3V region.

[ 2 ] Between these two organs is the median preoptic nucleus , which has multiple nerve connections with the two organs, as well as with the supraoptic nuclei and blood pressure control centers in the medulla oblongata .

[ 2 ] The osmoreceptors have a defined functionality as neurons that are endowed with the ability to detect extracellular fluid osmolarity . Osmoreceptors have aquaporin 4 proteins spanning through their plasma membranes in which water can diffuse, from an area of high to low water concentration. If plasma osmolarity rises above 290 mOsmol/L, then water will move out of the cell due to osmosis, causing the neuroreceptor to shrink in size. Embedded into the cell membrane are stretch inactivated cation channels (SICs), which when the cell shrinks in size, open and allow positively charged ions, such as Na + and K + ions to enter the cell.

[ 3 ] This causes initial depolarisation of the osmoreceptor and activates voltage-gated sodium channel , which through a complex conformational change, allows more sodium ions to enter the neuron, leading to further depolarisation and an action potential to be generated. This action potential travels along the axon of the neuron, and causes the opening of voltage-dependent calcium channels in the axon terminal. This leads to a Ca 2+ influx, due to calcium ions diffusing into the neuron along their electrochemical gradient . The calcium ions binds to the synaptotagmin 1 sub-unit of the SNARE protein attached to the arginine-vasopressin (AVP) containing vesicle membrane. This causes the fusion of the vesicle with the neuronal post synaptic membrane. Subsequent release of AVP into the posterior pituitary gland occurs, whereby vasopressin is secreted into the blood stream of the nearby capillaries.

[ 4 ] Macula densa [ edit ] The macula densa region of the kidney's juxtaglomerular apparatus is another modulator of blood osmolality .

[ 5 ] The macula densa responds to changes in osmotic pressure through changes in the rate of sodium ion (Na + ) flow through the nephron . Decreased Na + flow stimulates tubuloglomerular feedback to autoregulate, a signal (thought to be regulated by adenosine ) sent to the nearby juxtaglomerular cells of the afferent arteriole , causing the juxtaglomerular cells to release the protease renin into circulation. Renin cleaves the zymogen angiotensinogen , always present in plasma as a result of constitutive production in the liver, into a second inactive form, angiotensin I , which is then converted to its active form, angiotensin II , by angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), which is widely distributed in the small vessels of the body, but particularly concentrated in the pulmonary capillaries of the lungs.

Angiotensin II exerts system wide effects, triggering aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex , direct vasoconstriction , and thirst behaviors originating in the hypothalamus . This is commonly known as the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system .

See also [ edit ] Hypothalamus Vasopressin Baroreceptors References [ edit ] ^ Bourque CW (July 2008). "Central mechanisms of osmosensation and systemic osmoregulation".

Nature Reviews. Neuroscience .

9 (7): 519– 31.

doi : 10.1038/nrn2400 .

PMID 18509340 .

S2CID 205504313 .

^ a b Hall, John E. (2021).

Guyton and Hall textbook of medical physiology . Michael E. Hall (14 ed.). Philadelphia, PA. p. 376.

ISBN 978-0-323-59712-8 .

OCLC 1129099861 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Binder MD, Hirokawa N, Windhorst U, eds. (2009). "Stretch-inactivated Cation Channel (SIC)".

Encyclopedia of Neuroscience . Berlin Heidelberg: Springer. pp.

3865 .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-29678-2_5688 .

ISBN 978-3-540-23735-8 .

^ Turner NN, Lameire N, Goldsmith DJ, Winearls CG, Himmelfarb J, Remuzzi G, Bennet WG, Broe ME, Chapman JR, Covic A, Jha V, Sheerin N, Unwin R, Woolf A, eds. (2015-10-29).

Oxford Textbook of Clinical Nephrology (Fourth ed.). Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-959254-8 .

^ "The Urinary System" .

www2.highlands.edu .

External links [ edit ] theFreeDictionary-osmoreceptor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Osmoreceptor&oldid=1301158967 " Category : Sensory receptors Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are too technical from April 2025 All articles that are too technical This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 10:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Osmoreceptor 8 languages Add topic

