Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Microscopic plankton 1.2 Terminology 2 By habitat Toggle By habitat subsection 2.1 Aeroplankton 2.2 Freshwater plankton 2.3 Geoplankton 2.4 Marine plankton 2.4.1 At the ocean surface 2.4.2 In deep ocean 3 By taxon 4 By size 5 By trophic mode Toggle By trophic mode subsection 5.1 Phytoplankton 5.2 Zooplankton 5.3 Mixoplankton 5.4 Decomposers 6 By life cycle Toggle By life cycle subsection 6.1 Holoplankton 6.2 Meroplankton 7 Other groups Toggle Other groups subsection 7.1 Gelatinous zooplankton 7.2 Ichthyoplankton 7.3 Pseudoplankton 7.4 Tychoplankton 7.5 Mineralized plankton 8 Ecology Toggle Ecology subsection 8.1 Food webs 8.2 Carbon cycle 8.3 Great Calcite Belt 8.4 Oxygen production 8.5 Absorption efficiency 9 Biomass variability 10 Planktonic relationships Toggle Planktonic relationships subsection 10.1 Fish and plankton 10.2 Whales and plankton 10.3 Humans and plankton 11 Plankton Manifesto 12 See also 13 References 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Plankton 94 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Livvinkarjala Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 13 August 2025 .

Organisms living in water or air that are drifters on the current or wind This article is about the marine organisms. For other uses, see Plankton (disambiguation) .

Marine microplankton and mesoplankton Part of the contents of one dip of a hand net . The image contains diverse planktonic organisms, ranging from photosynthetic cyanobacteria and diatoms to many different types of zooplankton , including both holoplankton (permanent residents of the plankton) and meroplankton (temporary residents of the plankton, e.g., fish eggs , crab larvae, worm larvae). 100 μm = one tenth of a mm.

Plankton are organisms that drift in water (or air ) but are unable to actively propel themselves against currents (or wind ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Marine plankton include drifting organisms that inhabit the saltwater of oceans and the brackish waters of estuaries .

Freshwater plankton are similar to marine plankton, but are found in lakes and rivers. An individual plankton organism in the plankton is called a plankter .

[ 3 ] In the ocean plankton provide a crucial source of food, particularly for larger filter-feeding animals, such as bivalves , sponges , forage fish and baleen whales .

Plankton includes organisms from many species, ranging in size from the microscopic (such as bacteria , archaea , protozoa and microscopic algae and fungi [ 4 ] ) to larger organisms (such as jellyfish and ctenophores).

[ 5 ] This is because plankton are defined by their ecological niche and level of motility rather than by any phylogenetic or taxonomic classification. The plankton category differentiates organisms from those that can swim against a current, called nekton , and those that live on the deep sea floor, called benthos . Organisms that float on or near the water's surface are called neuston . Neuston that drift as water currents or wind take them, and lack the swimming ability to counter this, form a special subgroup of plankton. Mostly plankton just drift where currents take them, though some, like jellyfish, swim slowly but not fast enough to generally overcome the influence of currents.

Microscopic plankton, smaller than about one millimetre in size, play crucial roles in marine ecosystems . They are a diverse group, including phytoplankton (like diatoms and dinoflagellates ) and zooplankton (such as radiolarians , foraminifera and some copepods ), and serve as a foundational component of the marine food web . These largely unseen microscopic plankton drive primary production , support local food webs, cycle nutrients, and influence global biogeochemical processes. Their role is foundational for maintaining the health and balance of marine ecosystems.

Although plankton are usually thought of as inhabiting water, there are also airborne versions that live part of their lives drifting in the atmosphere. These aeroplankton can include plant spores , pollen and wind-scattered seeds . They can also include microorganisms swept into the air from terrestrial dust storms and oceanic plankton swept into the air by sea spray .

Overview [ edit ] Ocean chlorophyll concentration is a proxy for, or an indicator of, the distribution and abundance of phytoplankton . The intensity of green indicates how abundant the phytoplankton are, while blue indicates where there are few phytoplankton. – NASA Earth Observatory , October 2019.

[ 6 ] Apart from aeroplankton , plankton inhabits oceans, seas, estuaries, rivers, lakes and ponds. Local abundance varies horizontally, vertically and seasonally. The primary cause of this variability is the availability of light. All plankton ecosystems are driven by the input of solar energy (but see chemosynthesis ), confining primary production to surface waters, and to geographical regions and seasons having abundant light.

A secondary variable is nutrient availability. The amount and distribution of plankton depends on available nutrients, the state of water and a large amount of other plankton.

[ 7 ] The local distribution of plankton can be affected by wind-driven Langmuir circulation and the biological effects of this physical process. Although large areas of the tropical and sub-tropical oceans have abundant light, they experience relatively low primary production because they offer limited nutrients such as nitrate , phosphate and silicate . This results from large-scale ocean circulation and water column stratification . In such regions, primary production usually occurs at greater depth, although at a reduced level (because of reduced light).

While plankton are most abundant in surface waters, they live throughout the water column. At depths where no primary production occurs, zooplankton and bacterioplankton instead consume organic material sinking from more productive surface waters above. This flux of sinking material, so-called marine snow , can be especially high following the termination of spring blooms .

Despite significant macronutrient concentrations, some ocean regions are unproductive (so-called HNLC regions ).

[ 8 ] The micronutrient iron is deficient in these regions, and adding it can lead to the formation of phytoplankton algal blooms .

[ 9 ] Iron primarily reaches the ocean through the deposition of dust on the sea surface. Paradoxically, oceanic areas adjacent to unproductive, arid land thus typically have abundant phytoplankton (e.g., the eastern Atlantic Ocean , where trade winds bring dust from the Sahara Desert in north Africa ).

Within the plankton, holoplankton spend their entire life cycle as plankton (e.g. most algae , copepods , salps , and some jellyfish ). By contrast, meroplankton are only planktic for part of their lives (usually the larval stage), and then graduate to either a nektic (swimming) or benthic (sea floor) existence. Examples of meroplankton include the larvae of sea urchins , starfish , crustaceans , marine worms , and most fish .

[ 10 ] Microscopic plankton [ edit ] Microplankton The coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi (μm = thousandth of one mm) Algae bloom of Emiliania huxleyi off the southern coast of England Plankton is mostly made up of planktonic microorganisms less than one millimetre across, most invisible to the naked eye and needing a microscope if they are to be visually examined. Microorganisms have been variously estimated to make up about 70%, [ 11 ] or about 90%, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] of the total ocean biomass . Taken together they form the marine microbiome . Over billions of years this microbiome has evolved many life styles and adaptations and come to participate in the global cycling of almost all chemical elements.

[ 14 ] Microplankton are ecological linchpins in the marine food web . They are crucial to nutrient recycling in the way they act as decomposers . They are also responsible for nearly all photosynthesis that occurs in the ocean, as well as the cycling of carbon , nitrogen , phosphorus and other nutrients and trace elements.

[ 15 ] Microplankton sequesters large amounts of carbon and produce much of the world's oxygen.

It is estimated marine viruses kill 20% of ocean microplankton biomass every day. Viruses are the main agents responsible for the rapid destruction of harmful algal blooms which often kill other marine life . The number of viruses in the plankton decreases further offshore and deeper into the water, where there are fewer host organisms.

Terminology [ edit ] Plankton species diversity Diverse assemblages of unicellular and multicellular organisms with different sizes, shapes, feeding strategies, ecological functions, life cycle characteristics, and environmental sensitivities.

[ 16 ] Courtesy of Christian Sardet/CNRS/ Tara expeditions The name plankton was coined by German marine biologist Victor Hensen in 1887 from shortening the word halyplankton from Greek ᾰ̔́λς háls "sea" and πλανάω planáō to  "drift" or "wander".

[ 17 ] : 1 While some forms are capable of independent movement and can swim hundreds of meters vertically in a single day (a behavior called diel vertical migration ), their horizontal position is primarily determined by the surrounding water movement, and plankton typically flow with ocean currents . This is in contrast to nekton organisms, such as fish , squid and marine mammals , which can swim against the ambient flow and control their position in the environment.

The study of plankton is termed planktology and a planktonic individual is referred to as a plankter.

[ 18 ] The adjective planktonic is widely used in both the scientific and popular literature, and is a generally accepted term. However, from the standpoint of prescriptive grammar, the less-commonly used planktic is more strictly the correct adjective. When deriving English words from their Greek or Latin roots, the gender-specific ending (in this case, "-on" which indicates the word is neuter) is normally dropped, using only the root of the word in the derivation.

[ 19 ] By habitat [ edit ] Aeroplankton [ edit ] Main article: Aeroplankton Sea spray containing microorganisms in marine plankton can be swept high into the atmosphere and may travel the globe as aeroplankton before falling back to earth.

Aeroplankton are tiny lifeforms that float and drift in the air, carried by the current of the wind ; they are the atmospheric analogue to oceanic plankton. Most of the living things that make up aeroplankton are very small to microscopic in size, and many can be difficult to identify because of their tiny size. Scientists can collect them for study in traps and sweep nets from aircraft , kites or balloons.

[ 20 ] Aeroplankton is made up of numerous microbes , including viruses , about 1000 different species of bacteria , around 40,000 varieties of fungi , and hundreds of species of protists , algae , mosses and liverworts that live some part of their life cycle as aeroplankton, often as spores , pollen , and wind-scattered seeds . Additionally, peripatetic microorganisms are swept into the air from terrestrial dust storms, and an even larger amount of airborne marine microorganisms are propelled high into the atmosphere in sea spray. Aeroplankton deposits hundreds of millions of airborne viruses and tens of millions of bacteria every day on every square meter around the planet. This means similar mixes of microscopic plankton taxon can be found in open bodies of water around the world.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The sea surface microlayer , compared to the sub-surface waters, contains elevated concentration of bacteria and viruses .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] These materials can be transferred from the sea-surface to the atmosphere in the form of wind-generated aqueous aerosols due to their high vapour tension and a process known as volatilisation .

[ 26 ] When airborne, these microbes can be transported long distances to coastal regions. If they hit land they can have an effect on animal, vegetation and human health.

[ 27 ] Marine aerosols that contain viruses can travel hundreds of kilometers from their source and remain in liquid form as long as the humidity is high enough (over 70%).

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] These aerosols are able to remain suspended in the atmosphere for about 31 days.

[ 31 ] Evidence suggests that bacteria can remain viable after being transported inland through aerosols. Some reached as far as 200 meters at 30 meters above sea level.

[ 32 ] The process which transfers this material to the atmosphere causes further enrichment in both bacteria and viruses in comparison to either the SML or sub-surface waters (up to three orders of magnitude in some locations).

[ 32 ] Freshwater plankton [ edit ] Freshwater plankton parallel marine plankton (below), but are found inland in the freshwaters of lakes and rivers.

Geoplankton [ edit ] See also: Geoplankton A gastrotrich can lay resilient eggs capable of surviving years in a dry environment. Scale bar: 20 μm.

Many animals live in terrestrial environments by thriving in transient often microscopic bodies of water and moisture, these include rotifers and gastrotrichs which lay resilient eggs capable of surviving years in dry environments, and some of which can go dormant themselves. Nematodes are usually microscopic with this lifestyle. Water bears, despite only having lifespans of a few months, famously can enter suspended animation during dry or hostile conditions and survive for decades. This allows them to be ubiquitous in terrestrial environments despite needing water to grow and reproduce. Many microscopic crustacean groups like copepods and amphipods (of which sandhoppers are members) and seed shrimp are known to go dormant when dry and live in transient bodies of water too [ 33 ] Marine plankton [ edit ] Plankton (organisms that drift with water currents) can be contrasted with nekton (organisms that can swim against water currents) and benthos (organisms that live at the ocean floor). There are also neuston (organisms that live at the ocean surface). Neuston that cannot swim against currents or the wind are a special subset of plankton.

Marine plankton includes marine protists ( algae and protozoa ), drifting and floating animals (particularly microanimals ), marine prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea), and marine viruses that inhabit the saltwater of oceans and the brackish waters of estuaries.

At the ocean surface [ edit ] Further information: Neuston Plankton are also found at the ocean surface. Organisms that live at or just below the air-sea interface are called neuston . They float either on the water's surface ( epineuston ) or swim in the top few centimeters ( hyponeuston ). Many neuston qualify to be categorised as part of the broader plankton community, because they drift largely as currents or wind dictate, lacking strong enough swimming ability to counter them.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Neustonic animals are primarily adapted to float upside-down on the ocean surface, similar to an inverted benthos, [ 37 ] and form a unique subset of the zooplankton community, which plays a pivotal role in the functioning of marine ecosystems.

[ 38 ] Neustonic zooplankton are partially responsible for the active energy flux between superficial and deep layers of the ocean.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Neustonic plankton is also a food source for marine zooplankton and fish migrating from the deep layers and seabirds.

[ 34 ] In deep ocean [ edit ] The ocean conveyor belt carries warm surface waters (red) northward near the surface and cold deep waters (blue) southward. Diverse and flourishing microbial ecosystems have been found deep in the belt.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] In 2025, researchers discovered microbial communities inhabiting the ocean conveyor belt , even at great depths in the ocean.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Ocean currents are generated by surface wind and storms down to about 500 m (1,600 ft) below the surface. But the average depth of the ocean goes far below to 3.7 km (2.3 mi).

[ 44 ] At these greater depths, currents are driven by differences in water density, which in turn are controlled by differences in water temperature and salinity. This mechanism results in a circulation which behaves like a conveyor belt, carrying water and microorganisms to great depths and around the world.

[ 42 ] Water samples were taken along the full depth of the water column in the South Pacific Ocean, from Easter Island to Antarctica. They found marked increases in microbial diversity about 300 m (1,000 ft) deep, in a layer they call the prokaryotic phylocline . This zone, similar to the pycnocline , represents a shift from less diverse surface waters to abundant microbial ecosystems in the deep ocean. For instance, a group they called the Antarctic Bottom Water contains microbes suited to cold and high pressure, while another group they called the Ancient Water Group , located in slowly circulating water isolated from the surface for over a millennium, contains microbes with genes adapted to low oxygen.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] By taxon [ edit ] Plankton contains representatives from all major divisions of life. By taxon, it can be divided into the following broad groups: [ 45 ] [ 46 ] planktonic animals (metazoa) : – mostly predators (zooplankton) of smaller plankton. Examples are arrow worms , sea butterfly , ostracods , and salps . There are also planktonic microanimals typically smaller than one mm, such as copepods , water fleas , rotifers , and larval stages of various crustaceans and corals .

planktonic protists : – single-celled eukaryote microorganisms, mostly invisible to the naked eye, such as diatoms , dinoflagellates , coccolithophores , foraminifera , radiolarians , and ciliates . Planktonic protists include algae (phytoplankton), protozoa (zooplankton), and many mixoplankton .

[ 47 ] planktonic fungi : – known also as mycoplankton , play important roles in remineralisation and nutrient cycling .

[ 48 ] For example, in the mycoloop , parasitic chytrids facilitate the transfer of nutrients from large, inedible phytoplankton to zooplankton.

planktonic prokaryotes : – ( bacteria and archaea – planktonic bacteria are known also as bacterioplankton ) can play important roles as primary producers, or in remineralising organic material like mycoplankton down the water column.

Photosynthetic cyanobacteria are important members of the phytoplankton. The unusually small Pelagibacter ubique , perhaps the most abundant bacterium on Earth, makes up about one third of microbial cells in the surface ocean, [ 49 ] and plays important roles recycling nutrients in the microbial loop . The Roseobacter clade are significantly connected to phytoplankton.

planktonic viruses : – known also as virioplankton , though not always classified as living organisms, are abundant in planktonic communities and influence microbial dynamics. Viruses are small infectious agents that can replicate only inside the living cells of a host organism , because they need the replication machinery of the host to do so.

[ 50 ] They are more abundant in the plankton than bacteria and archaea, though much smaller.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Viruses can infect all types of life forms , from animals and plants to microorganisms , including bacteria and archaea .

[ 53 ] In the viral shunt , viruses infect and break down ( lyse ) bacteria, releasing their nutrients and organic matter back into the water instead of allowing them to be consumed by larger organisms like zooplankton. This "shunts" nutrients away from higher trophic levels, keeping them in the microbial loop for reuse by other microorganisms.

This planktonic animal (metazoa) is a female copepod . It has two egg sacs and microalgae attached to its body These are shells of planktonic protists called radiolarians , drawn by Ernst Haeckel (1904) This planktonic bacterium is the cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus , the smallest photosynthetic organism in the world. It contributes up to 20% of the world's oxygen production, more than all tropical rainforests.

[ 54 ] This planktonic virus (arrowed) is the giant coccolithovirus, Emiliania huxleyi virus 86 , infecting an Emiliania huxleyi coccolithophore Plankton sizes by taxonomic groups [ 55 ] By size [ edit ] Part of a series on Plankton By habitat Aeroplankton Geoplankton Marine plankton prokaryotes protists Freshwater plankton By taxon Algae diatoms coccolithophores dinoflagellates Protozoans radiolarians foraminiferans amoebae ciliates Bacteria cyanobacteria Archaea Viruses By size Heterotrophic picoplankton Microalgae Microzooplankton Nanophytoplankton calcareous Photosynthetic picoplankton Picoeukaryote Picoplankton Marine microplankton By trophic mode Phytoplankton Zooplankton Mixoplankton Decomposition microbial loop mycoloop viral shunt Other types Gelatinous zooplankton Holoplankton Ichthyoplankton Meroplankton Pseudoplankton Tychoplankton Blooms Algal bloom Critical depth Cyanobacterial bloom Harmful algal bloom Spring bloom Eutrophication Great Atlantic Sargassum Belt Great Calcite Belt Milky seas effect Related topics Algaculture CLAW hypothesis CPR Diel vertical migration f-ratio Marine primary production Ocean fertilization iron Paradox of the plankton Planktivore Planktology Thin layers NAAMES Category v t e Plankton are also often described in terms of size. Usually the following divisions are used: [ 56 ] Group Size range ( ESD ) Examples Megaplankton > 20 cm metazoans ; e.g.

jellyfish ; ctenophores ; salps and pyrosomes (pelagic Tunicata ); Cephalopoda ; Amphipoda Macroplankton 2→20 cm metazoans ; e.g.

Pteropoda ; Chaetognaths ; Medusae ; ctenophores ; salps , doliolids and pyrosomes (pelagic Tunicata ); Cephalopoda ; Janthina and Recluzia (two genera of gastropods); Amphipoda Mesoplankton 0.2→20 mm metazoans ; e.g.

copepods ; Medusae ; Cladocera ; Ostracoda ; Chaetognaths ; Pteropoda ; Tunicata Microplankton 20→200 μm large eukaryotic protists ; most phytoplankton ; Protozoa Foraminifera ; tintinnids ; other ciliates ; Rotifera ; juvenile metazoans – Crustacea ( copepod nauplii) Nanoplankton 2→20 μm small eukaryotic protists ; small diatoms ; small flagellates ; Pyrrophyta ; Chrysophyta ; Chlorophyta ; Xanthophyta Picoplankton 0.2→2 μm small eukaryotic protists ; bacteria ; Chrysophyta Femtoplankton < 0.2 μm marine viruses However, some of these terms may be used with very different boundaries, especially on the larger end. The term microplankton is sometimes used more broadly to cover plankton that cannot really be seen without using a microscope, say plankton less than about one millimetre across. The existence and importance of nano- and even smaller plankton was only discovered during the 1980s, but they are thought to make up the largest proportion of all plankton in number and diversity. It is the largely unseen microplankton that are the main drivers of the marine food web .

Microplankton and smaller groups are microorganisms that operate at low Reynolds numbers , where the viscosity of water is more important than its mass or inertia.

[ 57 ] Microplankton Some marine diatoms — a key phytoplankton group Pelagibacter ubique , the most common bacteria in the ocean, plays a major role in global carbon cycles The sea sparkle dinoflagellate glows in the night to produce the milky seas effect Microzooplankton are major grazers of the plankton: two dinoflagellates and a tintinnid ciliate.

Macroplankton Macrozooplankton: the amphipod Hyperia macrocephala The sea walnut ctenophore has a transient anus which forms only when it needs to defecate [ 58 ] A Janthina janthina snail (with bubble float) cast up onto a beach in Maui Sargassum seaweed drifts with currents using air bladders to stay afloat By trophic mode [ edit ] Trophic mode describes the role of a planktonic organism in the food web based on how it obtains energy and nutrients to sustain its growth, reproduction, and survival.

[ 1 ] By trophic mode, plankton can be divided into four broad functional groups: phytoplankton, zooplankton, mixoplankton and decomposers.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Phytoplankton [ edit ] Phytoplankton (from Greek phyton , or plant) are autotrophic prokaryotic or eukaryotic algae that live near the water surface where there is sufficient light to support photosynthesis . Among the more important groups are the diatoms , cyanobacteria , dinoflagellates , and coccolithophores .

Phytoplankton largely form the base of the marine food web Diatoms are one of the most common types of phytoplankton Fossil diatom frustule from 32 to 40 mya A cyanobacteria species ( Cylindrospermum sp) Green algae, Pyramimonas Zooplankton [ edit ] Zooplankton (from Greek zoon , or animal) are small protozoans or metazoans (e.g.

crustaceans and other animals ) that feed on other plankton. Some of the eggs and larvae of larger nektonic animals, such as fish, crustaceans, and annelids , are included here.

Larger plankton tend to be zooplankton which eat phytoplankton Herring larva imaged with the remains of the yolk and the long gut visible in the transparent animal Icefish larvae from Antarctica have no haemoglobin Copepod from Antarctica, a translucent ovoid microanimal with two long antennae A krill larva is zooplankton, though an adult (shown) is nekton Mixoplankton [ edit ] Mixoplankton (from Greek mixis , or mixture) have a mixed trophic strategy. In recent years, there has been a growing recognition that perhaps the majority of plankton can act in both the above modes.

Traditionally, plankton were divided into just the first two broad trophic groups: plant-like phytoplankton which make their own food, usually by photosynthesis, and animal-like zooplankton that eat other plankton. In recent years, there has been a recognition that many plankton, perhaps over half, are mixotrophic .

[ 63 ] Plankton have traditionally been categorized as producer , consumer , and recycler groups, but some plankton are able to benefit from more than just one trophic level. This mixed trophic strategy means mixoplankton can act as both producers and consumers, either at the same time or switching between modes of nutrition in response to ambient conditions. In this manner, mixoplankton can use photosynthesis for growth when nutrients and light are abundant, but switch to eating phytoplankton, zooplankton or each other when growing conditions are poor.

As a result of these findings, many plankton formally categorized as phytoplankton, including coccolithophores and dinoflagellates , are longer included as strictly phytoplankton, as they not only produce their own food through phototrophy but can also eat other organisms.

[ 64 ] These organisms are now more correctly termed mixoplankton.

[ 61 ] This recognition has important consequences for how the functioning of the planktonic food web is viewed.

[ 65 ] Mixoplankton can behave both as phytoplankton and zooplankton A single-celled ciliate with green zoochlorellae living inside endosymbiotically Euglena mutabilis , a photosynthetic flagellate The mixotrophic dinoflagellate Karenia brevis causes harmful red tides Acantharian radiolarian hosts Phaeocystis symbionts.

White Phaeocystis algal foam washing up on a beach Mixotrophs can be divided into two groups; constitutive mixotrophs which are able to perform photosynthesis on their own, and non-constitutive mixotrophs which use phagocytosis to engulf phototrophic prey that are either kept alive inside the host cell, which benefits from its photosynthesis, or they digested, except for the plastids , which continue to perform photosynthesis ( kleptoplasty ).

[ 66 ] Recognition of the importance of mixotrophy as an ecological strategy is increasing, [ 67 ] as well as the wider role this may play in marine biogeochemistry .

[ 68 ] Studies have shown that mixoplankton are much more important for marine ecology than previously assumed.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Their presence acts as a buffer that prevents the collapse of ecosystems during times with little to no light.

[ 71 ] Mixoplankton have ancient origins and have been recognized by scientists for over a century. However, it is only in recent years that the widespread significance of mixoplankton has been gaining recognition in mainstream marine science.

[ 72 ] Decomposers [ edit ] Instead of directly building biomass, decomposers break organic nutrients down into inorganic forms which can be recycled (an approach which metabolically can be costly).

[ 62 ] Fungi: Mostly tiny mycoplankton ( microfungi ), yeast , or mobile zoospores , that can recycle organic matter through a process called the mycoloop which involves parasiting plankton.

[ 62 ] Bacteria/Archaea: These minute prokaryotes (typically <0.001mm) return organic nutrients to inorganic forms by breaking down particulate and dissolved organic matter through the process called the microbial loop .

[ 73 ] Some convert ammonium in animal waste to nitrate, while others transform nitrate to nitrogen gas. Viral infections likely destroy many, while others are eaten by protist zooplankton and mixoplankton, which use their nutrients for photosynthesis. However details of their ecology is complex and it is not clear what sustains them.

[ 62 ] Viruses: Typically 10 to 100 times smaller than bacteria and also the most abundant (~100 billion per litre), viruses infect other plankton and larger organisms. It is thought they efficiently halt vast plankton blooms within days, by turning biomass into dissolved organic matter that supports bacterial growth through a process called the viral shunt .

[ 74 ] Being host-specific, they also likely influence the biological and microbial carbon pumps .

[ 62 ] By life cycle [ edit ] Holoplankton [ edit ] Main article: Holoplankton Tomopteris , a holoplanktic bioluminescence polychaete worm [ 75 ] Holoplankton are organisms that are planktic for their entire life cycle. Holoplankton can be contrasted with meroplankton , which are planktic organisms that spend part of their life cycle in the benthic zone . Examples of holoplankton include some diatoms , radiolarians , some dinoflagellates , foraminifera , amphipods , copepods , and salps , as well as some gastropod mollusk species. Holoplankton dwell in the pelagic zone as opposed to the benthic zone .

[ 76 ] Holoplankton include both phytoplankton and zooplankton and vary in size. The most common plankton are protists .

[ 77 ] Meroplankton [ edit ] Larva stage of a spiny lobster Main article: Meroplankton Meroplankton are a wide variety of aquatic organisms that have both planktonic and benthic stages in their life cycles. Much of the meroplankton consists of larval stages of larger organisms.

[ 33 ] Meroplankton can be contrasted with holoplankton , which are planktonic organisms that stay in the pelagic zone as plankton throughout their entire life cycle.

[ 78 ] After some time in the plankton, many meroplankton graduate to the nekton or adopt a benthic (often sessile ) lifestyle on the seafloor . The larval stages of benthic invertebrates make up a significant proportion of planktonic communities.

[ 79 ] The planktonic larval stage is particularly crucial to many benthic invertebrates in order to disperse their young. Depending on the particular species and the environmental conditions, larval or juvenile-stage meroplankton may remain in the pelagic zone for durations ranging from hours to months.

[ 33 ] Other groups [ edit ] Gelatinous zooplankton [ edit ] Jellyfish are gelatinous zooplankton.

[ 80 ] Main article: Gelatinous zooplankton Gelatinous zooplankton are fragile animals that live in the water column in the ocean. Their delicate bodies have no hard parts and are easily damaged or destroyed.

[ 81 ] Gelatinous zooplankton are often transparent.

[ 82 ] All jellyfish are gelatinous zooplankton, but not all gelatinous zooplankton are jellyfish. The most commonly encountered organisms include ctenophores , medusae , salps , and Chaetognatha in coastal waters. However, almost all marine phyla, including Annelida , Mollusca and Arthropoda , contain gelatinous species, but many of those odd species live in the open ocean and the deep sea and are less available to the casual ocean observer.

[ 83 ] Ichthyoplankton [ edit ] Main article: Ichthyoplankton Salmon egg hatching into a sac fry . In a few days, the sac fry will absorb the yolk sac and start feeding on smaller plankton.

Ichthyoplankton are the eggs and larvae of fish. They are mostly found in the sunlit zone of the water column , less than 200 metres deep, which is sometimes called the epipelagic or photic zone . Ichthyoplankton are planktonic , meaning they cannot swim effectively under their own power, but must drift with the ocean currents. Fish eggs cannot swim at all, and are unambiguously planktonic. Early stage larvae swim poorly, but later stage larvae swim better and cease to be planktonic as they grow into juveniles . Fish larvae are part of the zooplankton that eat smaller plankton, while fish eggs carry their own food supply. Both eggs and larvae are themselves eaten by larger animals.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Fish can produce high numbers of eggs which are often released into the open water column. Fish eggs typically have a diameter of about 1 millimetre (0.039 in). The newly hatched young of oviparous fish are called larvae . They are usually poorly formed, carry a large yolk sac (for nourishment), and are very different in appearance from juvenile and adult specimens. The larval period in oviparous fish is relatively short (usually only several weeks), and larvae rapidly grow and change appearance and structure (a process termed metamorphosis ) to become juveniles. During this transition larvae must switch from their yolk sac to feeding on zooplankton prey, a process which depends on typically inadequate zooplankton density, starving many larvae. In time fish larvae become able to swim against currents, at which point they cease to be plankton and become juvenile fish .

Pseudoplankton [ edit ] Main article: Pseudoplankton Pseudoplankton are organisms that attach themselves to planktonic organisms or other floating objects, such as drifting wood, buoyant shells of organisms such as Spirula , or man-made flotsam . Examples include goose barnacles and the bryozoan Jellyella . By themselves these animals cannot float , which contrasts them with true planktonic organisms, such as Velella and the Portuguese Man o' War , which are buoyant. Pseudoplankton are often found in the guts of filtering zooplankters .

[ 86 ] Tychoplankton [ edit ] Main article: Tychoplankton Tychoplankton are organisms, such as free-living or attached benthic organisms and other non-planktonic organisms, that are carried into the plankton through a disturbance of their benthic habitat, or by winds and currents.

[ 87 ] This can occur by direct turbulence or by disruption of the substrate and subsequent entrainment in the water column.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Tychoplankton are, therefore, a primary subdivision for sorting planktonic organisms by duration of lifecycle spent in the plankton, as neither their entire lives nor particular reproductive portions are confined to planktonic existence.

[ 89 ] Tychoplankton are sometimes called accidental plankton .

Mineralized plankton [ edit ] See also: protist shells and biomineralization Some planktons are protected with mineralized shells or tests .

Diatoms have glass shells ( frustules ) and produce much of the world's oxygen.

The elaborate silica shells of microscopic marine radiolarians can eventually produce opal .

Coccolithophores have chalk plates called coccoliths , and produced the Cliffs of Dover .

Foraminiferans have calcium carbonate shells and produced the limestone in the Great Pyramids .

Ecology [ edit ] Food webs [ edit ] See also: Marine food web Marine food web traditional paradigm [ 90 ] Marine food web mixoplankton paradigm [ 90 ] As well as representing the lower levels of a food chain that supports commercially important fisheries , plankton ecosystems play a role in the biogeochemical cycles of many important chemical elements , including the ocean's carbon cycle .

[ 91 ] Fish larvae mainly eat zooplankton, which in turn eat phytoplankton [ 92 ] The microbial loop : Bacteria play central roles in aquatic food webs. The microbial loop refers to a process in aquatic ecosystems where bacteria consume dissolved organic matter (DOM) and are then consumed by larger microorganisms, effectively cycling nutrients and energy within the ecosystem.

[ 93 ] The viral shunt : Viruses also play central roles in aquatic food webs. The viral shunt is a process where viruses infect and lyse (burst) host cells, releasing cellular contents (including dissolved organic matter) that can be utilized by other microplankton like bacteria, effectively bypassing the traditional food web pathways. This process plays a significant role in nutrient cycling and carbon flow within aquatic ecosystems.

[ 94 ] The basking shark uses filter feeding to strain plankton from the water.

The microbial loop: The link between the microbial loop and the aquatic food web.

Dissolved organic matter (DOM) becomes particulate organic matter (POM) as bacteria eat it and grow to form clumps. Small clumps of organic matter are eaten by bacterivores and zooplankton eat both bacterivores and big clumps of organic matter. Zooplankton are then eaten by fish. Dissolved organic matter is leaked or excreted by zooplankton and fish, and the cycle, called the microbial loop, starts over. Blue arrows show the movement of organic matter from the microbial loop to the food web and back.

[ 93 ] The viral shunt: Phytoplankton live in the photic zone of the ocean, where photosynthesis is possible. During photosynthesis, they assimilate carbon dioxide and release oxygen. For growth, phytoplankton cells depend on nutrients, which enter the ocean by rivers, continental weathering, and glacial ice meltwater on the poles. Phytoplankton release dissolved organic carbon (DOC) into the ocean. Since phytoplankton are the basis of marine food webs, they serve as prey for zooplankton, fish larvae and other heterotrophic organisms. They can also be degraded by bacteria or by viral lysis.

[ 94 ] Fungi have a role as well. The mycoloop is a specific aquatic food web pathway where parasitic chytrid fungi infect large, inedible phytoplankton, and their zoospores (a type of spore) become a food source for zooplankton. In this manner, the chytrid fungi transfer nutrients from otherwise unusable phytoplankton to zooplankton.

[ 95 ] Pennate diatom from an Arctic meltpond , infected with two chytrid-like fungal pathogens (in false-colour red).

[ 96 ] Scale bar = 10 μm.

The mycoloop: Small phytoplankton can be grazed upon by zooplankton, but large phytoplankton are not easy to eat, or are even inedible. Chytrid infections on large phytoplankton can make them more palatabile, as a result of host aggregation (reduced edibility) or mechanistic fragmentation of cells or filaments (increased palatability). First, chytrid parasites extract and repack nutrients and energy from their hosts in form of readily edible zoospores. Second, infected and fragmented hosts including attached sporangia can also be ingested by grazers.

[ 95 ] Carbon cycle [ edit ] See also: ocean carbon cycle and biological pump The ocean food web , showing the central involvement of marine microplankton in how the ocean imports nutrients from and then exports them back to the atmosphere and ocean floor The central role played by pelagic fungi , both parasitic and saprotrophic in the mycoloop , and saprotrophic fungi as active contributors to the microbial loop . The activity of heterotrophic microbes, including pelagic fungi, has far-reaching global implications for fisheries (i.e., the amount of carbon that will ultimately flow to higher trophic levels) and climate change (i.e., the amount of carbon that will be sequestered in the ocean or respired back to CO 2 and the release of other greenhouse gases; e.g., N 2 O.

[ 97 ] Primarily by grazing on phytoplankton, zooplankton provide carbon to the planktic foodweb , either respiring it to provide metabolic energy, or upon death as biomass or detritus . Organic material tends to be denser than seawater , so it sinks into open ocean ecosystems away from the coastlines, transporting carbon along with it. This process, called the biological pump , is one reason that oceans constitute the largest carbon sink on Earth . However, it has been shown to be influenced by increments of temperature.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] In 2019, a study indicated that at ongoing rates of seawater acidification , Antarctic phytoplanktons could become smaller and less effective at storing carbon before the end of the century.

[ 102 ] It might be possible to increase the ocean's uptake of carbon dioxide ( CO 2 ) generated through human activities by increasing plankton production through iron fertilization – introducing amounts of iron into the ocean. However, this technique may not be practical at a large scale. Ocean oxygen depletion and resultant methane production (caused by the excess production remineralising at depth) is one potential drawback.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Great Calcite Belt [ edit ] Yearly cycle of the Great Calcite Belt in the Southern Ocean . The belt appears during the southern hemisphere summer as a light teal stripe.

The Great Calcite Belt is a region in the Southern Ocean characterized by high concentrations of coccolithophores , a type of calcite-producing phytoplankton. It plays a significant role in ocean biogeochemistry and the global carbon cycle. Coccolithophores in the belt produce calcium carbonate ( calcite or chalk ) plates called coccoliths . This process, known as calcification , affects the ocean's carbon cycle by lowering alkalinity and releasing CO 2 . However, when coccolithophores die, their calcite shells sink, contributing to the biological pump by transporting carbon to the deep ocean, sequestering it for centuries or longer and mitigating atmospheric CO 2 levels.

[ 105 ] Oxygen production [ edit ] See also: oxygen cycle Phytoplankton absorb energy from the Sun and nutrients from the water to produce their own nourishment or energy. In the process of photosynthesis , phytoplankton release molecular oxygen ( O 2 ) into the water as a waste byproduct. It is estimated that about 50% of the world's oxygen is produced via phytoplankton photosynthesis.

[ 106 ] The rest is produced via photosynthesis on land by plants .

[ 106 ] Furthermore, phytoplankton photosynthesis has controlled the atmospheric CO 2 / O 2 balance since the early Precambrian Eon.

[ 107 ] Absorption efficiency [ edit ] See also: biological pump The absorption efficiency (AE) of plankton is the proportion of food absorbed by the plankton that determines how available the consumed organic materials are in meeting the required physiological demands.

[ 108 ] Depending on the feeding rate and prey composition, variations in absorption efficiency may lead to variations in fecal pellet production, and thus regulates how much organic material is recycled back to the marine environment. Low feeding rates typically lead to high absorption efficiency and small, dense pellets, while high feeding rates typically lead to low absorption efficiency and larger pellets with more organic content. Another contributing factor to dissolved organic matter (DOM) release is respiration rate. Physical factors such as oxygen availability, pH, and light conditions may affect overall oxygen consumption and how much carbon is loss from zooplankton in the form of respired CO 2 . The relative sizes of zooplankton and prey also mediate how much carbon is released via sloppy feeding . Smaller prey are ingested whole, whereas larger prey may be fed on more "sloppily", that is more biomatter is released through inefficient consumption.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] There is also evidence that diet composition can impact nutrient release, with carnivorous diets releasing more dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and ammonium than omnivorous diets.

[ 111 ] Biomass variability [ edit ] Amphipod with curved exoskeleton and two long and two short antennae The growth of phytoplankton populations is dependent on light levels and nutrient availability. The chief factor limiting growth varies from region to region in the world's oceans. On a broad scale, growth of phytoplankton in the oligotrophic tropical and subtropical gyres is generally limited by nutrient supply, while light often limits phytoplankton growth in subarctic gyres. Environmental variability at multiple scales influences the nutrient and light available for phytoplankton, and as these organisms form the base of the marine food web, this variability in phytoplankton growth influences higher trophic levels. For example, at interannual scales phytoplankton levels temporarily plummet during El Niño periods, influencing populations of zooplankton, fishes, sea birds, and marine mammals .

The effects of anthropogenic warming on the global population of phytoplankton is an area of active research. Changes in the vertical stratification of the water column, the rate of temperature-dependent biological reactions, and the atmospheric supply of nutrients are expected to have important impacts on future phytoplankton productivity.

[ 112 ] Additionally, changes in the mortality of phytoplankton due to rates of zooplankton grazing may be significant.

Planktonic relationships [ edit ] Fish and plankton [ edit ] Zooplankton are the initial prey item for almost all fish larvae as they switch from their yolk sacs to external feeding. Fish rely on the density and distribution of zooplankton to match that of new larvae, which can otherwise starve. Natural factors (e.g., current variations, temperature changes) and man-made factors (e.g. river dams, ocean acidification , rising temperatures) can strongly affect zooplankton populations, which can in turn strongly affect fish larval survival, and therefore breeding success.

It has been shown that plankton can be patchy in marine environments where there aren't significant fish populations and additionally, where fish are abundant, zooplankton dynamics are influenced by the fish predation rate in their environment. Depending on the predation rate, they could express regular or chaotic behavior.

[ 113 ] A negative effect that fish larvae can have on planktonic algal blooms is that the larvae will prolong the blooming event by diminishing available zooplankton numbers; this in turn permits excessive phytoplankton growth allowing the bloom to flourish .

[ 92 ] The importance of both phytoplankton and zooplankton is also well-recognized in extensive and semi-intensive pond fish farming. Plankton population-based pond management strategies for fish rearing have been practiced by traditional fish farmers for decades, illustrating the importance of plankton even in man-made environments.

Whales and plankton [ edit ] Of all animal fecal matter, it is whale feces that is the 'trophy' in terms of increasing nutrient availability. Phytoplankton are the powerhouse of open ocean primary production and they can acquire many nutrients from whale feces.

[ 114 ] In the marine food web, phytoplankton are at the base of the food web and are consumed by zooplankton & krill, which are preyed upon by larger and larger marine organisms, including whales, so it can be said that whale feces fuels the entire food web.

Humans and plankton [ edit ] Plankton have many direct and indirect effects on humans.

Around 70% of the oxygen in the atmosphere is produced in the oceans from phytoplankton performing photosynthesis, meaning that the majority of the oxygen available for us and other organisms that respire aerobically is produced by plankton.

[ 115 ] Plankton also make up the base of the marine food web, providing food for all the trophic levels above. Recent studies have analyzed the marine food web to see if the system runs on a top-down or bottom-up approach . Essentially, this research is focused on understanding whether changes in the food web are driven by nutrients at the bottom of the food web or predators at the top. The general conclusion is that the bottom-up approach seemed to be more predictive of food web behavior.

[ 116 ] This indicates that plankton have more sway in determining the success of the primary consumer species that prey on them than do the secondary consumers that prey on the primary consumers.

In some cases, plankton act as an intermediate host for deadly parasites in humans. One such case is that of cholera , an infection caused by several pathogenic strains of Vibrio cholerae . These species have been shown to have a symbiotic relationship with chitinous zooplankton species like copepods . These bacteria benefit not only from the food provided by the chiton from the zooplankton, but also from the protection from acidic environments. Once the copepods have been ingested by a human host, the chitinous exterior protects the bacteria from the stomach acids in the stomach and proceed to the intestines. Once there, the bacteria bind with the surface of the small intestine and the host will start developing symptoms, including extreme diarrhea, within five days.

[ 117 ] Plankton Manifesto [ edit ] In 2024, the United Nations Global Compact ’s Ocean Stewardship Coalition launched the Plankton Manifesto , [ 62 ] collaboratively developed by over 30 international experts.

[ 118 ] It outlines strategic recommendations to guide global efforts at safeguarding plankton and harnessing their potential to address planetary climate change issues, as well as pollution and biodiversity loss . It emphasizes plankton’s critical role as the foundation of marine ecosystems , producing about 50% of Earth’s oxygen and sequestering 30–50 billion metric tonnes of carbon annually.

[ 62 ] Key recommendations include: [ 62 ] Enhanced research and monitoring: Leveraging technologies like DNA sequencing , bioinformatics , satellite monitoring , and AI image analysis to improve understanding of plankton dynamics and create a global plankton atlas.

Plankton-based solutions: Promoting innovative applications, such as using plankton for water purification , bioplastics , fertilizers , and animal feed to support sustainable industries.

Policy integration: Urging governments, United Nations agencies, and businesses to include plankton in climate and biodiversity frameworks, with endorsements sought at COP29 , COP16 , and the 2025 United Nations Ocean Conference .

Public awareness: Fostering “plankton literacy” through education and interdisciplinary initiatives to highlight their role in food security and ecosystem health .

Collaboration: Encouraging cross-sectoral partnerships among academia, industry, and governments to fund research and protect plankton from threats like nutrient pollution and ocean warming .

See also [ edit ] Paradox of the plankton Seston Veliger References [ edit ] ^ a b Lalli, Carol; Parsons, Timothy R. (1997-04-10).

Biological Oceanography: An Introduction . Oxford: Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-08-052799-4 .

^ Smith, David J. (July 2013).

"Aeroplankton and the Need for a Global Monitoring Network" .

BioScience .

63 (7): 515– 516.

doi : 10.1525/bio.2013.63.7.3 .

S2CID 86371218 .

^ "plankter" .

American Heritage Dictionary . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. Archived from the original on 9 November 2018 . Retrieved 9 November 2018 .

^ Lawton, Graham (10 February 2024). "Fungi ahoy!".

New Scientist .

261 (3477): 37– 39.

Bibcode : 2024NewSc.261b..37L .

doi : 10.1016/S0262-4079(24)00274-4 .

^ Dolan, John (November 2012).

"Microzooplankton: the microscopic (micro) animals (zoo) of the plankton" (PDF) .

Institut océanographique . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2014 .

^ Chlorophyll NASA Earth Observatory. Accessed 30 November 2019.

^ Agrawai, Anju; Gopnal, Krishna (2013).

Biomonitoring of Water and Waste Water . Springer India. p. 34.

ISBN 978-8-132-20864-8 . Retrieved 2 April 2018 .

^ Martin, J.H.; Fitzwater, S.E. (1988). "Iron-deficiency limits phytoplankton growth in the Northeast Pacific Subarctic".

Nature .

331 (6154): 341– 343.

Bibcode : 1988Natur.331..341M .

doi : 10.1038/331341a0 .

S2CID 4325562 .

^ Boyd, P.W.; et al. (2000). "A mesoscale phytoplankton bloom in the polar Southern Ocean stimulated by fertilization".

Nature .

407 (6805): 695– 702.

Bibcode : 2000Natur.407..695B .

doi : 10.1038/35037500 .

PMID 11048709 .

S2CID 4368261 .

^ Karleskint, George; Turner, Richard; Small, James (2013). "17: The Open Sea".

Introduction to Marine Biology (4th ed.). Brooks/Cole. pp.

442– 443.

ISBN 978-1-133-36446-7 .

^ Bar-On, YM; Phillips, R; Milo, R (2018).

"The biomass distribution on Earth" .

PNAS .

115 (25): 6506– 6511.

Bibcode : 2018PNAS..115.6506B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1711842115 .

PMC 6016768 .

PMID 29784790 .

^ Census Of Marine Life Accessed 29 October 2020.

^ Cavicchioli, Ricardo; Ripple, William J.; Timmis, Kenneth N.; Azam, Farooq; et al. (2019).

"Scientists' warning to humanity: Microorganisms and climate change" .

Nature Reviews Microbiology .

17 (9): 569– 586.

doi : 10.1038/s41579-019-0222-5 .

PMC 7136171 .

PMID 31213707 .

Modified text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

^ Bolhuis, H. and Cretoiu, M.S. (2016) "What is so special about marine microorganisms?". In: L. J. Stal and M. S. Cretoiu (Eds.) The Marine Microbiome , pages 3–20, Springer.

ISBN 9783319330006 ^ "Functions of global ocean microbiome key to understanding environmental changes" .

www.sciencedaily.com . University of Georgia. 10 December 2015 . Retrieved 11 December 2015 .

^ Chust, G., Vogt, M., Benedetti, F., Nakov, T., Villéger, S., Aubert, A., Vallina, S.M., Righetti, D., Not, F., Biard, T. and Bittner, L.(2017) " Mare incognitum : A glimpse into future plankton diversity and ecology research".

Frontiers in Marine Science , 4 : 68.

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2017.00068 .

^ Hansen, Victor (1887).

"Uber die Bestimmung des Plankton's oder des im Meere treibenden Materials an Pflanzen und Thieren" [On the determination of the plankton or the material floating in the sea on plants and animals].

Fünfter Bericht der Kommission zur Wissenschaftlichen Untersuchung der Deutschen Meere (in German).

12 ( 12– 16). Berlin, Germany: Paul Parey: 1– 108 – via Biodiversity Heritage Library.

^ "Plankter – marine biology" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Emiliani, C. (1991). "Planktic/Planktonic, Nektic/Nektonic, Benthic/Benthonic".

Journal of Paleontology .

65 (2): 329.

Bibcode : 1991JPal...65..329E .

doi : 10.1017/S0022336000020576 .

JSTOR 1305769 .

S2CID 131283465 .

^ A. C. Hardy and P. S. Milne (1938) Studies in the Distribution of Insects by Aerial Currents. Journal of Animal Ecology, 7(2):199-229 ^ Living Bacteria Are Riding Earth's Air Currents Smithsonian Magazine , 11 January 2016.

^ Robbins, Jim (13 April 2018).

"Trillions Upon Trillions of Viruses Fall From the Sky Each Day" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 14 April 2018 .

^ Reche, Isabel; D'Orta, Gaetano; Mladenov, Natalie; Winget, Danielle M; Suttle, Curtis A (29 January 2018).

"Deposition rates of viruses and bacteria above the atmospheric boundary layer" .

ISME Journal .

12 (4): 1154– 1162.

Bibcode : 2018ISMEJ..12.1154R .

doi : 10.1038/s41396-017-0042-4 .

PMC 5864199 .

PMID 29379178 .

^ Liss, P. S. (1997).

The sea surface and global change . Cambridge New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-56273-7 .

OCLC 34933503 .

^ Blanchard, D.C., 1983. The production, distribution and bacterial enrichment of the sea-salt aerosol. In: Liss, P.S., Slinn, W.G.N. ŽEds.., Air–Sea Exchange of Gases and Particles. D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 407–444.

^ Wallace Jr., G.T., Duce, R.A., 1978. Transport of particulate organic matter by bubbles in marine waters. Limnol. Oceanogr. 23 Ž6., 1155–1167.

^ WHO, 1998. Draft guidelines for safe recreational water environments: coastal and fresh waters, draft for consultation. World Health Organization, Geneva, EOSrDRAFTr98 14, pp. 207–299.

^ Klassen, R. D., & Roberge, P. R. (1999). Aerosol transport modeling as an aid to understanding atmospheric corrosivity patterns. Materials & Design, 20, 159–168.

^ Moorthy, K. K., Satheesh, S. K., & Krishna Murthy, B.V. (1998). Characteristics ofspectral optical depths and size distributions of aerosols over tropical oceanic regions. Journal of Atmospheric and Solar–Terrestrial Physics, 60, 981–992.

^ Chow, J. C., Watson, J. G., Green, M. C., Lowenthal, D. H., Bates, B., Oslund, W., & Torre, G. (2000). Cross-border transport and spatial variability of suspended particles in Mexicali and California's Imperial Valley. Atmospheric Environment, 34, 1833–1843.

^ Aller, J., Kuznetsova, M., Jahns, C., Kemp, P. (2005) The sea surface microlayer as a source of viral and bacterial enrichment in marine aerosols. Journal of aerosol science. Vol. 36, pp. 801–812.

^ a b Marks, R., Kruczalak, K., Jankowska, K., & Michalska, M. (2001). Bacteria and fungi in air over the GulfofGdansk and Baltic sea. Journal of Aerosol Science, 32, 237–250.

^ a b c Stübner, E. I.; Søreide, J. E. (2016-01-27).

"Year-round meroplankton dynamics in high-Arctic Svalbard" .

Journal of Plankton Research .

38 (3): 522– 536.

doi : 10.1093/plankt/fbv124 .

^ a b Albuquerque, Rui; Bode, Antonio; González-Gordillo, Juan Ignacio; Duarte, Carlos M.; Queiroga, Henrique (2021).

"Trophic Structure of Neuston Across Tropical and Subtropical Oceanic Provinces Assessed with Stable Isotopes" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

7 .

Bibcode : 2021FrMaS...706088A .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2020.606088 .

hdl : 10754/667566 .

Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

^ Helm, Rebecca R. (2021-04-28).

"The mysterious ecosystem at the ocean's surface" .

PLOS Biology .

19 (4): e3001046.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001046 .

ISSN 1545-7885 .

PMC 8081451 .

PMID 33909611 .

^ Egger, Matthias; Quiros, Lauren; Leone, Giulia; Ferrari, Francesco; Boerger, Christiana M.; Tishler, Michelle (2021-06-03).

"Relative Abundance of Floating Plastic Debris and Neuston in the Eastern North Pacific Ocean" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

8 .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2021.626026 .

ISSN 2296-7745 .

^ Anthony, Colin J.; Bentlage, Bastian; Helm, Rebecca R. (2024).

"Animal evolution at the ocean's water–air interface" .

Current Biology .

34 (1): 196–203.e2.

Bibcode : 2024CBio...34E.196A .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2023.11.013 .

ISSN 0960-9822 .

PMID 38194916 .

^ Helm, Rebecca R. (2021-04-28).

"The mysterious ecosystem at the ocean's surface" .

PLOS Biology .

19 (4). Public Library of Science: e3001046.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001046 .

PMC 8081451 .

PMID 33909611 .

^ Turner, JT (2002).

"Zooplankton fecal pellets, marine snow and sinking phytoplankton blooms" .

Aquatic Microbial Ecology .

27 : 57– 102.

doi : 10.3354/ame027057 .

^ Jónasdóttir, Sigrún Huld; Visser, André W.; Richardson, Katherine; Heath, Michael R. (2015).

"Seasonal copepod lipid pump promotes carbon sequestration in the deep North Atlantic" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

112 (39): 12122– 12126.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1512110112 .

PMC 4593097 .

PMID 26338976 .

^ Hernández-León, S.; Koppelmann, R.; Fraile-Nuez, E.; Bode, A.; Mompeán, C.; Irigoien, X.; Olivar, M. P.; Echevarría, F.; Fernández De Puelles, M. L.; González-Gordillo, J. I.; Cózar, A.; Acuña, J. L.; Agustí, S.; Duarte, C. M. (2020).

"Large deep-sea zooplankton biomass mirrors primary production in the global ocean" .

Nature Communications .

11 (1): 6048.

Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.6048H .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19875-7 .

PMC 7695708 .

PMID 33247160 .

S2CID 227191974 .

^ a b c d "Deep ocean currents shape microbial communities across South Pacific, scientists discover" .

Phys.org . 2025-07-14 . Retrieved 2025-07-16 .

^ a b c Kolody, Bethany C.; Sachdeva, Rohan; Zheng, Hong; Füssy, Zoltán; Tsang, Eunice; Sonnerup, Rolf E.; Purkey, Sarah G.; Allen, Eric E.; Banfield, Jillian F.; Allen, Andrew E. (2025-07-10).

"Overturning circulation structures the microbial functional seascape of the South Pacific" .

Science .

389 (6756): 176– 182.

doi : 10.1126/science.adv6903 .

ISSN 0036-8075 . Retrieved 2025-07-16 .

^ "How deep is the ocean?" .

NOAA's National Ocean Service . Retrieved 2023-05-10 .

^ Worden, Alexandra Z.; Follows, Michael J.; Giovannoni, Stephen J.; Wilken, Susanne; et al. (2015-02-13).

"Rethinking the marine carbon cycle: Factoring in the multifarious lifestyles of microbes" .

Science .

347 (6223).

doi : 10.1126/science.1257594 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

^ Sunagawa, Shinichi; Coelho, Luis Pedro; Chaffron, Samuel; Kultima, Jens Roat; et al. (2015-05-22).

"Structure and function of the global ocean microbiome" .

Science .

348 (6237).

doi : 10.1126/science.1261359 .

ISSN 0036-8075 . Retrieved 2025-08-11 .

^ Millette, Nicole C.; Leles, Suzana G.; Johnson, Matthew D.; Maloney, Ashley E.; Brownlee, Emily F.; Cohen, Natalie R.; Duhamel, Solange; Poulton, Nicole J.; Princiotta, Sarah D.; Stamieszkin, Karen; Wilken, Susanne; Moeller, Holly V. (2024-06-05).

"Recommendations for advancing mixoplankton research through empirical-model integration" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

11 .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2024.1392673 .

ISSN 2296-7745 .

^ Wang, G.; Wang, X.; Liu, X.; Li, Q. (2012). "Diversity and biogeochemical function of planktonic fungi in the ocean". In Raghukumar, Chandralata (ed.).

Biology of Marine Fungi . Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp.

71– 88.

ISBN 978-3-642-23342-5 .

^ " Candidatus Pelagibacter ubique." European Bioinformatics Institute. European Bioinformatics Institute, 2011. Web. 08 Jan. 2012.

http://www.ebi.ac.uk/2can/genomes/bacteria/Candidatus_Pelagibacter_ubique.html Archived December 1, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Brussaard, Corina P.D.; Baudoux, Anne-Claire; Rodríguez-Valera, Francisco (2016). "Marine Viruses". In Stal, Lucas J.; Cretoiu, Mariana Silvia (eds.).

The Marine Microbiome .

Springer International Publishing . pp.

155– 183.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-33000-6_5 .

ISBN 9783319329987 .

^ Wommack, K.E.; Colwell, R.R. (March 2000).

"Virioplankton: viruses in aquatic ecosystems" .

Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews .

64 (1): 69– 114.

doi : 10.1128/MMBR.64.1.69-114.2000 .

PMC 98987 .

PMID 10704475 .

^ "Plankton" .

Resource Library .

National Geographic . Retrieved 13 September 2019 .

^ Koonin EV, Senkevich TG, Dolja VV (2006).

"The ancient Virus World and evolution of cells" .

Biology Direct .

1 : 29.

doi : 10.1186/1745-6150-1-29 .

PMC 1594570 .

PMID 16984643 .

Modified text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 International License .

^ "How much oxygen comes from the ocean?" .

NOAA's National Ocean Service . Retrieved 2025-07-17 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Karsenti, Eric; Acinas, Silvia G.; Bork, Peer; Bowler, Chris; et al. (2011).

"A Holistic Approach to Marine Eco-Systems Biology" .

PLOS Biology .

9 (10): e1001177.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001177 .

PMC 3196472 .

PMID 22028628 .

^ Omori, M.; Ikeda, T. (1992).

Methods in Marine Zooplankton Ecology . Malabar, USA: Krieger Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-89464-653-9 .

^ Dusenbery, David B. (2009).

Living at micro scale: the unexpected physics of being small . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-03116-6 .

^ Michael Le Page (March 2019).

"Animal with an anus that comes and goes could reveal how ours evolved" .

New Scientist .

^ Flynn, Kevin J.; Stoecker, Diane K.; Mitra, Aditee; Raven, John A.; et al. (2013-01-01).

"Misuse of the phytoplankton–zooplankton dichotomy: the need to assign organisms as mixotrophs within plankton functional types" (PDF) .

Journal of Plankton Research .

35 (1): 3– 11.

doi : 10.1093/plankt/fbs062 .

ISSN 1464-3774 . Retrieved 2025-08-11 .

^ Mitra, Aditee; Flynn, Kevin J.; Tillmann, Urban; Raven, John A.; et al. (2016).

"Defining Planktonic Protist Functional Groups on Mechanisms for Energy and Nutrient Acquisition: Incorporation of Diverse Mixotrophic Strategies" .

Protist .

167 (2): 106– 120.

doi : 10.1016/j.protis.2016.01.003 .

^ a b Flynn, Kevin J; Mitra, Aditee; Anestis, Konstantinos; Anschütz, Anna A; et al. (2019-07-26).

"Mixotrophic protists and a new paradigm for marine ecology: where does plankton research go now?" (PDF) .

Journal of Plankton Research .

41 (4): 375– 391.

doi : 10.1093/plankt/fbz026 .

ISSN 0142-7873 . Retrieved 2025-08-09 .

^ a b c d e f g h Plankton Manifesto Ocean Stewardship Coalition of the United Nations Global Compact , published September 2024.

^ Richard Collins (2016-11-14).

"Beware the mixotrophs – they can destroy entire ecosystems 'in a matter of hours' " .

Irish Examiner .

^ Mitra, Aditee; Caron, David A.; Faure, Emile; Flynn, Kevin J.; Leles, Suzana Gonçalves; Hansen, Per J.; McManus, George B.; Not, Fabrice; do Rosario Gomes, Helga; Santoferrara, Luciana F.; Stoecker, Diane K.; Tillmann, Urban (27 February 2023).

"The Mixoplankton Database (MDB): Diversity of photo-phago-trophic plankton in form, function, and distribution across the global ocean" .

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

70 (4): e12972.

doi : 10.1111/jeu.12972 .

ISSN 1066-5234 .

PMID 36847544 .

^ Glibert, Patricia M.; Mitra, Aditee (2022-01-21).

"From webs, loops, shunts, and pumps to microbial multitasking: Evolving concepts of marine microbial ecology, the mixoplankton paradigm, and implications for a future ocean" .

Limnology and Oceanography .

67 (3): 585– 597.

Bibcode : 2022LimOc..67..585G .

doi : 10.1002/lno.12018 .

ISSN 0024-3590 .

^ Leles, Suzana Gonçalves (November 2018).

"Modelling mixotrophic functional diversity and implications for ecosystem function - Oxford Journals" .

Journal of Plankton Research .

40 (6): 627– 642.

doi : 10.1093/plankt/fby044 .

^ Hartmann, M.; Grob, C.; Tarran, G.A.; Martin, A.P.; Burkill, P.H.; Scanlan, D.J.; Zubkov, M.V. (2012).

"Mixotrophic basis of Atlantic oligotrophic ecosystems" .

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA .

109 (15): 5756– 5760.

Bibcode : 2012PNAS..109.5756H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1118179109 .

PMC 3326507 .

PMID 22451938 .

^ Ward, B.A.; Follows, M.J. (2016).

"Marine mixotrophy increases trophic transfer efficiency, mean organism size, and vertical carbon flux" .

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA .

113 (11): 2958– 2963.

Bibcode : 2016PNAS..113.2958W .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1517118113 .

PMC 4801304 .

PMID 26831076 .

^ "Mixing It Up in the Web of Life" .

The Scientist Magazine . Archived from the original on 2021-01-21.

^ "Uncovered: the mysterious killer triffids that dominate life in our oceans" . 3 November 2016.

^ "Catastrophic Darkness" .

Astrobiology Magazine . Archived from the original on 2015-09-26 . Retrieved 2019-11-27 .

^ Mitra, Aditee; Caron, David A.; Faure, Emile; Flynn, Kevin J.; Leles, Suzana Gonçalves; Hansen, Per J.; McManus, George B.; Not, Fabrice; do Rosario Gomes, Helga; Santoferrara, Luciana F.; Stoecker, Diane K.; Tillmann, Urban (2023).

"The Mixoplankton Database (MDB): Diversity of photo‐phago‐trophic plankton in form, function, and distribution across the global ocean" .

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

70 (4).

doi : 10.1111/jeu.12972 .

ISSN 1066-5234 . Retrieved 2025-08-04 .

^ Azam, F., Fenchel, T., Field, J.G., Gray, J.S., Meyer-Reil, L.A. and Thingstad, F.J.M.E.P.S., 1983.

"The ecological role of water-column microbes in the sea" Marine ecology progress series . Oldendorf, 10(3), pp.257-263.

^ Suttle, C.A., 2007.

"Marine viruses—major players in the global ecosystem." Nature reviews microbiology , 5(10), pp.801–812.

^ Harvey, Edmund Newton (1952).

Bioluminescence . Academic Press.

^ Anderson, Genny.

"Marine Plankton" .

Marine Science . Retrieved 2012-04-04 .

^ Talks, Ted.

"Zooplankton" .

Marine Life/Marine Invertebrates . Archived from the original on 2017-12-07 . Retrieved 2012-04-04 .

^ "Plankton" .

Britannica . Retrieved 2020-06-13 .

^ Ershova, E. A.; Descoteaux, R. (2019-08-13).

"Diversity and Distribution of Meroplanktonic Larvae in the Pacific Arctic and Connectivity With Adult Benthic Invertebrate Communities" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

6 .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2019.00490 .

hdl : 10037/16483 .

S2CID 199638114 .

^ Hays, Graeme C.

; Doyle, Thomas K.; Houghton, Jonathan D.R. (2018).

"A Paradigm Shift in the Trophic Importance of Jellyfish?" .

Trends in Ecology & Evolution .

33 (11): 874– 884.

Bibcode : 2018TEcoE..33..874H .

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2018.09.001 .

PMID 30245075 .

S2CID 52336522 .

^ Lalli, C.M. & Parsons, T.R.

(2001) Biological Oceanography . Butterworth-Heinemann.

^ Johnsen, S.

(2000) Transparent Animals.

Scientific American 282 : 62–71.

^ Nouvian, C.

(2007) The Deep . University of Chicago Press.

^ What are Ichthyoplankton?

Southwest Fisheries Science Center, NOAA. Modified 3 September 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2011.

^ Allen, Dr. Larry G.; Horn, Dr. Michael H. (15 February 2005).

The Ecology of Marine Fishes: California and Adjacent Waters . University of California Press. pp.

269– 319.

ISBN 9780520932470 .

^ Sorokin, Yuri I. (12 March 2013).

Coral Reef Ecology . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 96.

ISBN 9783642800467 .

^ a b Chapman, Michael J.

; Margulis, Lynn (2009).

Kingdoms and Domains: An Illustrated Guide to the Phyla of Life on Earth ([4th ed.]. ed.). Amsterdam: Academic Press/Elsevier. pp.

566 .

ISBN 978-0123736215 .

^ Simberloff, Daniel; Rejmanek, Marcel, eds. (2011).

Encyclopedia of biological invasions . Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

736 .

ISBN 978-0520264212 .

^ Kennish, Michael J., ed. (2004).

Estuarine Research, Monitoring, and Resource Protection . Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press. p. 194.

ISBN 978-0849319600 . Archived from the original on 2013-01-20.

^ a b Mitra, Aditee; Leles, Suzana Gonçalves (2023). "A Revised Interpretation of Marine Primary Productivity in the Indian Ocean: The Role of Mixoplankton".

Dynamics of Planktonic Primary Productivity in the Indian Ocean . Cham: Springer International Publishing. p. 101–128.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-34467-1_5 .

ISBN 978-3-031-34466-4 . Retrieved 2025-08-06 .

^ Falkowski, Paul G. (1994).

"The role of phytoplankton photosynthesis in global biogeochemical cycles" (PDF) .

Photosynthesis Research ( FTP ). pp.

235– 258.

Bibcode : 1994PhoRe..39..235F .

doi : 10.1007/BF00014586 .

PMID 24311124 .

S2CID 12129871 .

[ dead ftp link ] (To view documents see Help:FTP ) ^ a b James, Alex; Pitchford, Jonathan W.; Brindley, John (2003-02-01).

"The relationship between plankton blooms, the hatching of fish larvae, and recruitment" .

Ecological Modelling .

160 (1): 77– 90.

Bibcode : 2003EcMod.160...77J .

doi : 10.1016/S0304-3800(02)00311-3 .

ISSN 0304-3800 .

^ a b Tung, Alice; Lehman, Peggy W.; Durand, John (2022-04-26).

"Can Bacteria Save an Estuary's Food Web?" .

Frontiers for Young Minds .

10 .

doi : 10.3389/frym.2022.624953 .

ISSN 2296-6846 .

Modified text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ a b Käse, Laura; Geuer, Jana K. (2018). "Phytoplankton Responses to Marine Climate Change – An Introduction".

YOUMARES 8 – Oceans Across Boundaries: Learning from each other . Cham: Springer International Publishing. p. 55–71.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-93284-2_5 .

ISBN 978-3-319-93283-5 . Retrieved 2025-07-15 .

Modified text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ a b Frenken, Thijs; Alacid, Elisabet; Berger, Stella A.; Bourne, Elizabeth C.; Gerphagnon, Mélanie; Grossart, Hans-Peter; Gsell, Alena S.; Ibelings, Bas W.; Kagami, Maiko; Küpper, Frithjof C.; Letcher, Peter M.; Loyau, Adeline; Miki, Takeshi; Nejstgaard, Jens C.; Rasconi, Serena; Reñé, Albert; Rohrlack, Thomas; Rojas-Jimenez, Keilor; Schmeller, Dirk S.; Scholz, Bettina; Seto, Kensuke; Sime-Ngando, Télesphore; Sukenik, Assaf; Van de Waal, Dedmer B.; Van den Wyngaert, Silke; Van Donk, Ellen; Wolinska, Justyna; Wurzbacher, Christian; Agha, Ramsy (2017).

"Integrating chytrid fungal parasites into plankton ecology: research gaps and needs" .

Environmental Microbiology .

19 (10): 3802– 3822.

doi : 10.1111/1462-2920.13827 .

hdl : 2164/9083 .

ISSN 1462-2912 . Retrieved 2025-07-15 .

Modified text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ Kilias, Estelle S.; Junges, Leandro; Šupraha, Luka; Leonard, Guy; Metfies, Katja; Richards, Thomas A. (2020).

"Chytrid fungi distribution and co-occurrence with diatoms correlate with sea ice melt in the Arctic Ocean" .

Communications Biology .

3 (1): 183.

doi : 10.1038/s42003-020-0891-7 .

PMC 7174370 .

PMID 32317738 .

S2CID 216033140 .

^ Breyer, Eva; Baltar, Federico (2023).

"The largely neglected ecological role of oceanic pelagic fungi" .

Trends in Ecology & Evolution .

38 (9): 870– 888.

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2023.05.002 . Retrieved 2025-07-27 .

^ Sarmento, H.; Montoya, JM.; Vázquez-Domínguez, E.; Vaqué, D.; Gasol, JM. (2010).

"Warming effects on marine microbial food web processes: how far can we go when it comes to predictions?" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

365 (1549): 2137– 2149.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2010.0045 .

PMC 2880134 .

PMID 20513721 .

^ Vázquez-Domínguez, E.; Vaqué, D.; Gasol, JM. (2007). "Ocean warming enhances respiration and carbon demand of coastal microbial plankton".

Global Change Biology .

13 (7): 1327– 1334.

Bibcode : 2007GCBio..13.1327V .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2486.2007.01377.x .

hdl : 10261/15731 .

S2CID 8721854 .

^ Vázquez-Domínguez, E.; Vaqué, D.; Gasol, JM. (2012).

"Temperature effects on the heterotrophic bacteria, heterotrophic nanoflagellates, and microbial top predators of NW Mediterranean" .

Aquatic Microbial Ecology .

67 (2): 107– 121.

doi : 10.3354/ame01583 .

hdl : 10261/95626 .

^ Mazuecos, E.; Arístegui, J.; Vázquez-Domínguez, E.; Ortega-Retuerta, E.; Gasol, JM.; Reche, I. (2012).

"Temperature control of microbial respiration and growth efficiency in the mesopelagic zone of the South Atlantic and Indian Oceans" .

Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers .

95 (2): 131– 138.

doi : 10.3354/ame01583 .

hdl : 10261/95626 .

^ Petrou, Katherina; Nielsen, Daniel (2019-08-27).

"Acid oceans are shrinking plankton, fueling faster climate change" .

phys.org . Retrieved 2019-09-07 .

^ Chisholm, S.W.; et al. (2001). "Dis-crediting ocean fertilization".

Science .

294 (5541): 309– 310.

doi : 10.1126/science.1065349 .

PMID 11598285 .

S2CID 130687109 .

^ Aumont, O.; Bopp, L. (2006).

"Globalizing results from ocean in situ iron fertilization studies" .

Global Biogeochemical Cycles .

20 (2): GB2017.

Bibcode : 2006GBioC..20.2017A .

doi : 10.1029/2005GB002591 .

^ Smith, Helen E. K.; Poulton, Alex J.; Garley, Rebecca; Hopkins, Jason; Lubelczyk, Laura C.; Drapeau, Dave T.; Rauschenberg, Sara; Twining, Ben S.; Bates, Nicholas R.; Balch, William M. (2017).

"The influence of environmental variability on the biogeography of coccolithophores and diatoms in the Great Calcite Belt" .

Biogeosciences .

14 (21): 4905– 4925.

Bibcode : 2017BGeo...14.4905S .

doi : 10.5194/bg-14-4905-2017 .

Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

^ a b Roach, John (June 7, 2004).

"Source of Half Earth's Oxygen Gets Little Credit" .

National Geographic News . Archived from the original on June 8, 2004 . Retrieved 2016-04-04 .

^ Tappan, Helen (April 1968). "Primary production, isotopes, extinctions and the atmosphere".

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

4 (3): 187– 210.

Bibcode : 1968PPP.....4..187T .

doi : 10.1016/0031-0182(68)90047-3 .

^ Steinberg, Deborah K.; Landry, Michael R. (2017). "Zooplankton and the Ocean Carbon Cycle".

Annual Review of Marine Science .

9 : 413– 444.

Bibcode : 2017ARMS....9..413S .

doi : 10.1146/annurev-marine-010814-015924 .

PMID 27814033 .

^ Moller, E. F. (2004).

"Sloppy feeding in marine copepods: Prey-size-dependent production of dissolved organic carbon" .

Journal of Plankton Research .

27 : 27– 35.

doi : 10.1093/plankt/fbh147 .

^ Møller, Eva Friis (2007).

"Production of dissolved organic carbon by sloppy feeding in the copepods Acartia tonsa, Centropages typicus, and Temora longicornis" .

Limnology and Oceanography .

52 (1): 79– 84.

Bibcode : 2007LimOc..52...79M .

doi : 10.4319/lo.2007.52.1.0079 .

^ Thor, P.; Dam, HG; Rogers, DR (2003).

"Fate of organic carbon released from decomposing copepod fecal pellets in relation to bacterial production and ectoenzymatic activity" .

Aquatic Microbial Ecology .

33 : 279– 288.

doi : 10.3354/ame033279 .

^ Steinacher, M.; et al. (2010).

"Projected 21st century decrease in marine productivity: a multi-model analysis" .

Biogeosciences .

7 (3): 979– 1005.

Bibcode : 2010BGeo....7..979S .

doi : 10.5194/bg-7-979-2010 .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0011-F69E-5 .

^ Medvinsky, Alexander B.; Tikhonova, Irene A.; Aliev, Rubin R.; Li, Bai-Lian; Lin, Zhen-Shan; Malchow, Horst (2001-07-26).

"Patchy environment as a factor of complex plankton dynamics" .

Physical Review E .

64 (2): 021915.

Bibcode : 2001PhRvE..64b1915M .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevE.64.021915 .

ISSN 1063-651X .

PMID 11497628 .

^ "whale poop and phytoplankton, fighting climate change" .

IFAW . Retrieved 2022-03-29 .

^ Sekerci, Yadigar; Petrovskii, Sergei (2015-12-01).

"Mathematical Modelling of Plankton–Oxygen Dynamics Under the Climate Change" .

Bulletin of Mathematical Biology .

77 (12): 2325– 2353.

doi : 10.1007/s11538-015-0126-0 .

hdl : 2381/36058 .

ISSN 1522-9602 .

PMID 26607949 .

S2CID 8637912 .

^ Frederiksen, Morten; Edwards, Martin; Richardson, Anthony J.; Halliday, Nicholas C.; Wanless, Sarah (November 2006).

"From plankton to top predators: bottom-up control of a marine food web across four trophic levels" .

Journal of Animal Ecology .

75 (6): 1259– 1268.

Bibcode : 2006JAnEc..75.1259F .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2656.2006.01148.x .

ISSN 0021-8790 .

PMID 17032358 .

^ Lipp, Erin K.

; Huq, Anwar; Colwell, Rita R. (October 2002).

"Effects of Global Climate on Infectious Disease: the Cholera Model" .

Clinical Microbiology Reviews .

15 (4): 757– 770.

doi : 10.1128/CMR.15.4.757-770.2002 .

ISSN 0893-8512 .

PMC 126864 .

PMID 12364378 .

^ Doumeizel, Vincent; Dolan, John R (2024-12-02).

"The launch of The Plankton Manifesto in September 2024" (PDF) .

Journal of Plankton Research .

46 (6): 525– 526.

doi : 10.1093/plankt/fbae061 .

ISSN 0142-7873 . Retrieved 2025-08-02 .

Further reading [ edit ] Kirby, Richard R. (2010).

Ocean Drifters: A Secret World Beneath the Waves . Studio Cactus Ltd, UK.

ISBN 978-1-904239-10-9 .

Dusenbery, David B. (2009).

Living at Micro Scale: The Unexpected Physics of Being Small . Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts ISBN 978-0-674-03116-6 .

Kiørboe, Thomas (2008).

A Mechanistic Approach to Plankton Ecology . Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

ISBN 978-0-691-13422-2 .

Dolan, J.R., Agatha, S., Coats, D.W., Montagnes, D.J.S., Stocker, D.K., eds. (2013).

Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton . Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, UK ISBN 978-0-470-67151-1 .

External links [ edit ] Look up plankton in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Plankton .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Plankton ".

Wikiquote has quotations related to Plankton .

Ocean Drifters – Short film narrated by David Attenborough about the varied roles of plankton Plankton Chronicles Archived 2020-07-28 at the Wayback Machine – Short documentary films and photos COPEPOD: The Global Plankton Database – Global coverage database of zooplankton biomass and abundance data Plankton*Net Archived 2006-08-21 at the Wayback Machine – Taxonomic database of images of plankton species Guide to the marine zooplankton of south-eastern Australia – Tasmanian Aquaculture and Fisheries Institute Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science – Continuous Plankton Recorder Survey Australian Continuous Plankton Recorder Project – Integrated Marine Observing System Sea Drifters – BBC Audio slideshow Aquaparadox: the diversity of planktonic microorganisms – Images of planktonic microorganisms Plankton, planktic, planktonic – Essays on nomenclature Journal of Plankton Research [ dead link ] – Scientific periodical devoted to plankton v t e Plankton About plankton Algal bloom CLAW hypothesis High lipid content microalgae Holoplankton Marine microorganisms Meroplankton Mycoplankton Milky seas effect Paradox of the plankton Planktivore Planktology Red tide Spring bloom Thin layers More...

By size Eukaryotic picoplankton Heterotrophic picoplankton Marine microplankton Microphyte (microalgae) Nanophytoplankton Photosynthetic picoplankton Picobiliphyte Picoeukaryote Picoplankton Bacterioplankton Aeromonas salmonicida Cyanobacteria Cyanobiont Cyanotoxin Enteric redmouth disease Flavobacterium Flavobacterium columnare Pelagibacter ubique Marine bacteriophage SAR11 clade Streptococcus iniae Phytoplankton Auxospore Axodine Bacteriastrum Chaetoceros Chaetocerotaceae Coccolithophore Emiliania huxleyi Eustigmatophyte Frustule Stramenopile Nannochloropsis Navicula Prasinophyceae Raphidophyte Thalassiosira pseudonana Diatom orders Centrales Pennales Classes: Coscinodiscophyceae Fragilariophyceae Bacillariophyceae Flagellates Brevetoxin Choanoflagellates Dinoflagellates Flagellum Pfiesteria piscicida Saxitoxin Symbiodinium Velvet (fish disease) Zooplankton Chaetognatha Ciguatera Ctenophora Gelatinous zooplankton Ichthyoplankton Jellyfish Marine larvae Crustacean larvae Salmon louse Sea louse Copepod orders Calanoida Canuelloida Cyclopoida Gelyelloida Harpacticoida Misophrioida Monstrilloida Mormonilloida Platycopioida Siphonostomatoida More...

Related topics Aeroplankton Algaculture Algal mat Algal nutrient solutions Artificial seawater Autotrophs Biological pump Diel vertical migration Dimethylsulfoniopropionate f-ratio Fish diseases and parasites Heterotroph HNLC Macroalgae Manta trawl Marine mucilage Microbial mat Ocean acidification Marine microorganisms Marine primary production Pseudoplankton Stromatolite Tychoplankton Zoid C-MORE CPR AusCPR MOCNESS SCAR v t e Aquatic ecosystems General components and freshwater ecosystems General Acoustic ecology Algal bloom Anoxic waters Aquatic adaptation Aquatic animal Insect Mammal Water bird Aquatic biomonitoring Aquatic plant Aquatic population dynamics Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Aquatic science Aquatic toxicology Benthos Bioluminescence Biomass Cascade effect Colored dissolved organic matter Dead zone Ecohydrology Eutrophication Fisheries science Food chain Food web GIS and aquatic science Hydrobiology Hypoxia Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial loop Nekton Neuston Particle Pelagic zone Photic zone Phytoplankton Plankton Pleuston Productivity Ramsar Convention Sediment trap Semiaquatic Shoaling and schooling Siltation Spawn Stable isotope analysis in aquatic ecosystems Stream metabolism Substrate Thermal pollution Trophic level Underwater camouflage Water column Zooplankton Freshwater Freshwater biology Freshwater biome Freshwater environmental quality parameters Freshwater fish Hyporheic zone Limnology Lake ecosystem Lake stratification Macrophyte Pond Fish pond Rheotaxis River Ecosystem Stream bed Stream pool Trophic state index Upland and lowland Water garden Wetland Bog Brackish marsh Fen Freshwater marsh Freshwater swamp forest Ecoregions List of freshwater ecoregions (WWF) Africa and Madagascar Latin America and the Caribbean List of marine ecoregions Specific examples Everglades Maharashtra North Pacific Subtropical Gyre San Francisco Estuary Marine ecosystems ( components ) General Deep scattering layer Diel vertical migration f-ratio Iron fertilization Large marine ecosystem Marine biology Marine chemistry Marine food web Marine primary production Marine snow Ocean fertilization Oceanic physical-biological process Ocean turbidity Photophore Thorson's rule Upwelling Viral shunt Whale fall Marine life Census of Marine Life Deep-sea community Deep-water coral Marine fungi Marine invertebrates Marine larval ecology Seagrass Seashore wildlife Wild fisheries Microorganisms Marine bacteriophage Marine prokaryotes Marine protists Marine viruses Paradox of the plankton Vertebrates Marine mammal Marine reptile Saltwater fish Coastal fish Coral reef fish Deep-sea fish Demersal fish Pelagic fish Seabird Marine habitats Bay mud Marine coastal ecosystem Coastal biogeomorphology Cold seep Coral reef Davidson Seamount § Ecology Estuary Intertidal ecology Intertidal wetland Kelp forest Hydrothermal vent Lagoon Mangrove Marine biomes Mudflat Oyster reef Rocky shore Salt marsh Salt pannes and pools Seagrass meadow Sponge ground Sponge reef Tide pool Conservation Coral bleaching Ecological values of mangroves Fisheries and climate change HERMIONE Human impact on marine life Marine conservation activism Marine pollution Marine protected area Lakes portal Oceans portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐66xgc
Cached time: 20250814215030
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.841 seconds
Real time usage: 2.145 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11075/1000000
Revision size: 110483/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 382318/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9842/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 567898/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.164/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19758321/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1798.863      1 -total
 56.59% 1017.947      1 Template:Reflist
 32.43%  583.436     59 Template:Cite_journal
 10.48%  188.562     16 Template:Cite_book
  6.81%  122.488      2 Template:Lang
  5.94%  106.832      1 Template:Plankton_sidebar
  4.02%   72.225     15 Template:Cite_web
  3.54%   63.656      1 Template:Short_description
  2.67%   48.103      4 Template:Sister_project
  2.57%   46.257      4 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:25011:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215030 and revision id 1305629427. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plankton&oldid=1305629427 " Categories : Plankton Biological oceanography Planktology Aquatic ecology Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Source attribution Articles with dead FTP links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons link is on Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2025 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 05:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plankton 94 languages Add topic

