Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Contributions 3 Recognition 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul James (academic) 3 languages العربية فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian academic (born 1958) This biography of a living person relies too much on references to primary sources .

Please help by adding secondary or tertiary sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful.

Find sources: "Paul James" academic – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Paul James (born 1958, Melbourne ) is Professor of Globalization and Cultural Diversity at Western Sydney University, and Director of the Institute for Culture and Society where he has been since 2014.

[ 1 ] He is a writer on global politics , globalization , sustainability , and social theory .

Background [ edit ] After studying politics at the University of Melbourne James was a lecturer in the Department of Politics at Monash University , Melbourne before moving to Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology in 2002 as Professor of Globalization and Cultural Diversity, the first professor of globalization in Australia.

[ 2 ] At RMIT he led and secured funding for several successful initiatives, including the Global Cities Institute (Director, 2006–2013); the UN Global Compact Cities Programme (Director, 2007–2014); and the Globalism Institute (Founding Director, 2002–2007; now, the Centre for Global Research) that brought scholars including Tom Nairn , Manfred Steger , Heikki Patomäki [ fi ] and Nevzat Soguk to RMIT.

[ 3 ] He was appointed as Director of the Institute for Culture and Society at Western Sydney University in 2014.

[ 4 ] He was Director of the United Nations Global Compact Cities Programme, a UN International Secretariat with offices in Sydney, Melbourne and New York until 2014.

[ 5 ] Contributions [ edit ] James is primarily known as a theorist of globalization, particularly how local and national communities alter under an emergent level of global integration. His work has been read as challenging the simple notion of 'global flows' presented by other writers such Zygmunt Bauman .

[ 6 ] Using a distinctive comparative method called 'constitutive abstraction' or ' engaged theory ', he has contributed to theories of political culture, the changing nature of community, and the structures and subjectivities of social formation. He is author or editor of more than 30 books, including a SAGE Publications series on globalization. The series, Central Currents in Globalization , is a collection of writings by key figures in the field of globalization. His collaborative work includes writing with other senior scholars such as Jonathan Friedman , Peter Mandaville , Tom Nairn , Heikki Patomäki , Manfred Steger and Christopher Wise , amongst others. His main contribution in the field of global studies is the book Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism .

[ 7 ] He co-edits Arena Journal (1986–present), a publication concerned with understanding the crisis-ridden transformations of our time, and is on the board of a dozen other journals.

[ 8 ] His work also contributes empirically to understanding contemporary politics and culture, particularly in Australia, East Timor, and Papua New Guinea.

[ 9 ] His research on sustainable community development laid part of the foundation for the 2007 legislation that went through the PNG parliament, [ 10 ] and was developed by the Minister for Community Development at the time, Dame Carol Kidu , as the basis of community development policy in Papua New Guinea.

As Director of the UN Global Compact Cities Programme (2007-2014), James also works in the cross-over fields of urban sustainability [ 11 ] and sustainable development .

[ 12 ] He argues against the mainstream view that 'smart cities' are necessarily better or more sustainable cities, suggesting instead that it is the integration of learning and practice which makes for intelligent and sustainable cities.

[ 13 ] Along these lines he is quoted as saying that London used the 2012 Olympics in an intelligent way 'where the economy, politics and culture thrive, aided by good transport and a strong information technology infrastructure, all built on a platform of ecological sustainability'.

[ 14 ] Consistent with this approach, he is one of the key developers of the ' Circles of Sustainability ' method used by a number of cities around the world to respond to relatively intractable or complex issues.

[ 15 ] That method takes the emphasis away from economic growth and suggests that cities should rather be aiming for social sustainability , including cultural resilience, political vibrancy, economic prosperity and ecological adaptation.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Here his key contribution is Urban Sustainability in Theory and Practice: Circles of Sustainability .

[ 19 ] As Research Director of Global Reconciliation (2009–present), an organization dedicated to global dialogue and community-level practice, he has (with Paul Komesaroff) contributed to redefining the concept of 'reconciliation'. Instead of an emphasis on reconciliation as an event of testimony and contrition, the Global Reconciliation Foundation treats reconciliation as an ongoing process of dialogue and practice across the boundaries of continuing difference.

[ 20 ] In 2002, James, Komesaroff, and a management team led by Peter Phipps and Haris Halilovich, ran the first national reconciliation forum in Bosnia Hercegovina. In October 2012, James, Komesaroff and Suresh Sudram, together with a team in Australia and Sri Lanka ran the first national civil-society reconciliation forum in Sri Lanka since the end of the war. This followed a Reconciliation Summit on the Middle East held in Amman, Jordan in 2009, organized by Komesaroff and James.

[ 21 ] Because his work has a general reach, criticisms of James’ work tend to take the form of rebukes for what he does not do or challenges to take seriously mainstream considerations such as citizenship and social movement success.

[ 22 ] For example, describing James's book written with Tom Nairn, Global Matrix , Claudia Aradau (2007, p. 371) initially writes positively that: “Contradiction remains however the structuring principle of the book and a method of analysis. It allows the authors to think alternatives from ‘the field of our own ideological determinations’ (Balibar, 2004, p. 25)". However, she then goes on to criticize the authors for failing to consider citizenship as one of the missing conceptions in the range of alternatives to the world in crisis that the authors describe.

In a similar vein, Bihku Parekh says that despite his comprehensive coverage, "James does not explore how the nation and the state are internally related such that the apparently strange idea of the nation-state was considered self-evident by many." [ 23 ] Recognition [ edit ] Fellow of the Royal Society of the Arts (2010–present) Melbourne Ambassador (2010–present) Collaborating Advisor to the Minister for Community Development of Papua New Guinea (2004-2010); including contributing to drafting the Minister's New Policy Document (2004) and the Corporate Plan (2004-2007) [ 24 ] Bronze Medal, ‘Beyond the Frontiers of Knowledge’, awarded to the Community Sustainability International Project, Malaysia, by the University of Malaya (2005) Member of the G20 Advisory Group to the Canadian Prime Minister (2004) Crisp Medal by the Australasian Political Studies Association for the best book in the field of political studies (1996) Australian Research Council Fellowship (1994-1996) Japan-Australia Foundation Fellowship (1991) References [ edit ] ^ Barcham, University of Western Sydney - Helen.

"Professor Paul James" .

Uws.edu.au . Retrieved 2 August 2017 .

^ "James, Professor. Paul - RMIT University" . Rmit.edu.au . Retrieved 19 April 2013 .

^ "About the Globalism Research Centre - RMIT University" . Rmit.edu.au. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013 . Retrieved 19 April 2013 .

^ (Squiz), Western Sydney University - Root User.

"Professor Paul James" .

Uws.edu.au . Retrieved 2 August 2017 .

{{ cite web }} : |first= has generic name ( help ) ^ "The Cities Programme" . The Cities Programme . Retrieved 19 April 2013 .

^ Bude, Heinz, and Jörg Durrschmidt. (2010). ‘What is Wrong with Globalization? Contra “flow speak” - Towards and Existential Turn in the Theory of Globalization’, European Journal of Social Theory 13 (4), 2010: 481–500.

^ James, Paul (2006).

Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism: Bringing Theory Back In—Volume 2 of Towards a Theory of Abstract Community . London: SAGE Publications.

^ "Arena Journal - Arena" .

arena.org.au . Retrieved 2 August 2017 .

^ James, Paul ; Nadarajah, Yaso; Haive, Karen; Stead, Victoria (2012).

Sustainable Communities, Sustainable Development: Other Paths for Papua New Guinea . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

^ The National , 11 January 2007, The National , 22 May 2009.

^ James, Paul ; with Magee, Liam; Scerri, Andy; Steger, Manfred B. (2015).

Urban Sustainability in Theory and Practice: Circles of Sustainability . London: Routledge.

^ "Economist Debates: Cities: Statements" . Economist.com. 11 January 2011 . Retrieved 19 April 2013 .

^ Bruno Berthon, ‘Smart Cities: Can they Work?’ The Guardian , 1 June 2011.

^ Matthew Saltmarsh, ‘Will Olympics Save East London’, New York Times , 28 July 2011.

^ Amen, Mark, Noah J. Toly, Patricia L. Carney and Klaus Segbers, eds. (2011).

Cities and Global Governance , Ashgate, Farnham.

^ Oliver Balch (9 May 2013).

"Forget Economic Growth, We need real Prosperity Instead" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 August 2017 .

^ Tania Brangan, ‘The Biggest Movement in History’, The Guardian , 7 October 2011 ^ Tania Branigan, ‘China Becomes an Urban Nation at Breakneck Speed’, The Guardian , 2 October 2011.

^ James, Paul ; with Magee, Liam; Scerri, Andy; Steger, Manfred B. (2015).

Urban Sustainability in Theory and Practice: Circles of Sustainability . London: Routledge.

.

^ Rothfield, Philipa, Cleo Fleming, Paul A. Komesaroff, eds. 2008.

Pathways to Reconciliation: Between Theory and Practice , Ashgate, Aldershot.

^ Martin Flanagan, ‘Embracing the Wave of Compassion’, The Age , 9 October 2010.

^ Roland Bleiker, ‘Global Matrix’, Australian Book Review, June–July 2006; Tristan Clayton, ‘Global Matrix’, Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy, vol. 23, no. 5, 2005, pp. 787–8; William Safran, ‘Nation Formation’, Canadian Review of Studies in Nationalism, Vol. 29, Nos 1-2, 2002, pp. 161–63; Lars Bo Kaspersen, ‘Nation Formation’, The European Journal of Development Research, 2000; Paul Reynolds, ‘Nation Formation’, Capital and Class, no. 67, 1999, pp. 196–7; Bernt Jonsson, ‘Politics of Differences, Equality and Religion’, New Routes, vol. 3, no. 2, 1998, pp. 25–6;Philip Smith, ‘Nation Formation’, in Journal of Sociology, 34, 1, 1998, pp. 87–9; Andrew Vandenberg, `Nation Formation’ in Forum, no. 7, 1996, p. 5.

^ Parekh, Bhikhu. 1998. ‘Nation Formation’, Nations and Nationalism 4 (2): 274 ^ ‘Progress should start in Communities, says Klapat’, The National , 11 January 2007; ‘Study on PNG Villages Published’, The National , 22 May 2009.

External links [ edit ] Institute for Culture and Society Academia - articles available for downloading Cities Programme [ usurped ] , UN Global Compact " Economist Debate on Urban Growth" .

The Economist .

Globalism Research Centre , RMIT University v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID ResearcherID Scopus Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_James_(academic)&oldid=1278568876 " Categories : Academic staff of Western Sydney University Living people Writers about globalization Scholars of nationalism Australian political scientists 1958 births Academic journal editors Social theorists Academics from Melbourne Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles lacking reliable references from August 2017 All articles lacking reliable references BLP articles lacking sources from August 2017 This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 06:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul James (academic) 3 languages Add topic

