Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 English usage Toggle English usage subsection 1.1 British usage 1.2 American usage 1.2.1 American territories 1.2.2 During the Vietnam War 1.2.3 War on Terror 2 In popular culture 3 International usage 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Savage (pejorative term) 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pejorative term describing someone uncivilized Taiwanese indigenous peoples in Japanese Taiwan , from a 1926 book titled The Savage Tribes of Formosa Savage is a derogatory term to describe a person or people the speaker regards as primitive and uncivilized . It has predominantly been used to refer to indigenous , tribal , and nomadic peoples.

Sometimes a legal, military, and ethnic term, it has shifted in meaning since its first usages in the 16th century.

Since 1776, American politicians have used the term savage to refer to uncivilized peoples as well as those affiliated with Nazism, Communism, and terrorism.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] According to the National Museum of the American Indian , the word "served to justify the taking of Native lands, sometimes by treaty and other times through coercion or conquest".

[ 3 ] During the 16th century, the noble savage , a romanticized literary archetype, emerged in Western anthropology , philosophy , and literature . The stock character symbolizes the mythical innate goodness and moral superiority of a character in tune with nature and uncorrupted by civilization.

English usage [ edit ] British usage [ edit ] An 1874 passage from Ecce Veritas epitomizes the overlap between the use of "savage" and eugenicist , white supremacist , and Social Darwinist views: ...the prevailing [natural] law seems to be — "once a savage always a savage." Like the Red Indians and nomads generally, we may extirpate but can never civilise them. Science declares, as does Mr. Darwin , that the earlier races of mankind were barbarous ; ... it is the superior races that have thrust out the older and inferior, supplanting them as if by uniform law.

[ 4 ] The 1884 English pamphlet titled Can the independent chiefs of savage tribes cede to any private individual the whole or a part of their states...?

counterposes "European" and "Christian" nations with "nomads and savages" from "feeble races", including Native North Americans, Syrian Bedouins , Iraqi Turkmen , and Central Africans including the Kongo people .

[ 5 ] 1812 American propaganda poster, poeticizing the British alliance with the "savage Indian" during the War of 1812 and demonstrating scalping American usage [ edit ] In the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence , Thomas Jefferson describes Native Americans as "merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare, is undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The 1873 Reports of the Committee of Investigation sent by the Mexican Government to the Frontier of Texas contains 76 uses of the term "savages", possibly in reference to Tejanos .

[ 8 ] The 1899 book The Dark Continent...At Our Doors by Christian evangelist Emilio Dolsson compares the continent of South America with the continent of Africa under the heading "Among the Savage Tribes." [ 9 ] American territories [ edit ] In 1901, the US Supreme Court described inhabitants of its recently acquired territories — Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines — as "savage tribes" as part of the Insular Cases ' DeLima v. Bidwell ruling.

[ 10 ] [ 1 ] In 2023, the ACLU condemned this language, stating it was a method of denying "millions of people...certain constitutional rights and protections", which "showed obvious contempt for the predominately Asian, Black, Indigenous, Latine, and Pacific Islander residents of these territories". The ACLU claimed this continues to contribute to systemic racism today.

[ 1 ] During the Vietnam War [ edit ] The American military used the term used to describe Viet Cong soldiers. During a 1971 court hearing, American airborne ranger Robert Bowie Johnson Jr. stated, "It is like there are savages out there, there are gooks out there. In the same way we slaughtered the Indian's buffalo , we would slaughter the water buffalo in Vietnam".

[ 11 ] He claimed soldiers also used the term " Indian country " to refer to free-fire zones in South Vietnam.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] War on Terror [ edit ] Main article: War on terror The day after the 9/11 attacks on September 11, 2001, president George W. Bush declared a war on terror.

[ 13 ] On an address to the Judiciary Committee on September 24, 2001, Attorney General John Ashcroft reiterated the description of the US as "the civil" and terrorists as "the savage": [ 14 ] [The] attacks of September 11 drew a bright line of demarcation between the civil and the savage, and our nation will never be the same...Today I call upon Congress to act to strengthen our ability to fight this evil wherever it exists, and to ensure that the line between the civil and the savage, so brightly drawn on September 11, is never crossed again.

[ 14 ] In 2020, Jérôme Viala-Gaudefroy of the Université Sorbonne Nouvelle drew a correlation between "The Evil Savage Other as Enemy in Modern U.S. Presidential Discourse", claiming the "savage Other" has been defined as "American Indians of the Frontier, the British during the American Revolution, the immigrants in the early 20th century, the Nazis, the Communists, and more recently...terrorists". Viala-Gaudefroy claims this same strategy was employed to prepare the American public for the Iraq War and to increase support for Trumpism .

[ 1 ] In 2023, the National Park System 's Advisory Committee on Reconciliation in Place Names stated their belief that "all instances of 'savage' should be removed from lands, including geographic features". The committee wrote that the term "has a historic derogatory association with Native Americans".

[ 15 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Citing 1922 Wild West Weekly illustrations, Bowling Green State University claims that, "Historically and today, representations of Native American men have frequently relied on stereotypes of violence, savagery, or primitivism".

[ 16 ] Beginning in about 2008, [ 17 ] the term became an American slang term meaning "bad-ass, cool, and violent".

[ citation needed ] In 2019, while browsing orange shirts to honor Native victims of residential schools for Canada's National Day for Truth and Reconciliation , a teacher at Harrison Trimble High School in Moncton came across an orange shirt which read "Savage est. 1998". Sold by retailer Urban Planet , the orange shirt's text was framed by a white-and-black circular design. This paralleled the NDTR's Every Child Matters shirt, designed by artist Andy Everson of the K'ómoks First Nation . The Every Child Matters shirt was designed for nonprofits, to honor "the thousands of children who died in the federally funded, church-run boarding schools", but was frequently misappropriated by non-charitable groups.

[ 18 ] Douglas Stewart, a teacher of the Sylix/Okanagan Nation , pointed out the similarities and told CBC News , "It's important to understand that for Indigenous people, this word is our N-word ". The assistant manager of the Fredericton Urban Planet agreed that the word should be removed from its clothing, stating, "It's affected Indigenous people for hundreds of years; it still affects them. It would be the same as any other racial slurs printed and then sold in stores".

[ 19 ] In 2020, a clothing company and a restaurant changed its name along with public apologies regarding their usages of the term.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] VII Apparel Company, formerly Savage Apparel, wrote: It feels as if the word has been completely separated from its racist past — and that belief made us feel justified...But despite its origins, it is an indisputable fact that the word savage was used as a racial slur to describe Native American and Indigenous people...And recognizing that fact is what ultimately brought us to the decision to change our name.

[ 17 ] The restaurant SHIFT (formerly named Savage) in St. Louis, Missouri issued an apology the same year, stating the term has "a troubled history and it was a mistake to celebrate that" and described themselves as "truly sorry".

[ 21 ] [ 20 ] International usage [ edit ] In 2004, Pakistani al-Qaeda CEO Mohammad Hasan Khalil al-Hakim published Management of Savagery [ 22 ] (also translated as Administration of Savagery ) [ 22 ] which described a strategy for Islamic extremists to create a new Islamic caliphate .

[ 23 ] In 2015, the European Union funded a "Savage Warfare" project, using the term to apply to British and American colonial campaigns between 1885 and 1914. Funded for €269 857,80, the project aimed to "reconfigure how historians debate Europe’s colonial past, as well as influence current popular interpretations of this crucial period of world history".

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Indian giver References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Viala-Gaudefroy, Jérôme.

"Creating The Enemy: The Evil Savage Other as Enemy in Modern U.S. Presidential Discourse" .

doi : 10.4000/angles.498 . Archived from the original on August 3, 2023.

^ "Words Matter Case Study" .

nmai.si.edu . Retrieved 2024-03-13 .

^ "Words Matter Case Study" .

nmai.si.edu . Retrieved 2024-03-13 .

^ Ecce Veritas. An Ultra-Unitarian Review of the life and character of Jesus. [The preface is signed, Sylva.] . McCorquodale&Company. 1874. p. 96.

^ Can (1884).

Can the independent chiefs of savage tribes cede to any private individual the whole or a part of their states, together with the sovereign rights which belong to them in conformity with the traditional customs of the country?

.

^ "Jefferson and American Indians" .

Monticello . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ Brady, Cheyenne (2020-07-04).

" "Merciless Indian Savages" " .

Center for Native American Youth . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ "The Fate of the Tejanos" . 2024-03-10. Archived from the original on 2024-03-10 . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ Olsson, Emilio (1899).

The Dark Continent--at Our Doors: Slavery, Heathenism, and Cruelty in South America . M.E. Munson.

^ "DeLima v. Bidwell, 182 U.S. 1 (1901)" .

Justia Law . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ a b King, J. C. H. (2016-08-25).

Blood and Land: The Story of Native North America . Penguin UK.

ISBN 978-1-84614-808-8 .

^ Silliman, Stephen W. (June 2008).

"The "Old West" in the Middle East: U.S. Military Metaphors in Real and Imagined Indian Country" .

American Anthropologist .

110 (2): 237– 247.

doi : 10.1111/j.1548-1433.2008.00029.x .

JSTOR 27563986 .

S2CID 162479330 . Retrieved Nov 23, 2020 .

^ "Text of Bush's act of war statement" . 2001-09-12 . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ a b "EPF118 09/24/01 - Text: Ashcroft Outlines Proposed Changes in Anti-Terrorism Laws - (Attorney General testifies before House Judiciary Committee) (2600)" . September 24, 2001. Archived from the original on March 10, 2024.

^ Comments on the Draft Working Lists of Federal Land Unit and Geographic Feature Names - Advisory Committee on Reconciliation in Place Names National Park System Advisory Board Address , circa 2023. Archived March 9, 2024.

^ "The "Violent Savage" · Race in the United States, 1880-1940 · Student Digital Gallery · BGSU Libraries" .

digitalgallery.bgsu.edu . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ a b Eisenhood, Charlie (2020-10-28).

"Savage Apparel Company Changing Name to VII Apparel Company" .

Ultiworld . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ Goodyear, Sheena (July 8, 2021).

"He created a logo to honour residential school victims. Now retailers are using it to 'make a buck' " .

CBC Radio .

^ " 'This word is our N-word': Indigenous teacher asks Urban Planet to drop racial slur" .

CBC News . October 2, 2019.

^ a b "A Restaurant Changed Its Name From 'Savage' Due To The Racial History Of The Term" .

Delish . 2020-06-23 . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ a b "South city restaurant changes name citing its association with 'a troubled history' " .

ksdk.com . 2020-06-22 . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ a b Ryan, Michael W. S. (28 January 2010).

"Al-Qaeda's Purpose in Yemen Described in Works of Jihad Strategists" .

Terrorism Monitor .

8 (4): Jamestown Foundation . Retrieved 7 September 2014 .

^ Wright, Lawrence (16 June 2014).

"ISIS's Savage Strategy in Iraq" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 1 September 2014 .

^ "How 'savage warfare' characterised violence and control in Western imperialism" .

CORDIS | European Commission . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

^ "Savage Warfare: A Cultural History of British and American Colonial Campaigns 1885-1914 | Savage Warfare Project | Fact Sheet | H2020" .

CORDIS | European Commission . Retrieved 2024-03-10 .

v t e Ethnic slurs by ethnicity Africans Abeed Black Diamond Boerehaat Choc ice Cushi Golliwog Kaffir Wog Europeans General Ang mo Bule Cracker Farang Guiri Guizi Gweilo Honky Mat Salleh Redleg Wasi'chu Wigger Wog Albanians Šiptar Turco-Albanian British Anglo-Saxons Limey Pom Scots Teuchter ( Scottish Highlanders ) Welsh Crachach ( Welsh-speaking elite ) Dic Siôn Dafydd ( Anglophile Welsh ) Sheep shagger Taffy Dutch Cheesehead Finns Chukhna China Swede Finnjävel French Cheese-eating surrender monkeys Frog Gabacho Germans Hun Kraut Greeks Grecomans Irish Fenian ( Republicans ) Hun ( Irish Protestant ) Knacker ( Irish Travellers ) Pikey ( Irish Travellers ) Shoneen ( Anglophile Irish ) Taig ( Irish Catholics ) West Brit ( Anglophile Irish ) Italians Dago Goombah Greaseball Guido Guinea Polentone ( Northern Italians ) Sardegnolo ( Sardinians ) Sheep shagger ( Sardinians ) Terrone ( South Italians ) Wop Wog Poles Polack Pshek Russians Moskal Orc Tibla Serbs Shkije Serbomans Spaniards Dago Gachupín Polaco ( Catalans ) Quinqui (Mercheros) Xarnego Ukrainians Khokhol Ukrop Others Bulgarophiles ( Macedonians and Serbs ) Hunky ( eastern and central europeans ) Yestonians ( Russified Estonians ) Asians East Asians General Banana ( westernized East Asians ) Gook Sangokujin Toku-A ( Chinese and Korean ) Twinkie ( westernized East Asians ) Chinese Ah Beng Chinaman Ching chong Chink Chinky Coolie Jook-sing ( overseas / westernized Chinese ) Locust Shina Japanese Jap Jjokbari Nip Xiao Riben Koreans Ban-jjokbari ( Japan-affiliated Korean people ) Gaoli bangzi Sangokujin ( also Chinese ) Taiwanese Tai Ke ( Benshengren ) South Asians General American-Born Confused Desi (ABCD) Coconut ( westernized South Asians ) Coolie Wog Bengali Hindus Bong Bongal Danchi babu Dkhar Malaun Mayang Indians Chinki ( Northeast Indians ) Coolie Keling ( Maritime Southeast Asian-origin Indians ) Pakistanis Paki Southeast Asians Filipinos Vietnamese Eurasians Arabs Rafida ( Shi'ites ) Raghead Wog Jews Christ killer Jewish-American princess (JAP) Kafir Khazar ( Ashkenazi Jews ) Kike Marrano ( Conversos / Crypto-Jews ) Rootless cosmopolitan Wog Yekke ( German Jews ) Yid Zhyd / Zhydovka Żydokomuna Turks Kebab Mongol Kanake Romani , Dom , and Lom Didicoy Gypsies (sometimes used against other semi-nomadic groups) Nawar Zott Oceanians Anglo-Saxons ( English Australians / New Zealanders ) Blackfella ( Indigenous Australians ) Hori ( Māori ) Kanaka ( Pacific Islander ) Coconut ( Pacific Islander ) North and South Americans Indigenous Eskimo ( Inuit / Yupik / Unangan ) , Indian/Injun ( Native American / First Nations / American Indian ) Redskin/Red Indian ( Native American / First Nations ) Squaw ( Native American women ) Blacks Alligator bait Black American princess Black Buck Cocolo Colored House Negro Jim Crow Macaca Mammy Negro Nigger ( Nigga ) Pickaninny Rastus Queen / Queenie Sambo Schvartze Tar-Baby Uncle Tom Wog Whites Anglo-Saxons ( Anglo-Americans ) Becky Buckra Conch ( Bahamians of European descent) Coonass ( Cajuns ) Cracker Gringo Gweilo Haole Hillbilly / Hilljack Honky Karen Peckerwood Redleg Redneck Swamp Yankee Trailer trash Wasi'chu White trash Whitey Whitexican Others Beaner ( Mexicans ) Canuck ( Canadians ) Chirigüillo Cholo ( Mestizos ) Coonass ( Cajuns ) Greaser Gusano ( Cubans ) Half-breed Naco Newfie ( Newfoundlander ) Okie ( Oklahomans ) Pindos ( Americans ) Pocho ( Mexican Americans ) Roto ( Chileans ) Spic Sudaca ( Central and South Americans ) Wetback Yank / Yankee ( Americans ) Outsiders Ajam ( non- Arabs ) Barbarian Fresh off the boat / F.O.B.

( immigrant ) Gadjo ( non- Romani ) Gaijin ( non- Japanese ) Goy ( non-Jew ) Guizi ( non- Chinese ) Kafir ( non-believer ) (pl.

Kuffar ) Reffo / Balt ( Non-Anglo immigrant to Australia ) Savage ( usually Indigenous, regarded as primitive/uncivilized ) Shegetz ( non-Jewish boy or man ) (pl.

Shkutzim ) Shiksa ( non-Jewish woman ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Savage_(pejorative_term)&oldid=1299623390 " Categories : Ethnic and religious slurs Anti-indigenous racism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 13:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Savage (pejorative term) 1 language Add topic

