Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Reception 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Death of the West 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2001 book by Patrick J. Buchanan For the music album, see Sol Invictus (band) .

The Death of the West Author Patrick J. Buchanan Language English Publisher St. Martin's Griffin Publication date 2001 Publication place United States Media type Print ( hardcover and paperback ) Pages 320 This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization is a 2001 book by the paleoconservative commentator Patrick J. Buchanan . In his book, Patrick J. Buchanan argues that Western culture will soon be imperiled.

Summary [ edit ] The title of the book is a reference to Oswald Spengler 's book Decline of the West . Buchanan argues that the culture that produced western civilization as it has traditionally been understood is in its death throes in the United States because by the year 2050, the United States will cease to be a western country.

[ 1 ] He uses United Nations population statistics to analyze the recent trends in global populations, especially the major declines in the populations of European nations and the major increases in the populations of Asia, Africa, and Latin America.

Buchanan argues that the United States already has a "nation within a nation". The population of 30 million foreign-born people (of which 11 million are "illegal aliens") is larger than the entire populations of Rhode Island , Massachusetts , and Connecticut combined.

Buchanan argues that the "counter culture" of the 1960s has become the dominant culture, and he also argues that the counter culture aims to rewrite American history and dismantle its heritage. In his opinion, this culture is a hostile culture because it regards western civilization with antipathy: "A new generation has now grown up for whom the cultural revolution is not a revolution at all, but the culture they were born into and have known all their lives." [ 2 ] He sees the new culture as being aggressive and inexorable towards those of traditional beliefs and determined to impose political correctness .

Since the 1960s, he writes, an "adversary culture" that set about "dynamiting" America's history and "demolishing" her heroes has arisen. With its media collaborators, the counterculture has rarely left an institution unscarred and it has rarely left a hero unsullied. The Americans feebly fend off "the relentless pounding of the artillery of an adversary culture that accepts no armistice." [ 3 ] The "pounding" of history begins with Columbus and one chapter is devoted to him, titled "Good-bye, Columbus." The discovery of America used to be one of the greatest events in world history , beginning the American history books. Today, Columbus is accused of perpetrating the "rape of paradise," setting off the legacy of slavery , racism , genocide , ecocide , exploitation and shame that goes on until today. The UN canceled its Columbus Day celebration and California University changed Columbus Day to Indigenous Peoples Day . By 2000, "diabolized" as an irredeemable racist murderer, Columbus made " Hitler look like a juvenile delinquent." [ 4 ] New textbooks which propagated the New History were published. The Wright brothers and the 1969 moon landing were both omitted from them. Instead, the new textbooks introduced readers to the wealth of the Mali Empire and its achievements and grandeur during the reign of Mansa Musa .

[ 5 ] The new textbooks described the achievements of the Aztecs in great detail but they did not contain any information about their conquests and their sacrifices of captives to Huitzilopotchli . Instead, the new textbooks portrayed Cortes 's conquest of the Aztecs as a genocide which was committed against a peace-loving people. The use of the term " cultural genocide " puzzles Buchanan  because indigenous American peoples practiced cannibalism and none of them invented the wheel.

[ 6 ] Buchanan comments on slavery: "Had it not been for the West, African rulers would still be trafficking in the flesh of their kinsmen. Slaves, after all, were the leading cash crop of the friends of Mansa Musa." [ 7 ] The "war on America's past and the dumbing down of American children—to make their minds empty vessels into which the New History may be poured—is succeeding," he comments.

[ 8 ] Academic careers of the defenders of the Western history and heritage are ruined while those of the destroyers succeed spectacularly.

Buchanan confirms the latter argument by quoting John H. Wallace and Susan Sontag . The former made a career out of attacking Huckleberry Finn by portraying it as a piece of "racist trash." Any teacher who is caught trying to give it to children "should be fired on the spot as racist" or at best, he or she should be considered insensitive.

Hemingway and many other notable writers regarded Huckleberry Finn as a literary classic but who are they to contradict John H. Wallace?

[ 9 ] Buchanan also quotes Susan Sontag : "The white race is the cancer of human history; it is the white race and it alone—its ideologies and inventions—which eradicates autonomous civilizations wherever it spreads…" [ 10 ] He comments: "Rewrite that sentence with ' Jewish race ' in place of 'white race' and the passage would fit nicely into Mein Kampf ." Had Sontag so savaged the Jewish people, her career would have ended there. But her diatribe against the white race did not diminish her standing and subsequently, she won a MacArthur Foundation genius award and according to the results of one recent survey, she is the most respectful intellectual of our time.

[ 11 ] Buchanan also argues that the decline of the Christian faith is the primary cause of low birth rates, hopelessness, and political utopianism. He cites examples of anti-Christian sentiment such as negative reactions to Catholic films and the triumphant attitude of secularism . According to Buchanan, "Western Man has decided he can disobey God without consequence and become his own God." And at the same time: "The new hedonism seems unable to give people a reason to go on living." [ 12 ] He depicts the United States as a country with a culture which is being demolished by the counterculture, and as a result, scarcely a trace of the traditional system of thought is left.

Reception [ edit ] Kirkus Reviews called it "[s]hameless, embarrassing rantings" and also remarked that "[l]ittle attests to the moral health of this nation more than the fact that it’s made a mockery of Buchanan's presidential ambitions time and again." The review particularly criticized Buchanan's claim that "[h]ad it not been for the West, African rulers would still be trafficking in the flesh of their kinsmen" as an example of dishonest historical revisionism.

[ 13 ] Jonah Goldberg of the National Review : First, let me say I both admire and dislike Buchanan's writing for the same reason: He brilliantly manages to do with one language what Yassir Arafat does with two. He offers red meat to the extremists while at the same giving himself the wiggle room to deny he said anything controversial in the first place. This is no mean feat.

[ 14 ] The book's premise has been linked to the concept of Eurabia retrospectively by historian Niall Ferguson [ 15 ] and by Voice of America .

[ 16 ] Buchanan's follow-up book State of Emergency made the Eurabia-association explicit.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Books portal Conservatism portal America Alone Churchill, Hitler and the Unnecessary War Criticism of multiculturalism Eurabia Frankfurt School Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Great Replacement Le Suicide français (2014) Opposition to immigration We Are Doomed White genocide conspiracy theory References [ edit ] ^ "Death of the West - Pat Buchanan" .

www.stewartsynopsis.com . Archived from the original on 2017-11-12 . Retrieved 2016-05-07 .

^ Buchanan (2001), p. 214 ^ Buchanan Patrick J. (2001).

The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization , (New York: St. Matrin's Griffin), p 149, https://archive.org/details/deathofwesthowdy00buch_0/page/148/mode/2up?view=theater ^ Buchanan Patrick J. (2001).

The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization , (New York: St. Matrin's Griffin), p 150, 153-154, https://archive.org/details/deathofwesthowdy00buch_0/page/150/mode/2up?view=theater ^ Buchanan Patrick J. (2001).

The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization , (New York: St. Martin's Griffin), p 173-174, https://archive.org/details/deathofwesthowdy00buch_0/page/172/mode/2up?view=theater ^ Buchanan Patrick J. (2001).

The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization , (New York: St. Matrin's Griffin), p 154, https://archive.org/details/deathofwesthowdy00buch_0/page/154/mode/2up?view=theater ^ Buchanan Patrick J. (2001).

The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization , (New York: St. Matrin's Griffin), p 58, 220, https://archive.org/details/deathofwesthowdy00buch_0/page/58/mode/2up?view=theater ^ Buchanan Patrick J. (2001).

The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization , (New York: St. Matrin's Griffin), p 152, 174, https://archive.org/details/deathofwesthowdy00buch_0/page/152/mode/2up?view=theater ^ Buchanan Patrick J. (2001).

The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization , (New York: St. Matrin's Griffin), p 167, https://archive.org/details/deathofwesthowdy00buch_0/page/166/mode/2up?view=theater ^ Sontag, Susan (1967). "What's Happening to America? (A Symposium)".

Partisan Review . 34 (1): 57–58, https://www.bu.edu/partisanreview/books/PR1967V34N1/HTML/files/assets/basic-html/index.html#13 ^ Buchanan Patrick J. (2001).

The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions Imperil Our Country and Civilization , (New York: St. Matrin's Griffin), p 217, https://archive.org/details/deathofwesthowdy00buch_0/page/216/mode/2up?view=theater ^ Buchanan (2001), p. 9 ^ "The Death of the West by Patrick J. Buchanan" .

Kirkus Reviews . November 15, 2001 . Retrieved October 27, 2012 .

^ Goldberg, Jonah (February 25, 2002).

"Goldberg File" .

The National Review .

^ Ferguson, Niall (April 4, 2004).

"Eurabia?" .

The New York Times Magazine .

^ "From Europe to Eurabia?" .

Voice of America . October 27, 2009.

^ "Pat Buchanan: Mexico recapturing U.S. lands?" .

Today . August 21, 2006.

External links [ edit ] The Death of the West at Archive.org " Reviving the West " Review and Thoughts by Hans-Hermann Hoppe "'The Death of the West'" Review by Paul Gottfried "Buchanan and Market" Economics Review by Jeffrey A. Tucker The Death of the West Review by Thomas Dunne v t e Pat Buchanan Books A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) The Death of the West (2001) State of Emergency (2006) Churchill, Hitler, and the Unnecessary War (2008) Electoral career Electoral history 2000 presidential campaign Meatballs Media The American Conservative Buchanan & Press GayBlade Trust Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Death_of_the_West&oldid=1303966253 " Categories : 2001 non-fiction books Books by Patrick J. Buchanan Conspiracist books English-language non-fiction books Eurabia Non-fiction books about immigration to the United States Paleoconservative publications St. Martin's Press books White genocide conspiracy theory Books about conservatism Anti-immigration works Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 03:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Death of the West 2 languages Add topic

