Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education Toggle Education subsection 1.1 Areas of specialization 2 Employment 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Computer scientist 34 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina کوردی Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientist specializing in computer science Not to be confused with Computational scientist or Software engineer .

Computer scientist Occupation Occupation type Academic Description Competencies Computer science and other formal sciences (e.g.

mathematics , logic , statistics , information theory , systems science ) Education required Doctoral degree Fields of employment Universities, private corporations, financial industry, government, military Related jobs Logician , mathematician A computer scientist is a scientist who specializes in the academic study of computer science .

[ 1 ] Computer scientists typically work on the theoretical side of computation. Although computer scientists can also focus their work and research on specific areas (such as algorithm and data structure development and design, software engineering , information theory , database theory , theoretical computer science , numerical analysis , programming language theory , compiler , computer graphics , computer vision , robotics , computer architecture , operating system ), their foundation is the theoretical study of computing from which these other fields derive.

[ 2 ] A primary goal of computer scientists is to develop or validate models, often mathematical, to describe the properties of computational systems ( processors , programs, computers interacting with people, computers interacting with other computers, etc.) with an overall objective of discovering designs that yield useful benefits (faster, smaller, cheaper, more precise, etc.).

Education [ edit ] Most computer scientists possess a PhD , M.S.

, or Bachelor's degree in computer science, or other similar fields like Information and Computer Science (CIS), a closely related discipline such as mathematics [ 2 ] or physics .

[ 3 ] Areas of specialization [ edit ] Theoretical computer science – including data structures and algorithms, theory of computation , information theory and coding theory , programming language theory , and formal methods Computer systems – including computer architecture and computer engineering , computer performance analysis, concurrency , and distributed computing , computer networks , computer security and cryptography , and databases .

Computer applications – including computer graphics and visualization, human–computer interaction , scientific computing , and artificial intelligence .

Software engineering – the application of engineering to software development in a systematic method Employment [ edit ] Employment prospects for computer scientists are said to be excellent. Such prospects seem to be attributed, in part, to very rapid growth in computer systems design and related services industry, and the software publishing industry, which are projected to be among the fastest growing industries in the U.S. economy.

[ 2 ] Computer scientists are often hired by software publishing firms, scientific research and development organizations, or universities where they develop the theories and computer models that allow new technologies to be developed.

Computer scientists can follow more practical applications of their knowledge, doing things such as software engineering. They can also be found in the field of information technology consulting , and may be seen as a type of mathematician, given how much of the field depends on mathematics.

[ 4 ] Computer scientists employed in industry may eventually advance into managerial or project leadership positions.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Computational scientist Software engineering List of computer scientists List of computing people List of pioneers in computer science References [ edit ] ^ Orsucci, Franco F.; Sala, Nicoletta (2008).

Reflexing Interfaces: The Complex Coevolution of Information Technology Ecosystems, Information Science Reference . Information Science Reference. p. 335.

ISBN 978-1599046273 .

^ a b c "Computer and Information Research Scientists" . U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 29 March 2012.

Archived from the original on 2 April 2012 . Retrieved 9 September 2019 .

^ "Fields of Employment for Physics Bachelors in the Private Sector, tuty of 2010 & 2012 Combined" . American Physical Society.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2011 . Retrieved 9 September 2019 .

^ "Computing Disciplines & Majors" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 September 2019 . Retrieved 9 September 2019 .

^ Perry, Benjamin Beau.

"What is a computer scientist?" . The University of Newcastle.

Archived from the original on 21 August 2016 . Retrieved 9 September 2019 .

Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 3 4 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer_scientist&oldid=1299124995 " Categories : Computer scientists Computer occupations Mathematical science occupations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from June 2012 Use dmy dates from May 2022 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 18:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Computer scientist 34 languages Add topic

