Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Primary color 1.2 Secondary color 1.3 Intermediate color 1.4 Tertiary color 1.5 Quaternary color 2 RGB and CMYK 3 RYB color model 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Secondary color 26 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Simple English Sunda Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Color made by mixing two primary colors This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Secondary color" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Page from A New Practical Treatise on the Three Primitive Colours Assumed as a Perfect System of Rudimentary Information by Charles Hayter .

A secondary color is a color made by mixing two primary colors of a given color model in even proportions. Combining one secondary color and a primary color in the same manner produces a tertiary color. Secondary colors are special in traditional color theory and color science .

Overview [ edit ] Primary color [ edit ] Main article: primary color In traditional color theory , it is believed that all colors can be mixed from 3 universal primary - or pure - colors, which were originally believed to be red, yellow and blue pigments (representing the RYB color model ). However, modern color science does not recognize universal primary colors and only defines primary colors for a given color model or color space .

RGB and CMYK color models are popular color models in modern color science, but are only chosen as efficient primaries, in that their combination leads to a large gamut. However, any three primaries can produce a viable color gamut. The RYB model continues to be used and taught as a color model for practical color mixing in the visual arts .

Secondary color [ edit ] A secondary color is an even mixture of two primary colors. For a given color model , secondary colors have no special meaning, but are useful when comparing additive and subtractive color models.

Intermediate color [ edit ] An intermediate color is any mixture of a secondary and a primary color. They are often visualized as even mixtures, but intermediate colors can arise from any mixture proportion. Therefore any color that is not a secondary or primary color is an intermediate color.

Tertiary color [ edit ] Tertiary color has two common, conflicting definitions, depending on context.

In traditional color theory , which applies mostly to practical painting, a tertiary color is an even mixture between two secondary colors, i.e. a mixture of three primaries in 1:2:1 proportion. This definition is used by color theorists, such as Moses Harris [ 1 ] and Josef Albers.

[ 2 ] The result is approximately a less saturated form of the dominant primary color of the mixture. Under this definition, a color model has 3 tertiary colors.

More recently, an alternative definition has emerged that is more applicable to digital media, where a tertiary color is an intermediate color resulting from an even mixture of a primary and a secondary color, i.e. a mixture of the primaries in 3:1:0 proportion. The result yields a maximum saturation for a given hue. Under this definition, a color model has 6 tertiary colors.

Quaternary color [ edit ] A quaternary color is a seldom-used descriptor that is the conceptual extension of a tertiary color. Quaternary colors have no special use or status in color theory or color science.

Under the traditional definition, a quaternary color is the even mixture of two tertiary colors, as demonstrated by Charles Hayter . These quaternary colors have contributions from all three primaries in 3-3-2 proportions, so are very desaturated (even mixtures of three primaries gives a neutral color: zero saturation). Under this definition, a color model has 3 quaternary colors.

Under the modern definition, a quaternary color is the even mixture of a tertiary color with either a secondary or primary color. Quaternary colors are sometimes given a maximum saturation for their hue. Under this definition, a color model has 12 quaternary colors.

RGB and CMYK [ edit ] Primary, secondary, and tertiary colors of the RGB (CMY) color wheel, with tertiary colors described under the modern definition.

Primary colors of the CMY color model : cyan, magenta, and yellow, mixed to form secondary colors red, green, and blue.

The RGB color model is an additive mixing model, used to estimate the mixing of colored light, with primary colors red , green , and blue . The secondary colors are yellow , cyan and magenta as demonstrated here: red (●) + green (●) = yellow (●) green (●) + blue (●) = cyan (●) blue (●) + red (●) = magenta (●) The CMY color model is an analogous subtractive mixing color model, used to estimate the mixing of colored pigments, with primary colors cyan , magenta , and yellow , equivalent to the secondary colors of the RGB color model. The secondary colors of the CMY model are blue , red and green , equivalent to the primary colors of the RGB model, as demonstrated here: cyan (●) + magenta (●) = blue (●) magenta (●) + yellow (●) = red (●) yellow (●) + cyan (●) = green (●) Under the modern definition, the 6 tertiary colors are conceptually equivalent between the color models, and can be described by the even combinations of a primary and a secondary color: red (●) + yellow (●) = orange (●) yellow (●) + green (●) = chartreuse (●) green (●) + cyan (●) = spring green (●) cyan (●) + blue (●) = azure (●) blue (●) + magenta (●) = violet (●) magenta (●) + red (●) = rose (●) A color model is a conceptual model and does not have specifically defined primary colors. A color space based on the RGB color model, most commonly sRGB , has defined primaries and can be used to visualize the color mixing and yield approximate tertiary colors. Also note that the color terms applied to tertiary and quaternary colors are not well-defined.

sRGB colors approximating primary (1), secondary (2), tertiary (3), and quaternary (4) colors in an RGB color model and additionally defined by the hue angle in HSV color space (#FF0000; 0°) red (1) (#FF4000; 15°) vermilion (4) (#FF8000; 30°) orange (3) (#FFC000; 45°) amber (4) (#FFFF00; 60°) yellow (2) (#C0FF00; 75°) lime (4) (#80FF00; 90°) chartreuse (3) (#40FF00; 105°) harlequin (4) (#00FF00; 120°) green (1) (#00FF40; 135°) erin (4) (#00FF80; 150°) spring green (3) (#00FFC0; 165°) aquamarine (4) (#00FFFF; 180°) cyan (2) (#00C0FF; 195°) sky blue (4) (#0080FF; 210°) azure (3) (#0040FF; 225°) cerulean (4) (#0000FF; 240°) blue (1) (#4000FF; 255°) indigo (4) (#8000FF; 270°) violet (3) (#C000FF; 285°) purple (4) (#FF00FF; 300°) magenta (2) (#FF00C0; 315°) cerise (4) (#FF0080; 330°) rose (3) (#FF0040; 345°) crimson (4) (#FF0000; 360°) red (1) RYB color model [ edit ] Main article: RYB color model A RYB color wheel with tertiary colors described under the modern definition.

RYB is a subtractive mixing color model, used to estimate the mixing of pigments (e.g. paint) in traditional color theory, with primary colors red , yellow , and blue . The secondary colors are green , purple , and orange as demonstrated here: red (●) + yellow (●) = orange (●) yellow (●) + blue (●) = green (●) blue (●) + red (●) = purple (●) Primary colors of the RYB color model : red, yellow, and blue, mixed to form colors orange, green, and purple.

Under the modern definition (as even combinations of a primary and a secondary color), tertiary colors are typically named by combining the names of the adjacent primary and secondary color.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, these tertiary colors have also been ascribed with common names: amber /marigold ( yellow-orange ), vermilion /cinnabar ( red-orange ), magenta ( red-purple ), violet (blue-purple), teal /aqua ( blue-green ), and chartreuse /lime green ( yellow-green ). The 6 tertiary colors are given: red (●) + orange (●) = red-orange (●) ~ vermilion orange (●) + yellow (●) = yellow-orange [ 5 ] (●) ~ amber yellow (●) + green (●) = yellow-green (●) ~ chartreuse green (●) + blue (●) = blue-green [ 5 ] (●) ~ teal blue (●) + purple (●) = blue-purple (●) ~ violet purple (●) + red (●) = red-purple (●) ~ magenta Approximate colors and color names are given for the tertiary and quaternary colors. However, the names for the twelve quaternary colors are quite variable, and defined here only as an approximation.

RYB colors approximating primary (1), secondary (2), tertiary (3), and quaternary (4) colors [ 6 ] red (1) scarlet (4) vermilion (3) persimmon (4) orange (2) sun (4) amber (3) golden (4) yellow (1) lemon (4) chartreuse (3) lime (4) green (2) viridian (4) teal (3) cerulean (4) blue (1) indigo (4) violet (3) amethyst (4) purple (2) aubergine (4) magenta (3) crimson (4) red (1) Under the traditional definition, there are three tertiary colors, approximately named russet (orange–purple), slate (purple–green), and citron (green–orange), with the corresponding three quaternary colors plum (russet–slate), sage (slate–citron), buff (citron–russet) (with olive sometimes used for either slate or citron).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In every level of mixing, saturation of the resultant decreases and mixing two quaternary colors approaches gray.

The RYB color terminology outlined above and in the color samples shown below is ultimately derived from the 1835 book Chromatography , an analysis of the RYB color wheel by George Field , a chemist who specialized in pigments and dyes.

[ 9 ] RYB colors produced by mixing equal amounts of secondary and subsequent colors [ 6 ] Primary red yellow blue Secondary orange green purple Tertiary russet citron slate Quaternary buff sage plum See also [ edit ] Color theory Color wheel List of colors Primary color References [ edit ] ^ Moses Harris (1766).

The Natural System of Colours . Laidler.

Archived from the original on 2023-03-26 . Retrieved 2024-02-15 .

^ Josef Albers (1963).

Interaction of Color . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-01846-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Adrienne L. Zihlman (2001).

The Human Evolution Coloring Book . HarperCollins.

ISBN 0-06-273717-1 .

^ Kathleen Lochen Staiger (2006).

The Oil Painting Course You've Always Wanted: Guided Lessons for Beginners and Experienced Artists . Watson-Guptill.

ISBN 0-8230-3259-0 .

^ a b Susan Crabtree and Peter Beudert (1998).

Scenic Art for the Theatre: History, Tools, and Techniques . Focal Press.

ISBN 0-240-80187-3 .

^ a b RGB approximations of RYB tertiary colors, using cubic interpolation.

"RYB RGB conversion" . Archived from the original on 2013-06-28 . Retrieved 2012-12-29 .

The colors are paler than a simple mixture of paints would produce. Pure tertiary colors would be darker still.

^ William J. Miskella, 1928, Practical Color Simplified: A Handbook on Lacquering, Enameling, Coloring And Painting , pp ^ John Lemos, 1920, "Color Charts for the School Room", in School Arts , vol. 19, pp 580–584 ^ Maerz and Paul (1930).

A Dictionary of Color . New York. p. 154.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Secondary_color&oldid=1300925420 " Categories : Color Secondary colors Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use American English from December 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 04:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Secondary color 26 languages Add topic

