Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Example cards 3 In Unicode 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents King (playing card) 30 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Shqip Sicilianu Slovenščina Ślůnski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from King of spades ) Playing card Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see King of clubs (disambiguation) , King of diamonds (disambiguation) , King of hearts (disambiguation) , and King of spades (disambiguation) .

King cards of all four suits in the English pattern The king is a playing card with a picture of a king displayed on it. The king is usually the highest-ranking face card . In the French version of playing cards and tarot decks, the king immediately outranks the queen . In Italian and Spanish playing cards , the king immediately outranks the knight . In German and Swiss playing cards , the king immediately outranks the Ober . In some games, the king is the highest-ranked card; in others, the Ace is higher. Aces began outranking kings around 1500 with Trappola being the earliest known game in which the aces were highest in all four suits.

[ 1 ] In the ace–ten family of games such as pinochle and Schnapsen , both the ace and the 10 rank higher than the king.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] French Rouen pattern on the left, Spanish Toledo pattern on the right The king card is the oldest and most universal court card. It most likely originated in Persian Ganjifeh where kings are depicted as seated on thrones and outranking the viceroy cards which are mounted on horses. Playing cards were transmitted to Italy and Spain via the Mamluks and Moors .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The best preserved and most complete deck of Mamluk cards, the Topkapı pack, did not display human figures but just listed their rank most likely due to religious prohibition. It is not entirely sure if the Topkapı pack was representative of all Mamluk decks as it was a custom-made luxury item used for display. A fragment of what may be a seated king card was recovered in Egypt which may explain why the poses of court cards in Europe resemble those in Persia and India.

[ 5 ] Evolution of the king of hearts from the Rouennais pattern to the English pattern Seated kings were generally common throughout Europe. During the 15th century, the Spanish started producing standing kings. The French originally used Spanish cards before developing their regional deck patterns. Many Spanish court designs were simply reused when the French invented their own suit-system around 1480.

[ 5 ] The English imported their cards from Rouen until the early 17th century when foreign card imports were banned.

[ 6 ] The king of hearts is sometimes called the "suicide king" because he appears to be sticking his sword into his head. This is a result of centuries of bad copying by English card makers where the king's axe head has disappeared.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Starting in the 15th century, French manufacturers assigned to each of the court cards names taken from history or mythology.

[ 9 ] This practice survives only in the Paris pattern which ousted all its rivals, including the Rouen pattern around 1780.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The names for the kings in the Paris pattern ( portrait officiel ) are: [ 12 ] David Charles Cesar Alexandre Most French-suited continental European patterns are descended from the Paris pattern but they have dropped the names associated with each card.

[ 10 ] Example cards [ edit ] Kings from Russian playing cards : King of Clubs (Russian pattern) King of Diamonds (Russian pattern) King of Hearts (Russian pattern) King of Spades (Russian pattern) Industrie und Glück pattern Kings from Italian playing cards : King of clubs (Bergamo pattern) King of coins (Bergamo pattern) King of cups (Bergamo pattern) King of swords (Bergamo pattern) Kings from Spanish playing cards : King of clubs ( Aluette ) King of coins (Aluette) King of cups (Aluette) King of swords (Aluette) Catalan pattern Castilian pattern Kings from German playing cards : King of acorns (Saxon pattern) King of bells (Saxon pattern) King of hearts (Saxon pattern) King of leaves (Saxon pattern) In Unicode [ edit ] The kings are included in the Playing Cards : [ 13 ] U+1F0AE 🂮 PLAYING CARD KING OF SPADES U+1F0BE 🂾 PLAYING CARD KING OF HEARTS U+1F0CE 🃎 PLAYING CARD KING OF DIAMONDS U+1F0DE 🃞 PLAYING CARD KING OF CLUBS See also [ edit ] List of poker hand nicknames References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kings (playing cards) .

^ Parlett, David (1990).

The Oxford Guide to Card Games . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

252 .

^ McLeod, John.

Ace-Ten Games at pagat.com . Retrieved 25 February 2016.

^ Tor, Gjerde.

"Mamluk cards, ca. 1500" .

old.no .

^ Wintle, Simon.

Moorish playing cards at World of Playing Cards. Retrieved 25 February 2017.

^ a b Dummett, Michael (1980).

The Game of Tarot . London: Duckworth. pp.

10– 64.

^ English pattern at the International Playing-Card Society . Retrieved 25 February 2017.

^ "The Rouen Pattern" .

whiteknucklecards.com .

^ Wintle, Simon.

Suicide King at the World of Playing Cards. Retrieved 25 February 2017.

^ "The Four King Truth" at the Urban Legends Reference Pages . Retrieved 25 February 2017.

^ a b Mann, Sylvia (1990).

All Cards on the Table . Leinfelden: Jonas Verlag. pp.

115– 124.

^ Pollett, Andy.

France and Belgium at Andy's Playing Cards. Retrieved 25 February 2017.

^ Paris and Rouen pattern figures at the International Playing-Card Society . Retrieved 25 February 2017.

^ "Playing Cards - The Unicode Standard, Version 13.0" (PDF) . Unicode. 2020 . Retrieved 6 April 2021 .

v t e Playing cards Standard 52-card deck Playing card suits ( French ) Spades Hearts Diamonds Clubs Ranks Ace Ace of spades Ace of hearts King Queen Queen of spades Jack Curse of Scotland Beer card Specific decks Ambraser Hofjagdspiel Archaeology awareness Charruan Flemish Hunting Deck Hamas most wanted Hofämterspiel Jerry's Nugget Most-wanted Iraqi Politicards Stuttgart pack Transformation Other packs and decks As-Nas Chinese Four-colour pack Ganjifa Ganjapa Karuta Hanafuda Hyakunin Isshu Kabufuda Uta-garuta Kvitlech Polish Russian Tarot pack Tujeon Zi pai Cards Banner Blank Court card Knight Ober Unter Pip card Deuce Weli Joker Nicknames Stripped deck Talon Unicode Other suits German Leaves Swiss Shields Roses German and Swiss Acorns Bells Latin ( Italian / Spanish / Portuguese ) Cups Coins Batons Swords Chinese (Money) Cash Strings of Cash Myriads of Strings Tens of Myriads Manufacturers and brands Manufacturers ASS Altenburger Cartamundi Copag Dal Negro Fournier France Cartes F.X. Schmid Gemaco J.O. Öberg & Son Modiano Nintendo Nürnberger-Spielkarten-Verlag Oishi Tengudo Piatnik Ravensburger Trefl U.S. Games Systems United States Playing Card Company Brands Bicycle Grimaud Defunct Aspioti-ELKA Bielefelder Spielkarten C.L. Wüst Charles Goodall Dondorf Lewis Cohen Waddingtons Notable people Lee Asher Hubert Auer Bryan Berg David Blaine Derren Brown Lewis Cohen Dan and Dave Thierry Depaulis S. W. Erdnase Lennart Green Richard Harding Johann Kaspar Hechtel Ricky Jay Sekiryo Kaneda René Lavand Ed Marlo Master of the Playing Cards John McLeod Anton Moser Samuel J. Murray David Parlett Ferdinand Piatnik Richard Valentine Pitchford Franco Pratesi Johann Georg Rauch Juan Tamariz Howard Thurston Charles Troedel Dai Vernon Fusajiro Yamauchi Groups and organisations Skat British Skat Association German Skat Association International Skat Court International Skat Players Association 52 Plus Joker Cary Collection of Playing Cards Fournier Museum of Playing Cards German Doppelkopf Association German Playing Card Museum International Playing-Card Society The Playing-Card Musée Français de la Carte à Jouer Saga Arashiyama Museum of Arts and Culture Worshipful Company of Makers of Playing Cards Card manipulation and cardistry Tricks The Acme of Control Ambitious Card Blackstone's Card Trick Without Cards The Circus Card Trick The Four Burglars Out of This World Rising Card Spelling Bee Twenty-One Card Trick Bottom dealing Card marking Card sharp Card throwing Cards in the hat Cardistry-Con Cutting Double lift The Expert at the Card Table Herrmann pass History of cardistry House of cards One-way deck Palms and grips Gambler's Magician's Mechanic's Tenkai The Phantom of the Card Table Second dealing Shuffling Faro Gilbreath Zarrow Si Stebbins stack Spoke card Three-card monte Trick decks Art and media Paintings The Acrobats The Bezique Game The Card Players The Card Players II Card Players in a Rich Interior The Card Sharp with the Ace of Diamonds Cardplayers in a Sunlit Room The Cardsharps Dogs Playing Poker Still Life with a Poem Violin and Playing Cards on a Table Film and television Card Sharks Playing Cards (1896) Play Your Cards Right Video games Balatro Literature Alice's Adventures In Wonderland (1865) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=King_(playing_card)&oldid=1304506483 " Category : Playing cards Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 12:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents King (playing card) 30 languages Add topic

