Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Current plates Toggle Current plates subsection 1.1 Major plates 1.2 Minor plates 1.3 Microplates 2 Ancient tectonic plates Toggle Ancient tectonic plates subsection 2.1 African plate 2.2 Antarctic plate 2.3 Eurasian plate 2.4 Indo-Australian plate 2.5 North American plate 2.6 South American plate 3 See also 4 Notes and references Toggle Notes and references subsection 4.1 Notes 4.2 References 4.3 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents List of tectonic plates 21 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Gaeilge Bahasa Indonesia Kiswahili Bahasa Melayu Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Oromoo Português Simple English Slovenčina தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of tectonic plates Map of Earth's 16 principal tectonic plates, showing plate boundary types: Divergent : Spreading center Extension zone Convergent : Subduction zone Collision zone Transform : Dextral transform Sinistral transform Plate tectonics map from NASA This is a list of tectonic plates on Earth's surface .

Tectonic plates are pieces of Earth's crust and uppermost mantle , together referred to as the lithosphere . The plates are around 100 km (62 mi) thick and consist of two principal types of material: oceanic crust (also called sima from silicon and magnesium ) and continental crust ( sial from silicon and aluminium ). The composition of the two types of crust differs markedly, with mafic basaltic rocks dominating oceanic crust, while continental crust consists principally of lower- density felsic granitic rocks.

Current plates [ edit ] Geologists generally agree that the following tectonic plates currently exist on Earth's surface with roughly definable boundaries. Tectonic plates are sometimes subdivided into three fairly arbitrary categories: major (or primary ) plates , minor (or secondary ) plates , and microplates (or tertiary plates ).

[ 1 ] Major plates [ edit ] Map showing Earth's principal tectonic plates and their boundaries in detail These plates comprise the bulk of the continents and the Pacific Ocean . For purposes of this list, a major plate is any plate with an area greater than 20 million km 2 (7.7 million sq mi) African plate – Tectonic plate underlying Africa – 61,300,000 km 2 (23,700,000 sq mi) Antarctic plate – Major tectonic plate containing Antarctica and the surrounding ocean floor – 60,900,000 km 2 (23,500,000 sq mi) Eurasian plate – Tectonic plate which includes most of Eurasia – 67,800,000 km 2 (26,200,000 sq mi) Indo-Australian plate – Major tectonic plate formed by the fusion of the Indian and Australian plates (sometimes considered to be two separate tectonic plates) – 58,900,000 km 2 (22,700,000 sq mi) Australian plate – Major tectonic plate separated from Indo-Australian plate about 3 million years ago – 47,000,000 km 2 (18,000,000 sq mi) Indian plate – Minor plate that separated from Gondwana – 11,900,000 km 2 (4,600,000 sq mi) North American plate – Large tectonic plate including most of North America, Greenland and part of Siberia – 75,900,000 km 2 (29,300,000 sq mi) Pacific plate – Oceanic tectonic plate under the Pacific Ocean – 103,300,000 km 2 (39,900,000 sq mi) South American plate – Major tectonic plate which includes most of South America and a large part of the south Atlantic – 43,600,000 km 2 (16,800,000 sq mi) Minor plates [ edit ] These smaller plates are often not shown on major plate maps, as the majority of them do not comprise significant land area. For purposes of this list, a minor plate is any plate with an area less than 20 million km 2 (7.7 million sq mi) but greater than 1 million km 2 (0.39 million sq mi).

Amurian microplate – Minor tectonic plate in eastern Asia Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Arabian plate – Minor tectonic plate – 5,000,000 km 2 (1,900,000 sq mi) Burma plate – Minor tectonic plate in Southeast Asia – 1,100,000 km 2 (420,000 sq mi) Caribbean plate – Tectonic plate in Central America and the Caribbean – 3,300,000 km 2 (1,300,000 sq mi) Caroline plate – Minor oceanic tectonic plate north of New Guinea – 1,700,000 km 2 (660,000 sq mi) Cocos plate – Young oceanic tectonic plate beneath the Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Central America – 2,900,000 km 2 (1,100,000 sq mi) Indian plate – Minor plate that separated from Gondwana – 11,900,000 km 2 (4,600,000 sq mi) Nazca plate – Oceanic tectonic plate in the eastern Pacific Ocean basin – 15,600,000 km 2 (6,000,000 sq mi) [ note 1 ] New Hebrides plate – Minor Pacific Ocean tectonic plate – 1,100,000 km 2 (420,000 sq mi) Okhotsk microplate – Minor tectonic plate in Asia Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Philippine Sea plate – Oceanic tectonic plate to the east of the Philippines – 5,500,000 km 2 (2,100,000 sq mi) Scotia plate – Minor oceanic tectonic plate between the Antarctic and South American plates – 1,600,000 km 2 (620,000 sq mi) Somali plate – Minor tectonic plate including the east coast of Africa and the adjoining seabed – 16,700,000 km 2 (6,400,000 sq mi) Sunda plate – Tectonic plate including Southeast Asia Yangtze plate – Tectonic plate carrying the bulk of southern China Microplates [ edit ] These plates are often grouped with an adjacent principal plate on a tectonic plate world map. For purposes of this list, a microplate is any plate with an area less than 1 million km 2 . Some models identify more minor plates within current orogens (events that lead to a large structural deformation of Earth's lithosphere ) like the Apulian, Explorer, Gorda, and Philippine Mobile Belt plates.

[ 2 ] The latest studies have shown that microplates are the basic elements of which the crust is composed and that the larger plates are composed of amalgamations of these, and a subdivision of ca. 1200 smaller plates has come forward.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The new Global Tectonic Map with the subdivision of the continents, oceans and mobile mountain belts in ca. 1200 smaller plates. Legend: green: terrane (microplate) boundaries in the continental blocks; cyan: terranes of the oceanic plates; orange: terranes inside the mobile belts; blue: oceanic transform faults; red: fault zones in the continental and mountain belt domain; purple: main subduction zones and suture zones; orange dots: volcanoes.

African plate Lwandle plate – Mainly oceanic tectonic microplate off the southeast coast of Africa Rovuma plate – One of three tectonic microplates that contribute to the Nubian Plate and the Somali Plate Victoria microplate Danakil microplate - a microplate at the Afar triple junction Antarctic plate East Antarctic plate [ 5 ] Shetland plate – Tectonic microplate off the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula West Antarctic plate Australian plate Capricorn plate – Proposed minor tectonic plate under the Indian Ocean Futuna plate – Very small tectonic plate near the south Pacific island of Futuna Kermadec plate – Tectonic plate in the south Pacific Ocean Macquarie plate [ 6 ] Maoke plate – Small tectonic plate in western New Guinea Niuafo'ou plate – Small tectonic plate west of Tonga Tonga plate – Small tectonic plate in the southwest Pacific Ocean Woodlark plate – Small tectonic plate located to the east of the island of New Guinea Caribbean plate Gonâve microplate – Part of the boundary between the North American plate and the Caribbean plate Hispaniola microplate North Hispaniola microplate Panama plate – Small tectonic plate in Central America Puerto Rico-Virgin Islands microplate – Part of the boundary between the North American Plate and the Caribbean Plate Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets South Jamaica microplate Cocos plate Rivera plate – Small tectonic plate off the west coast of Mexico Eurasian plate Adriatic plate , also known as the Apulian plate – Small tectonic plate in the Mediterranean Aegean Sea plate , also known as Hellenic plate – Small tectonic plate in the eastern Mediterranean Sea Anatolian plate – Continental tectonic plate comprising most of the Anatolian Peninsula (Asia Minor) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Azores microplate – Oceanic plateau in the North Atlantic Ocean [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Banda Sea plate – Minor tectonic plate underlying the Banda Sea in southeast Asia Hreppar microplate – Small tectonic plate in south Iceland, between the Eurasian plate and the North American plate Iberian plate – Small tectonic plate now part of the Eurasian plate Iranian plate – Geological feature in Asia Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Molucca Sea plate – Small fully subducted tectonic plate near Indonesia Halmahera plate – Small tectonic plate in the Molucca Sea Sangihe plate – Microplate within eastern Indonesia Okinawa plate – Minor tectonic plate from the northern end of Taiwan to the southern tip of Kyūshū Pelso plate – Small tectonic unit in the Pannonian Basin in Europe Timor plate – Microplate in Southeast Asia carrying the island of Timor and surrounding islands Tisza plate – Tectonic microplate, in present-day Europe Nazca plate Coiba plate – Tectonic plate off the coast south of Panama and northwestern Colombia Malpelo plate – A small tectonic plate off the coast west of Ecuador and Colombia North American plate Greenland plate – Supposed tectonic microplate containing the Greenland craton [ 9 ] Queen Elizabeth Islands Subplate – Small tectonic plate containing the Queen Elizabeth Islands of Northern Canada Pacific plate Balmoral Reef plate – Small tectonic plate in the south Pacific north of Fiji Bird's Head plate – Small tectonic plate in New Guinea Conway Reef plate – Small tectonic plate in the south Pacific west of Fiji Easter microplate – Very small tectonic plate to the west of Easter Island Galápagos microplate – Very small tectonic plate at the Galápagos triple junction Juan de Fuca plate – Small tectonic plate in the eastern North Pacific – 250,000 km 2 Explorer plate – Oceanic tectonic plate beneath the Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Vancouver Island, Canada Gorda plate – One of the northern remnants of the Farallon plate Juan Fernández plate – Very small tectonic plate in the southern Pacific Ocean Manus plate – Tiny tectonic plate northeast of New Guinea North Bismarck plate – Small tectonic plate in the Bismarck Sea north of New Guinea North Galápagos microplate – Tectonic plate off west South America Solomon Sea plate – Minor tectonic plate near the Solomon Islands archipelago in the Pacific Ocean South Bismarck plate – Small tectonic plate in the southern Bismarck Sea Trobriand plate – Small tectonic plate located to the east of the island of New Guinea Philippine Sea plate Mariana plate – Small tectonic plate west of the Mariana Trench Philippine Mobile Belt , also known as Philippine microplate – Tectonic boundary Scotia plate South Sandwich plate – Small tectonic plate south of the South American plate Somali plate Madagascar plate – Tectonic plate formerly part of the supercontinent Gondwana South American plate Altiplano plate Falklands microplate North Andes plate – Small tectonic plate in the northern Andes (mainly in Colombia , minor parts in Ecuador and Venezuela ) Ancient tectonic plates [ edit ] In the history of Earth, many tectonic plates have come into existence and have over the intervening years either accreted onto other plates to form larger plates, rifted into smaller plates, or have been crushed by or subducted under other plates.

The following is a list of ancient cratons , microplates , plates , and terranes which no longer exist as separate plates.

Cratons are the oldest and most stable parts of the continental lithosphere, and shields are exposed parts of them.

Terranes are fragments of crustal material formed on one tectonic plate and accreted to crust lying on another plate, which may or may not have originated as independent microplates: a terrane may not contain the full thickness of the lithosphere.

African plate [ edit ] Atlantica – Ancient continent formed during the Proterozoic about 2 billion years ago Bangweulu Block – Part of the Congo craton of central Africa ( Zambia ) Congo Craton – Precambrian craton that with four others makes up the modern continent of Africa ( Angola , Cameroon , Central African Republic , Democratic Republic of Congo , Gabon , Sudan , and Zambia ) Kaapvaal Craton – Archaean craton, possibly part of the Vaalbara supercontinent ( South Africa ) Kalahari Craton – African geological area (South Africa) Saharan Metacraton – Large area of continental crust in the north-central part of Africa ( Algeria ) Sebakwe proto-Craton – Old and stable part of the continental lithosphere Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets (Zimbabwe) Tanzania Craton – Old and stable part of the continental lithosphere in central Tanzania ( Tanzania ) West African Craton – One of the five cratons of the Precambrian basement rock of Africa that make up the African Plate ( Algeria , Benin , Burkina Faso , Côte d'Ivoire , Gambia , Ghana , Guinea , Guinea Bissau , Liberia , Mali , Mauritania , Morocco , Nigeria , Senegal , Sierra Leone , and Togo ) Zaire Craton (Congo) Zimbabwe Craton – Area in Southern Africa of ancient continental crust (Zimbabwe) Antarctic plate [ edit ] Bellingshausen plate – Ancient tectonic plate that fused onto the Antarctic plate Charcot plate – Fragment of the Phoenix tectonic plate fused to the Antarctic Peninsula East Antarctic Shield , also known as East Antarctic Craton – Cratonic rock body which makes up most of the continent Antarctica Phoenix plate – Tectonic plate that existed during the early Paleozoic through late Cenozoic time Eurasian plate [ edit ] Armorica – Microcontinent or group of continental fragments rifted away from Gondwana (France, Germany, Spain and Portugal) Avalonia – Microcontinent in the Paleozoic era ( Canada , Ireland , Great Britain , and United States) Baltic plate – Ancient tectonic plate from the Cambrian to the Carboniferous Period Belomorian Craton Central Iberian plate Cimmerian plate – Ancient string of microcontinents that rifted from Gondwana ( Anatolia , Iran , Afghanistan , Tibet , Indochina and Malaya ) East China Craton [ citation needed ] East European Craton – Geology of Europe Baltic Shield , also known as Fennoscandian Shield – Ancient segment of Earth's crust Junggar plate – Geographical subregion in Northwest China and Eastern Kazakhstan Hunic plate Karelian Craton – Region comprising the Scandinavian Peninsula, Finland, Karelia, and the Kola Peninsula Kazakhstania – Geological region in Central Asia and the Junngar Basin in China Kola Craton – Geographical peninsula in Europe Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Lhasa terrane – Fragment of crustal material that forms present-day southern Tibet Massif Central – Highland region in southern France Moldanubian plate – A tectonic zone in Europe formed during the Variscan or Hercynian Orogeny Moravo Silesian plate Midlands Microcraton – Block of late Neoproterozoic crust which underlies the English Midlands North Atlantic Craton – Archaean craton exposed in Greenland, Labrador, and northwestern Scotland North China Craton – Continental crustal block in China, Inner Mongolia, the Yellow Sea, and North Korea Ossa-Morena plate Piemont-Liguria plate – Former piece of oceanic crust that is seen as part of the Tethys Ocean Proto-Alps terrane Rhenohercynian plate – Fold belt of west and central Europe, formed during the Hercynian orogeny Sarmatian Craton – The southern part of the East European Craton or Baltica, also known as Scythian Plateau Saxothuringian plate – Structural or tectonic zone in the Hercynian or Variscan orogen of central and western Europe Siberian Craton – Ancient craton forming the Central Siberian Plateau South Portuguese plate Tarim craton Teplá-Barrandian terrane Ukrainian Shield – The southwest shield of the East European craton Valais plate – Subducted ocean basin. Remnants found in the Alps in the North Penninic nappes.

Volgo-Uralian craton Yakutai craton Yangtze Craton – Precambrian continental block located in China Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Indo-Australian plate [ edit ] Basic geological regions of Australia, by age Map of chronostratigraphic divisions of India Altjawarra Craton ( Australia ) Aravalli Craton (India) Bastar Craton (India) Bhandara Craton ( India ) Bundelkhand Craton (India) Dharwar Craton – Part of the Indian Shield in south India Central Craton (Australia) Curnamona Craton (Australia) Gawler Craton – Province of the larger West Australian Shield in central South Australia Indian Craton Narooma terrane – Geological structural region on the south coast of New South Wales, Australia Pilbara Craton – Old and stable part of the continental lithosphere located in Pilbara, Western Australia Singhbhum Craton (India) Yilgarn Craton – Large craton in Western Australia Australian Shield , also known as Western Australian Shield – Large part of the continent of Australia Zealandia – Mostly submerged continental crust area in Oceania. See Moa plate and Lord Howe Rise North American plate [ edit ] North American cratons and basement rocks Avalonia – Microcontinent in the Paleozoic era (Canada, Ireland, Great Britain, and United States) Carolina plate – Exotic terrane from central Georgia to central Virginia in the United States Churchill Craton – Geologic region in Canada (Canada) Farallon plate – Ancient oceanic plate that has mostly subducted under the North American plate (split into the Cocos, Explorer, Juan de Fuca, Gorda plates, Nazca plate, and Rivera plates) Florida plate (United States) Hearne Craton – Craton in northern Canada (Canada) Laurentian Craton , also known as North American Craton – Craton forming the geological core of North America (Canada and United States) Insular plate – Ancient oceanic plate Intermontane plate – Ancient oceanic tectonic plate on the west coast of North America about 195 million years ago Izanagi plate – Ancient tectonic plate Mexican plate Nain Province – Part of the North Atlantic Craton in Labrador, Canada (Canada) Newfoundland plate North Atlantic Craton – Archaean craton exposed in Greenland, Labrador, and northwestern Scotland Nova Scotia plate Rae Craton – Archean craton in northern Canada north of the Superior Craton (Canada) Sask Craton (Canada) Sclavia Craton – Late Archean supercraton (Canada) Slave Craton – Area of ancient rocks in northwest Canada (Canada) Superior Craton – Large crustal block in North America (Canada) Wyoming Craton – Craton in the west-central United States and western Canada (United States) South American plate [ edit ] Amazonian Craton – Geologic province in South America ( Brazil ) Guiana Shield – Precambrian geological formation in northeast South America (Brazil, Colombia , French Guiana , Guyana , Suriname and Venezuela ) Río de la Plata Craton – Medium-sized continental block in Uruguay, eastern Argentina and southern Brazil ( Argentina and Uruguay ) São Francisco Craton – Ancient craton in eastern South America (Brazil) Arequipa–Antofalla Craton – South American geology (Argentina, Bolivia , Chile and Peru ) See also [ edit ] Geology portal Asthenosphere – Highly viscous, ductile, and mechanically weak region of Earth's mantle Continent – Large geographical region identified by convention Craton – Old and stable part of the continental lithosphere Platform – Continental area covered by relatively flat or gently tilted, mainly sedimentary strata Shield – Large stable area of exposed Precambrian crystalline rock Earth's crust – Earth's outer shell of rock Continental crust – Layer of rock that forms the continents and continental shelves Oceanic crust – Uppermost layer of the oceanic portion of a tectonic plate Earth's mantle – Layer of silicate rock Lower mantle – Region from 660 to 2900 km below Earth's surface Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Upper mantle – Very thick layer of rock inside Earth Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Geochemistry – Science that applies chemistry to analyze geological systems Sial – Rocks rich in aluminium silicate minerals Sima – Rocks rich in magnesium silicate minerals Hydrosphere – Total amount of water on a planet Lithosphere – Outermost shell of a terrestrial-type planet or natural satellite Ocean – Body of salt water covering most of Earth Plate tectonics – Movement of Earth's lithosphere List of tectonic plate interactions – Types of plate boundaries Supercontinent – Landmass comprising more than one continental core, or craton Terrane – Fragment of crust formed on one tectonic plate and accreted to another Notes and references [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ 15,600,000 km 2 is the original size before the 2017 split of the Coiba and Malpelo plates.

References [ edit ] ^ Madaan, About Sonia (2020-08-18).

"7 Major Tectonic Plates (Pacific, African, Eurasian, Antarctic and more)" .

Earth Eclipse . How Many Tectonic Plates Are on Earth?

. Retrieved 2022-05-12 .

^ Bird, P. (2003). "An updated digital model of plate boundaries".

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems 4 (3): 1027.

doi : 10.1029/2001GC000252 .

http://peterbird.name/publications/2003_PB2002/2003_PB2002.htm .

^ Hasterok, D., Halpin, J., Collins, A.S., Hand, M., Kreemer, C., Gard, M., and Glorie, S. (2022); New maps of global geological provinces and tectonic plates. Earth Science Reviews, 2022.

^ van Dijk, J.P. (2023); The New Global Tectonic Map – Analyses and Implications. Terra Nova, 2023, 27 pp.

doi : 10.1111/TER.12662 ^ Antarctic Plate Tectonics ^ Gasperini, L; Ligi, M; Accettella, D; Bosman, A; Cuffaro, M; Lodolo, E; Martorelli, E; Muccini, F; Palmiotto, C; Polonia, A (1 February 2023).

"Late Miocene to recent tectonic evolution of the Macquarie Triple Junction" .

Geology .

51 (2): 146– 50.

doi : 10.1130/G50556.1 .

^ "Introduction – Project Cratera" .

utl.pt .

^ Demets, C., Gordon, Richard, & Argus, Donald, «MORVEL: A new estimate for geologically recent plate motions» in AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts .

^ Niels Henriksen; A.K. Higgins; Feiko Kalsbeek; T. Christopher R. Pulvertaft (2000).

"Greenland from Archaean to Quaternary" (PDF) .

Greenland Survey Bulletin . No. 185. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-12-07 . Retrieved 2009-10-04 .

Bibliography [ edit ] North Andes plate Restrepo, Jorge Julián; Ordóñez Carmona, Oswaldo; Martens, Uwe; Correa, Ana María (2009).

"Terrenos, complejos y provincias en la Cordillera Central de Colombia (Terrains, complexes and provinces in the central cordillera of Colombia)" .

Ingeniería Investigación y Desarrollo .

9 : 49– 56 . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

Fuck, Reinhardt A.; Brito Neves, Benjamim Bley; Schobbenhaus, Carlos (2008).

"Rodinia descendants in South America" .

Precambrian Research .

160 : 108– 126 . Retrieved 2019-10-29 .

Cordani, U.G.; Cardona, A.; Jiménez, D.M.; Dunyl, L.; Nutman, A.P. (2003).

Geochronology of Proterozoic basement from the Colombian Andes: Tectonic history of remnants from a fragmented Grenville Belt . 10 o Congreso Geológico Chileno. pp.

1– 10.

Restrepo, Jorge Julian; Toussaint, Jean F. (1988).

"Terranes and continental accretion in the Colombian Andes" .

Episodes .

11 : 189– 193 . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

External links [ edit ] Bird, Peter (2003) An updated digital model of plate boundaries also available as a large (13 Mb) PDF file v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bmwff
Cached time: 20250818041515
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.068 seconds
Real time usage: 1.717 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 27251/1000000
Revision size: 20203/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 87680/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4722/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44738/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.702/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25059494/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1604.389      1 -total
 73.99% 1187.114    175 Template:Annotated_link
  7.02%  112.622      2 Template:Reflist
  5.27%   84.539      1 Template:Tectonic_plates
  5.11%   81.918      1 Template:Navbox
  4.50%   72.196      2 Template:Cite_web
  4.30%   69.009      1 Template:Short_description
  2.53%   40.628     24 Template:Convert
  2.47%   39.551      2 Template:Pagetype
  2.03%   32.632      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:494100:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818041515 and revision id 1304649093. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_tectonic_plates&oldid=1304649093 " Categories : Geology-related lists Tectonic plates Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 09:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of tectonic plates 21 languages Add topic

