Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organisational history Toggle Organisational history subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 Creation of the Communist League 2 Notable members 3 See also 4 Footnotes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Communist League 40 languages العربية Asturianu Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Ladino Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International political party active from 1847 to 1852 For other uses, see Communist League (disambiguation) .

Communist League Bund der Kommunisten Leader Karl Schapper Founder Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Karl Schapper Founded 1 June 1847 ; 178 years ago ( 1847-06-01 ) Dissolved November 1852 ; 172 years ago ( 1852-11 ) Merger of League of the Just Communist Correspondence Committee Headquarters London Cologne (after 1848) Newspaper Kommunistische Zeitschrift (1847) Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848–1849) Neue Rheinische Zeitung Revue (1850) Ideology Communism Marxism Revolutionary socialism Political position Far-left Colours Red Party flag The Communist League ( German : Bund der Kommunisten) was an international political party established on 1 June 1847 in London , England . The organisation was formed through the merger of the League of the Just , headed by Karl Schapper , and the Communist Correspondence Committee of Brussels , Belgium , in which Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels were the dominant personalities. The Communist League is regarded as the first Marxist political party and it was on behalf of this group that Marx and Engels wrote the Communist Manifesto late in 1847.

[ 1 ] The Communist League was formally disbanded in November 1852, following the Cologne Communist Trial .

Organisational history [ edit ] Background [ edit ] During the decade of the 1840s the word " communist " came into general use to describe those who supposedly hailed from the left wing of the Jacobin Club of the French Revolution .

[ 2 ] This political tendency saw itself as egalitarian inheritors of the 1795 Conspiracy of Equals headed by Gracchus Babeuf .

[ 2 ] The sans-culottes of Paris which had decades earlier been the base of support for Babeuf — artisans, journeymen, and the urban unemployed — was seen as a potential foundation for a new social system based upon the modern machine production of the day.

[ 3 ] The French thinker Étienne Cabet inspired the imagination with a novel about a utopian society based upon communal machine production, Voyage en Icarie (1839).

[ 3 ] The revolutionary Louis Auguste Blanqui argued in favor of an elite organising the overwhelming majority of the population against the "rich," seizing the government in a coup d'état , and instituting a new egalitarian economic order.

[ 3 ] One group of Germans in Paris, headed by Karl Schapper , organised themselves in the form of a secret society known as the League of the Just (Bund der Gerechten) and participated in a May 1839 rebellion in Paris in an effort to establish a "Social Republic." [ 4 ] Following its failure the organisation relocated its centre to London, while also maintaining local organisations in Zürich and Paris .

[ 5 ] Revolution was in the air across many of the monarchies of Europe.

Creation of the Communist League [ edit ] The year 1846 found Karl Marx and his close friend and co-thinker Friedrich Engels in Brussels , establishing a small political circle of radical German émigrés called the Communist Correspondence Committee and writing for the German-language Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung ("Brussels German Newspaper").

[ 6 ] Also important in this early circle was Wilhelm Wolff , a talented and radical writer hailing from the Silesian peasantry who had been forced to emigrate due to his agitation against the Prussian autocracy .

[ 7 ] The Brussels Communist Correspondence Committee had at the same time small counterparts located in London and Paris, composed of a handful of radical German expatriates living there. Relations between these small groups were not close, with petty jealousies and ideological disagreements preventing the participants from functioning as an effective political unit.

[ 7 ] Be that as it may, in the latter part of January 1847 the disparate parts of the fledgling German Communist movement began to congeal in a single organisational entity when the London center of the League of the Just first broached the idea of organisational unity with the Communist Corresponding Committee.

[ 8 ] A letter of 20 January 1847 by Schapper requested that Marx join the League in anticipation of a scheduled London congress at which a new set of principles would be adopted based upon the ideas previously expressed by Marx and Engels.

[ 9 ] Both Marx and Engels were persuaded by the appeal and they both joined the League of the Just shortly thereafter, followed by other members of the Communist Corresponding Committee.

[ 9 ] In June 1847, the London congress took place and the League of the Just adopted a new charter formally changing the group's name to the Communist League.

[ 9 ] The Communist League was structured around the formation of primary party units known as "communes," consisting of at least 3 and not more than 10 members.

[ 9 ] These were in turn to be combined into larger units known as "circles" and "leading circles," governed by a central authority selected at regular congresses.

[ 9 ] The League's programme called for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie and establishment of the rule of the proletariat and the construction of a new society free both of private property and social classes .

[ 9 ] The initial conference was attended by Engels, who convinced the League to change its motto to Karl Marx 's phrase, Working Men of All Countries, Unite!

. At the same conference, the organisation was renamed the Communist League and was reorganised significantly.

In particular, Marx did away with all "superstitious authoritarianism," as he called the rituals pertaining to secret societies.

[ 10 ] The conference itself was counted as the first congress of the new League.

The Communist League had a second congress, at Great Windmill Street , London, in November and December 1847. Both Marx and Engels attended, and they were assigned the task of composing a manifesto for the organisation. This became The Communist Manifesto .

The League was not able to function effectively during the 1848 revolutions , despite temporarily abandoning its clandestine nature. The Workers' Brotherhood was established in Germany by members of the League, and became the most significant revolutionary organisation there. During the revolution Marx edited the radical journal the Neue Rheinische Zeitung . Engels fought in the Baden campaign against the Prussians (June and July 1849) as the aide-de-camp of August Willich .

The Communist League reassembled in late 1849, and by 1850 they were publishing the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Revue journal, but by the end of the year, publication had ceased amid disputes between the managers of the group. Willich and Schapper wanted to continue to focus on revolutions, while Marx and Engels wanted to focus on building an international workers' movement. This would divide the league in two. The Willich-Schapper Group would be located in France and become compromised by the Prussian police.

In 1850, the German master spy Wilhelm Stieber stole the register of the League's members from Dietz, who was a member of Willich-Schapper group, which he sent to France and several German states. This would help bring about the imprisonment of several members.

In November 1852, after the Cologne Communist Trial , the organisation immediately disbanded. The Willich-Schapper Group would disband a few months after.

Notable members [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mathilde Franziska Anneke Heinrich Bauer Johann Baer Hermann Heinrich Becker Johann Philip Becker Adolph Bermbach Friedrich Heinrich Karl Bobzin Karl Heinrich Brüggermann Karl von Bruhn Heinrich Bürgers Roland Daniels Oswald Dietz Collet Dobson Collet Ernst Dronke Johann Eccarius Friedrich Engels Karl Ludwig Johann D'Ester August Herman Ewerbeck Ferdinand Freiligrath August Gebert Andreas Gottschalk Karl Theodor Ferdinand Grün Theodor Hagen Hermann Wilhelm Haupt Johann Joseph Jansen Albert Lehmann Frederick Lessner Wilhelm Liebknecht Karl Marx Friedrich Wilhelm German Mauer Joseph Moll Peter Nothjung Karl Pfänder Jakob Lukas Schabelitz Karl Schapper Alexander Schimmelpfennig Konrad Schramm Sebastian Seiler Georg Weerth Wilhelm Christian Weitling Joseph Weydemeyer Edgar von Westphalen August Willich Ferdinand Wolff Wilhelm Wolff See also [ edit ] German Workers Educational Association History of the Left in France July Monarchy Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "Communist Manifesto (Chapter 1)" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2024-09-20 .

^ a b David Fernbach, "Introduction" to Karl Marx, The Revolutions of 1848.

New York: Random House, 1973; pg. 23.

^ a b c Fernbach, "Introduction" to The Revolutions of 1848, pg. 24.

^ Bernard Moss, "Marx and the Permanent Revolution in France: Background to the Communist Manifesto," in Leo Panitch and Colin Leys (eds.), The Communist Manifesto Now: The Socialist Register, 1998.

New York: Monthly Review Press , 1998; pg. 10.

^ Franz Mehring , Karl Marx: The Story of His Life .

Edward Fitzgerald, trans. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1936; pg. 138.

^ Hal Draper , The Marx-Engels Chronicle: A Day-by-Day Chronology of Marx and Engels' Life and Activity: Volume 1 of the Marx-Engels Cyclopedia.

New York: Schocken Books , 1985; pg. 22.

^ a b Franz Mehring, Karl Marx, pg. 135.

^ Mehring, Karl Marx, pp. 138-139.

^ a b c d e f Mehring, Karl Marx, pg. 139.

^ See Eric Hobsbawm , Primitive Rebels , chapter titled "Rituals in Social Movements", p.169 of the 1965 edition by Norton Library External links [ edit ] The Communist League, 1847 - 1850 , documents of the league on Marxists.org .

Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne by Karl Marx.

Bund der Geächteten (in German) v t e Karl Marx Family Heinrich Marx Henriette Pressburg Jenny von Westphalen Jenny Longuet Laura Marx Eleanor Marx Louise Juta Charles Longuet Paul Lafargue Edward Aveling Helene Demuth Biographies Karl Marx: The Story of His Life Karl Marx: His Life and Environment Karl Marx: His Life and Thought Films Die Deutschen Marx Reloaded The Young Karl Marx Miss Marx Memberships Communist League International Workingmen's Association Other cultural depictions Assassin's Creed Syndicate The Leader Karl Marx in Kalbadevi Marx in Soho Marx Returns " The Philosophers' Football Match " Tomb Statues " World Forum/Communist Quiz " Young Marx Related Friedrich Engels 2807 Karl Marx Opium of the people Timeline v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communist_League&oldid=1281814805 " Categories : 1847 establishments in England 1852 disestablishments in the United Kingdom Communist organizations in Europe Defunct communist parties in England Defunct communist parties in Germany International socialist organizations July Monarchy Marxism Political parties established in 1847 Political parties disestablished in 1852 Transnational political parties Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles with German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 22 March 2025, at 17:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communist League 40 languages Add topic

