Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bread-making from seeds Toggle Bread-making from seeds subsection 1.1 Collecting the seed 1.2 Other seeds used 1.3 Making the flour 2 Bread-making from other plant products 3 Burke and Wills 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Bush bread 6 languages Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 مصرى 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Seedcakes baked by Aboriginal Australians Bush bread Damper being prepared in hot coals Alternative names Seedcakes Type Bread Place of origin Australia Region or state Aboriginal Main ingredients Flour (from various seeds), water Bush bread , or seedcakes , refers to the bread made by Aboriginal Australians by crushing seeds into a dough that is then baked. The bread is high in protein and carbohydrate , and forms part of a balanced traditional diet .

[ 1 ] It is also sometimes referred to as damper , [ 2 ] although damper is more commonly used to describe the bread made by non- Indigenous people.

With the arrival of Europeans and pre- milled white flour , this bread-making process has almost disappeared (although women were still recorded to be making seedcakes in Central Australia in the 1970s). The tradition of cooking bread in hot coals continues today.

Bread-making was a woman's task. It was generally carried out by several women at once, due to its labour-intensive nature. It involved collecting seasonal grains , legumes , roots or nuts , and preparing these into flour and then dough , or directly into a dough.

[ citation needed ] One of the traditional ingredients was the seeds of kangaroo grass .

[ 2 ] Bread-making from seeds [ edit ] An Aboriginal millstone , vital in making flour or pastes for bread. Some Aboriginal groups call it "mother and child".

Collecting the seed [ edit ] Seeds varied depending on the time of year and the area in Australia that the people lived. In Central Australia, native millet ( Panicum decompositum ; Panicum australianse ) and spinifex ( Triodia ) were commonly used.

Wattleseed could also be used in the flour mix.

Women harvested the fully ripe, dry seeds of the plant by beating the grass (or pod-laden trees in the case of wattleseed) with sticks to dislodge the seeds. Some species were eaten at the green stage and, when ground, would produce a juice at the side of the millstone, which was drunk directly.

Some seeds (such as the seed of acacia) need to be heated, hulled and then ground dry, while others (such as those of grasses) can be ground with water.

[ 3 ] In the Kimberley region of Western Australia , women observed that, after the dry season , many seeds would be gathered around the opening of harvester ants ' nests. The ants had effectively collected and husked the seed for them, and they were able to collect this seed, making the women's job much easier. After allowing the grain to dry, the women could begin to prepare the flour.

[ citation needed ] Other seeds used [ edit ] Pigwig ( Portulaca oleracea ), prickly wattle ( Acacia victoriae ), mulga ( Acacia aneura ), dead finish seed ( Acacia tetragonophylla ), and bush bean ( Vincetoxicum lineare ) are also occasionally used in the making of bush bread.

[ citation needed ] Making the flour [ edit ] After the grain was collected, it needed to be winnowed , which was done using the coolamon , the multi-purpose carrying vessel. Sometimes it needed to be winnowed several times.

[ citation needed ] Once the grain was winnowed, it was ground using a millstone, to create flour. Millstones have been discovered which have proven to be as old as 50,000 years. The flour was then mixed with water to make a dough and placed in hot ashes for baking. The results could be small buns, today referred to as johnny cakes , or a large loaf, known today as damper . Damper appears to be a mix of this traditional style of bread-making and European-style bread-making.

[ citation needed ] The dough could also be eaten raw. Cooking was a good way to prepare the bread if the group was about to travel for some time.

[ citation needed ] Bread-making from other plant products [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Bread could also be made from roots and corms of plants. In the Top End of Australia, people such as the Yolngu used the lotus root and wild taro . These were ground, then mixed to a paste to make bread.

Water lily seed bread was also common in the Top End. The two species of water lily used were Nelumbo nucifera and Nymphaea macrosperma . During the early part of the dry season, water lilies were an important part of the diet, with seed pods eaten raw or ground into paste.

Women had expert knowledge of how to detoxify certain plant foods. The seeds of the cycad palm, Cycas media , are highly carcinogenic when raw, and require elaborate treatment including shelling, crushing, leaching in running water for up to five days, then cooking. After this they are made into small loaves, which can keep for a number of weeks.

In Queensland , the people of the Mount Tamborine area used the bunya pine cone ( bunya nut ), endemic to the area, to make bread in this way.

Burke and Wills [ edit ] Main article: Burke and Wills expedition Ill-fated explorers Burke and Wills survived on bush bread for some time after they ran out of rations due to the death of their camels. The Yandruwandha people at Cooper Creek gave them fish, beans called padlu , and bread made from the ground sporocarps of the ngardu ( nardoo ) plant ( Marsilea drummondii ).

There is some evidence that the nardoo contributed to their deaths. Wills' last journal entry includes the following: ...starvation on nardoo is by no means very unpleasant, but for the weakness one feels, and the utter inability to move oneself, for as far as appetite is concerned, it gives me the greatest satisfaction. Certainly, fat and sugar would be more to one's taste, in fact, those seem to me to be the great stand by for one in this extraordinary continent; not that I mean to depreciate the farinacious food, but the want of sugar and fat in all substances obtainable here is so great that they become almost valueless to us as articles of food, without the addition of something else...

It is possible that the explorers, in preparing the bread themselves, were not preparing it in the traditional way of the Aboriginal people, [ 4 ] which may have involved soaking seeds prior to grinding in order to remove the enzyme thiaminase , which depletes the body of vitamin B 1 . It is therefore believed that the deaths of Burke and Wills resulted in part from the vitamin deficiency disease beri-beri .

[ 4 ] However, other research suggests that scurvy ( vitamin C deficiency) and environmental factors also contributed to their deaths.

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ Food Standards Australia New Zealand: Online Version Archived March 14, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Fieldhouse, Rachel (28 September 2018).

"Feature Plant Friday - Kangaroo Wheat Grass" .

PlantingSeeds . Retrieved 1 March 2021 .

^ Bush food: Aboriginal food and herbal medicine by Jennifer Isaacs ^ a b Chaffey, Calder (June 2002).

"A Fern which Changed Australian History" .

Australian Plants online . Association of Societies for Growing Australian Plants . Retrieved 12 April 2008 .

^ Phoenix, Dave (2011).

"Did Burke and Wills die because they ate nardoo?" .

State Library of Victoria : The Burke & Wills research gateway . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .

Peterson, Nicholas, Donald Thomson in Arnhem Land , Melbourne University Press ISBN 0-522-85063-4 , pp168–9.

External links [ edit ] Bush Bread artwork Grass seed artwork Aboriginal Technology Australian History Making bread from bush bean v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights v t e Australian cuisine History Bushfood industry The English and Australian Cookery Book Dishes Anzac biscuit Avocado toast Battered sausage Caramel tart Caramel shortbread Chocolate crackles Cheese slaw Chiko Roll Devon (sausage) Smiley fritz Democracy sausage Frog cake Frozie cup Friand Halal snack pack Jelly slice Kitchener bun Lamb's fry Lamington Lemon chicken Lemon delicious pudding Meat pie Neenish tart Pavlova Pie floater Rissole Rocky road Saveloy Sticky toffee pudding Vanilla slice White Christmas Zucchini slice Breads Boston bun Bush bread Cheese and bacon roll Cheese on toast Cheesymite scroll Cruffin Crumpet Conti roll Damper English muffin Fairy bread Finger bun Hamdog Hot cross bun Prawn roll Puftaloon Savoury toast Scone Steak and oyster pie Steak sandwich Beverages Alcohol Beer Blow my skull Blue Heaven (flavour) Death Flip Flat white Japanese slipper Lemon, lime and bitters Long black Milo Tea Two Dogs Whisky Wine Ingredients Bush tucker Australian Aboriginal sweets Indigenous Australian food groups Citrus australasica Eucalyptus honey Flake (fish) Kangaroo meat List of Australian herbs and spices Mānuka honey Seafood Smallgoods Vegemite Wattleseed Witchetty grub Culture Australian pub Coffee culture Goon of Fortune Milk bar Pie shop Sausage sizzle Six o'clock swill Shrimp on the barbie Sly-grog shop The Great Aussie Pie Competition Regional and ethnic cuisines Australian Chinese cuisine Cuisine of Brisbane Christmas Island cuisine Cocos (Keeling) Islands cuisine Miscellaneous Bedourie oven Billycan List of Australian and New Zealand dishes List of breweries in Australia List of pizzerias in Australia List of pubs in Australia List of restaurant chains in Australia Related Agriculture in Australia Wheatbelt Alcoholism in rural Australia Bush medicine Gardening in Australia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bush_bread&oldid=1282800876 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Bushfood Australian breads Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 Use Australian English from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles needing additional references from March 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 28 March 2025, at 17:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bush bread 6 languages Add topic

