Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hyperbolic plane 2 Split quadratic space 3 Relation with classification of quadratic forms 4 Field theory 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Isotropic quadratic form 3 languages Esperanto 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Quadratic form for which there is a non-zero vector on which the form evaluates to zero In mathematics, a quadratic form over a field F is said to be isotropic if there is a non-zero vector on which the form evaluates to zero. Otherwise it is a definite quadratic form . More explicitly, if q is a quadratic form on a vector space V over F , then a non-zero vector v in V is said to be isotropic if q ( v ) = 0 . A quadratic form is isotropic if and only if there exists a non-zero isotropic vector (or null vector ) for that quadratic form.

Suppose that ( V , q ) is quadratic space and W is a subspace of V . Then W is called an isotropic subspace of V if some vector in it is isotropic, a totally isotropic subspace if all vectors in it are isotropic, and a definite subspace if it does not contain any (non-zero) isotropic vectors. The isotropy index of a quadratic space is the maximum of the dimensions of the totally isotropic subspaces.

[ 1 ] Over the real numbers, more generally in the case where F is a real closed field (so that the signature is defined), if the quadratic form is non-degenerate and has the signature ( a , b ) , then its isotropy index is the minimum of a and b . An important example of an isotropic form over the reals occurs in pseudo-Euclidean space .

Hyperbolic plane [ edit ] Not to be confused with the plane in hyperbolic geometry .

Let F be a field of characteristic not 2 and V = F 2 .  If we consider the general element ( x , y ) of V , then the quadratic forms q = xy and r = x 2 − y 2 are equivalent since there is a linear transformation on V that makes q look like r , and vice versa. Evidently, ( V , q ) and ( V , r ) are isotropic. This example is called the hyperbolic plane in the theory of quadratic forms . A common instance has F = real numbers in which case { x ∈ V : q ( x ) = nonzero constant} and { x ∈ V : r ( x ) = nonzero constant} are hyperbolas . In particular, { x ∈ V : r ( x ) = 1} is the unit hyperbola . The notation ⟨1⟩ ⊕ ⟨−1⟩ has been used by Milnor and Husemoller [ 1 ] : 9 for the hyperbolic plane as the signs of the terms of the bivariate polynomial r are exhibited.

The affine hyperbolic plane was described by Emil Artin as a quadratic space with basis { M , N } satisfying M 2 = N 2 = 0, NM = 1 , where the products represent the quadratic  form.

[ 2 ] Through the polarization identity the quadratic form is related to a symmetric bilinear form B ( u , v ) = ⁠ 1 / 4 ⁠ ( q ( u + v ) − q ( u − v )) .

Two vectors u and v are orthogonal when B ( u , v ) = 0 . In the case of the hyperbolic plane, such u and v are hyperbolic-orthogonal .

Split quadratic space [ edit ] A space with quadratic form is split (or metabolic ) if there is a subspace which is equal to its own orthogonal complement ; equivalently, the index of isotropy is equal to half the dimension.

[ 1 ] : 57 The hyperbolic plane is an example, and over a field of characteristic not equal to 2, every split space is a direct sum of hyperbolic planes.

[ 1 ] : 12, 3 Relation with classification of quadratic forms [ edit ] From the point of view of classification of quadratic forms, spaces with definite quadratic forms are the basic building blocks for quadratic spaces of arbitrary dimensions. For a general field F , classification of definite quadratic forms is a nontrivial problem. By contrast, the isotropic forms are usually much easier to handle.  By Witt's decomposition theorem , every inner product space over a field is an orthogonal direct sum of a split space and a space with definite quadratic form.

[ 1 ] : 56 Field theory [ edit ] If F is an algebraically closed field,  for example, the field of complex numbers , and ( V , q ) is a quadratic space of dimension at least two, then it is isotropic.

If F is a finite field and ( V , q ) is a quadratic space of dimension at least three, then it is isotropic (this is a consequence of the Chevalley–Warning theorem ).

If F is the field Q p of p -adic numbers and ( V , q ) is a quadratic space of dimension at least five, then it is isotropic.

See also [ edit ] Isotropic line Polar space Witt group Witt ring (forms) Universal quadratic form References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Milnor, J.

; Husemoller, D. (1973).

Symmetric Bilinear Forms .

Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete . Vol. 73.

Springer-Verlag .

ISBN 3-540-06009-X .

Zbl 0292.10016 .

^ Emil Artin (1957) Geometric Algebra , page 119 via Internet Archive Pete L. Clark, Quadratic forms chapter I: Witts theory from University of Miami in Coral Gables, Florida .

Tsit Yuen Lam (1973) Algebraic Theory of Quadratic Forms , §1.3 Hyperbolic plane and hyperbolic spaces, W. A. Benjamin .

Tsit Yuen Lam (2005) Introduction to Quadratic Forms over Fields , American Mathematical Society ISBN 0-8218-1095-2 .

O'Meara, O.T (1963).

Introduction to Quadratic Forms .

Springer-Verlag . p. 94 §42D Isotropy.

ISBN 3-540-66564-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Serre, Jean-Pierre (2000) [1973].

A Course in Arithmetic .

Graduate Texts in Mathematics : Classics in mathematics. Vol. 7 (reprint of 3rd ed.).

Springer-Verlag .

ISBN 0-387-90040-3 .

Zbl 1034.11003 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isotropic_quadratic_form&oldid=1303312130 " Categories : Quadratic forms Bilinear forms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 06:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Isotropic quadratic form 3 languages Add topic

