Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career in Education 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Frank Morton McMurry Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American academic (1862–1936) Early life [ edit ] Frank Morton McMurry Born 1862 ( 1862 ) near Crawfordsville, Indiana Died 1936 (aged 73–74) Relatives Charles Alexander McMurry (brother) Academic background Alma mater University of Michigan Halle and Jena (Germany) Academic work Discipline Education Institutions Illinois State University Columbia University Frank Morton McMurry (1862–1936) was an American educator, educational theorist, pioneer in American Herbartianism, and brother to Charles Alexander McMurry .

In 1862, McMurry was born in Crawfordsville, Indiana . Following the death of his father, his mother moved the family to rural Illinois, settling in Normal, Illinois .

[ 1 ] Career in Education [ edit ] McMurry's education and career began with attending Normal schools , eventually graduating from Illinois State Normal University 's model school program in Normal,Illinois in 1879.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Following his graduation, he attended the University of Michigan from 1881 to 1882.

[ 1 ] In 1886, McMurry enrolled in universities in Halle and Jena, Germany , with interest in studying educational theories and psychology. McMurry studied the works of Karl Stoy and Willhelm Rein, who were two of the leading German Herbartian educators at the time. This influenced him further to adopt and study the pedagogy of Herbartianism.

[ 1 ] In 1889, he received his Ph.D. and returned to the United States.

In 1891, McMurry returned to Illinois State Normal University and became a professor of pedagogy as well as a training teacher for the university's model school, where he began to incorporate Herbartianism into his educational models and lessons.

[ 1 ] McMurry participated in the National Herbart Society, as well as the National Education Association, where he and other Herbartianists submitted their educational findings. In 1895, McMurry returned to Germany to further study education and pedagogy.

[ 1 ] He returned to the United States and was hired at Columbia University where he was appointed professor in 1898. While at the Illinois State University , he introduced the "practice-teaching" method, [ 1 ] which is now commonly known as "student teaching" and is found in most teacher training programs across the country. With Ralph Stockman Tarr he published the Tarr and McMurry Common School Geographies (1900), [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and with his brother Charles, Method of the Recitation (1903).

[ 5 ] McMurry also was the author of How to Study and Teaching How to Study (1900) and Elementary School Standards (1913).

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Dunkel, Harold B. (1969).

"Herbartianism Comes to America: Part I" .

History of Education Quarterly .

9 (2): 202– 233.

doi : 10.2307/367318 .

ISSN 0018-2680 .

JSTOR 367318 .

S2CID 248818674 .

^ Harper, Charles A. (1935).

Development of the Teachers College in the United States, with Special Reference to the Illinois State Normal University . Bloomington, Illinois: McKnight & McKnight. pp.

199– 216.

^ Tarr, Ralph Stockman; McMurry, Frank Morton (1900).

Tarr and McMurry's Geographies: Home geography . Macmillan.

^ Tarr, Ralph Stockman; McMurry, Frank Morton (1902).

Tarr and McMurry's Geographies: A Complete Geography . The Macmillan Co.

^ McMurry, Charles Alexander; McMurry, Frank Morton (1903).

The Method of the Recitation . New York: The Macmillan Company.

Frank Morton McMurry.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Frank Morton McMurry Works by Frank Morton McMurry at Project Gutenberg How to Study and Teaching How to Study from Project Gutenberg Works by or about Frank Morton McMurry at the Internet Archive Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX This article about an American educator is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frank_Morton_McMurry&oldid=1302892071 " Categories : 1862 births 1936 deaths University of Illinois faculty Columbia University faculty American non-fiction writers American expatriates in Germany Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg alumni University of Jena alumni University of Michigan alumni American educator stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2025 Articles with hCards Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links All stub articles This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 00:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frank Morton McMurry Add languages Add topic

