Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Work 3 Major publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Harold Demsetz 12 languages Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch Français مصرى 日本語 Polski Русский Simple English Türkçe Українська Volapük Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American economist (1930–2019) Harold Demsetz Born ( 1930-05-31 ) May 31, 1930 Chicago, Illinois Died January 4, 2019 (2019-01-04) (aged 88) Nationality American Academic background Alma mater Northwestern University University of Illinois Academic work Discipline Managerial economics School or tradition New institutional economics Institutions UCLA University of Chicago Notable ideas Nirvana fallacy Website Information at IDEAS / RePEc Harold Demsetz ( / ˈ d ɛ m s ɛ t s / ; May 31, 1930 – January 4, 2019) [ 1 ] was an American professor of economics at the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA).

Career [ edit ] Demsetz grew up on the West Side of Chicago, the grandchild of Jewish immigrants from central and eastern Europe.

[ 2 ] He  studied engineering, forestry, and philosophy at four universities before being awarded a B.A. (1953) in economics from the University of Illinois , and an MBA (1954) and a Ph.D. (1959) from Northwestern University . While a graduate student, he published an article each in Econometrica and the Journal of Political Economy .

Demsetz taught at the University of Michigan (1958–60), UCLA, 1960–63, and the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago , 1963–71. In 1971, he returned permanently to UCLA's Economics Department, which he chaired 1978–80. He held the Arthur Andersen UCLA Alumni Chair in Business Economics, 1986–95. He has been affiliated with the Center for Naval Analyses and the Hoover Institution .

Demsetz was a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences , a director of the Mont Pelerin Society , and a past (1996) president of the Western Economics Association.

Work [ edit ] Demsetz belonged to the Chicago school of economic theory, and was one of the pioneers of the approach now called New Institutional Economics . He is a founder of the field of managerial economics . He has expanded the theory of property rights now prevalent in law and economics . Even though Demsetz never employed game theory , he is a major figure in industrial organization through his writings on the theory of the firm , antitrust policy , and business regulation . His expository style is devoid of mathematical formalism to an extent unusual for someone who began his career after 1950. His principal influences include Frank Knight and a number of colleagues: Armen Alchian , Ronald Coase , Aaron Director , and George Stigler .

Demsetz coined the term " nirvana fallacy " in 1969.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The 1972 Demsetz and Armen Alchian article Production, Information Costs and Economic Organization was selected as one of the twenty most important articles published in the first century of the American Economic Review .

[ 5 ] One of his most significant works over the course of many decades was on externalities, in which he disputed the conclusions of Pigou and of Coase and showed that there is no problem of externalities which invokes a role for the government. Instead, with strategic behaviour we might get a problem of public goods with a potential role for the government. His 2011 paper, " The Problem of Social Cost: What Problem? A Critique of the Reasoning of A.C. Pigou and R.H. Coase " provides a detailed analysis of this position.

Major publications [ edit ] 1967, "Toward a Theory of Property Rights," American Economic Review .

1968, "Why Regulate Utilities?" Journal of Law and Economics .

1969, "Information and Efficiency: Another Viewpoint," Journal of Law and Economics .

1972, (with Armen Alchian ), "Production, Information Costs and Economic Organization", American Economic Review .

1973, "Industry Structure, Market Rivalry and Public Policy," Journal of Law and Economics .

1974, "Two systems of belief about monopoly," in H. Goldschmid, et al., eds., Industrial Concentration: The New Learning, Boston: Little Brown, also chapter 7 in, Demsetz, Harold. Efficiency, Competition, and Policy. Cambridge MA: Basil Blackwell, 1989.) 1979, "Accounting for Advertising as a Barrier to Entry," Journal of Business .

1982, Economic, Legal, and Political Dimensions of Competition .

1988, The Organization of Economic Activity , 2 vols. Blackwell. Reprints most of Demsetz's better known journal articles published as of date.

1994, (with Alexis Jacquemin ).

Anti-trust Economics: New Challenges for Competition Policy .

1995, The Economics of the Business Firm: Seven Critical Commentaries .

1997, "The Primacy of Economics: An Explanation of the Comparative Success of Economics in the Social Sciences" (Presidential Address to the Western Economics Association), Economic Inquiry .

2008, "From Economic Man to Economic System: Essays on Human Behavior and the Institutions of Capitalism" 2011, "The Problem of Social Cost: What Problem? - A Critique of the Reasoning of A.C. Pigou and R.H. Coase" in Review of Law and Economics .

References [ edit ] ^ Istituto Giovanni Treccani, Rome (1938).

"Enciclopedia italiana di scienze, lettere ed arti" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Read, C. (2015). "Harold Demsetz".

The Corporate Financiers . London: Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Demsetz, Harold (1969), "Information and Efficiency: Another Viewpoint", Journal of Law & Economics , 12 : 1– 22, doi : 10.1086/466657 , S2CID 222327886 ^ "Anarchy Unbound, or: Why Self-Governance Works Better than You Think" . 2007-08-06.

^ Arrow, Kenneth J.; Bernheim, B. Douglas; Feldstein, Martin S.; McFadden, Daniel L.; Poterba, James M.; Solow, Robert M. (2011).

"100 Years of the American Economic Review: The Top 20 Articles" (PDF) .

American Economic Review .

101 : 1– 8.

doi : 10.1257/aer.101.1.1 .

hdl : 1721.1/114169 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Harold Demsetz .

Brief biography of Demsetz on the web site of UCLA's Economics Department.

v t e Institutional economics Institutional economists Werner Abelshauser Clarence Edwin Ayres Joe S. Bain Shimshon Bichler Robert A. Brady Daniel Bromley Ha-Joon Chang John Maurice Clark John R. Commons Richard T. Ely Robert H. Frank John Kenneth Galbraith Walton Hale Hamilton Orris C. Herfindahl Albert O. Hirschman Geoffrey Hodgson János Kornai Simon Kuznets Hunter Lewis Jesse W. Markham Wesley Clair Mitchell Gunnar Myrdal Jonathan Nitzan Warren Samuels François Simiand Herbert A. Simon Frank Stilwell George W. Stocking Sr.

Lars Pålsson Syll Thorstein Veblen Edward Lawrence Wheelwright Erich Zimmermann New institutional economists Daron Acemoglu Armen Alchian Masahiko Aoki Steven N. S. Cheung Ronald Coase Harold Demsetz Avner Greif Claude Ménard Douglass North Mancur Olson Elinor Ostrom ( Bloomington school ) Oliver E. Williamson Behavioral economists George Ainslie Dan Ariely Nava Ashraf Ofer Azar Douglas Bernheim Samuel Bowles Sarah Brosnan Colin Camerer David Cesarini Kay-Yut Chen Rachel Croson Werner De Bondt Paul Dolan Stephen Duneier Catherine C. Eckel Armin Falk Urs Fischbacher Herbert Gintis Uri Gneezy David Halpern Charles A. Holt David Ryan Just Daniel Kahneman Djuradj Caranovic Ariel Kalil George Katona Jeffrey R. Kling George Loewenstein Graham Loomes Brigitte C. Madrian Gary McClelland Matteo Motterlini Sendhil Mullainathan Michael Norton Matthew Rabin Howard Rachlin Klaus M. Schmidt Eldar Shafir Hersh Shefrin Robert J. Shiller Uwe Sunde Richard Thaler Amos Tversky Robert W. Vishny Georg Weizsäcker Economic sociologists Jens Beckert Fred L. Block James S. Coleman Paul DiMaggio Paula England Mark Granovetter Donald Angus MacKenzie Joel M. Podolny Lynette Spillman Richard Swedberg Laurent Thévenot Carlo Trigilia Harrison White Viviana Zelizer Key concepts and ideas Accelerator effect Administered prices Barriers to entry Bounded rationality Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Conventional wisdom Countervailing power Effective competition Herfindahl index Hiding hand principle Hirschman cycle Instrumentalism Kuznets cycles Market concentration Market power Market structure Penalty of taking the lead Satisficing Shortage economy Structure–conduct–performance paradigm Technostructure Theory of two-level planning Veblen goods Veblenian dichotomy Related fields Cultural economics Development economics English historical school of economics Evolutionary economics Evolutionary psychology French historical school Historical school of economics Legal realism Microeconomics Post-Keynesian economics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Google Scholar People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harold_Demsetz&oldid=1304680694 " Categories : 1930 births 2019 deaths Writers from Chicago Law and economics scholars Scholars of competition law 20th-century American economists 21st-century American economists University of California, Los Angeles faculty Kellogg School of Management alumni University of Michigan faculty University of Chicago faculty New institutional economists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Distinguished fellows of the American Economic Association 20th-century American Jews 21st-century American Jews Member of the Mont Pelerin Society University of Illinois College of Liberal Arts and Sciences alumni Chicago School economists Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 14:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harold Demsetz 12 languages Add topic

