Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Possession of power 2 Exercising of power Toggle Exercising of power subsection 2.1 Class and power 2.2 Social power (status or Stände ) 2.3 Political power (party) 2.4 Social action 2.5 Mobility 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Three-component theory of stratification 4 languages العربية Español فارسی Hrvatski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social theory relating to class, status and party Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e The three-component theory of stratification , more widely known as Weberian stratification or the three class system , was developed by German sociologist Max Weber with class , status and party as distinct ideal types. Weber developed a multidimensional approach to social stratification that reflects the interplay among wealth, prestige and power.

Weber argued that power can take a variety of forms. A person's power can be shown in the social order through their status, in the economic order through their class, and in the political order through their party. Thus, class, status and party are each aspects of the distribution of power within a community.

[ 1 ] Class, status and power have not only a great deal of effect within their individual areas but also a great deal of influence over the other areas.

Wealth : includes property such as buildings, lands, farms, houses, factories and as well as other assets – Economic Situation Prestige : the respect with which a person or status position is regarded by others – Status Situation Power : the ability of people or groups to achieve their goals despite opposition from others – Parties According to Weber, there are two basic dimensions of power: the possession of power and the exercising of power.

This essay was written shortly before World War I and was published posthumously in 1922 as part of Weber's Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft .

[ 2 ] It was translated into English in the 1940s as "Class, Status, Party"; [ 3 ] reproduced with modifications in Weber 1978:926–939. and has been re-translated as "The distribution of power within the community: Classes, Stände , Parties".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Possession of power [ edit ] According to Weber, the ability to possess power derives from the individual's ability to control various "social resources".  "The mode of distribution gives to the propertied a monopoly on the possibility of transferring property from the sphere of use as 'wealth' to the sphere of 'capital,' that is, it gives them the entrepreneurial function and all chances to share directly or indirectly in returns on capital".

[ 6 ] These resources can be anything and everything: they might include land, capital, social respect, physical strength, and intellectual knowledge.

Exercising of power [ edit ] The ability to exercise power takes a number of different forms, but all involve the idea that it means the ability to get your own way with others, regardless of their ability to resist you. "For example, if we think about an individual's chances of realizing their own will against someone else, it is reasonable to believe that the person's social prestige, class position, and membership in a political group will have an effect on these chances".

[ 1 ] In terms of understanding the relationship between power and social stratification, Weber theorized the various ways in which societies are organized in hierarchical systems of domination and subordination using the several major concepts.

Class and power [ edit ] "Class, at its core, is an economic concept; it is the position of individuals in the market that determines their class position. And it is how one is situated in the marketplace that directly affects one's life chances".

[ 7 ] This was theorized by Weber on the basis of "unequal access to material resources". For example, if someone possesses something that you want or need then this makes him potentially more powerful than you. He is in a dominant position and you are in a subordinate position because he controls access to a desired social resource. A classic illustration here is the relationship between an employer and employee.

Social power (status or Stände ) [ edit ] "The existence of status groups most often shows itself in the form of endogamy or the restricted pattern of social intercourse, sharing of food and other benefits within groups, status conventions or traditions, and monopolistic acquisition of certain economic opportunities or the avoidance of certain kinds of acquisitions.

[ 8 ] If you respect someone or view him as your social superior, then he will potentially be able to exercise power over you (since you will respond positively to his instructions / commands). In this respect, social status is a social resource simply because he may have it while you may not. "Not all power, however entails social honor: The Typical American Boss, as well as the typical big speculator, deliberately relinquishes social honor. Quite generally, 'mere economic' power, and especially 'naked' money power, is by no means a recognized basis or social honor".

[ 6 ] Note: The German word Stand , plural Stände (English, "status" or "status group") is sometimes left untranslated in Weber, [ 9 ] in order to keep in view the origins of this concept in medieval guilds, professions, ethnic identities, and feudal classifications.

[ 10 ] Political power (party) [ edit ] Parties are associations that aim at securing "power within an organization [or the state] for its leaders in order to attain ideal or material advantages for its active members".

[ 11 ] This form of power can be related to the way in which the State is organized in modern social systems (involving the ability to make laws, for example). If you can influence this process of law creation then you will be in a potentially powerful position. Thus, by your ability to influence a decision-making process you possess power, even though you may not directly exercise that power personally. Political parties are the organizational means to possess power through the mechanism of the State and they include not just formally organized parties, but any group that is organized to influence the way in which power is exercised legitimately through the machinery of the State. "Since parties aim at such goals as getting their programs developed or accepted and getting positions of influence within organizations, it is clear that they operate only within a rational order within which these goals are possible to attain and only when there is a struggle for power".

[ 11 ] Social action [ edit ] Social action is in direct relation to "political or party power" in combination with the class situation. The influence of laws is based on the social action of members of the classes. "The direction of interests may vary according to whether or not social action of a larger or smaller portion of those commonly affected by the class situation, or even an association among them, e.g., a trade union , has grown out of the class situation, from which the individual may expect promising results for himself".

[ 12 ] "The degree in which "social action" and possibly associations emerge from the mass behavior of the members of a class is linked to general cultural conditions, especially to those of an intellectual sort. It is also likened to the extent of the contrasts that have already evolved".

[ 13 ] "Class-conscious action is most likely if, first, [Weber says] 'the connection between the causes and consequences of the "class situation"' are transparent, or clear. If individuals can plainly see that there is a connection between the structure of the economic system and what happens to them in terms of life chances, class action is more likely".

[ 8 ] The greater the numbers within these class positions, will increase the chance that they will rise up in action.

Mobility [ edit ] "It is noncontroversial that the class situation in which each individual finds himself represents a limitation on his scope, tends to keep him within the class. It acts as an obstacle to any rise into a higher class, and as a pair of water wings with respect to the classes below...Class type, relations with class fellows, power over outward resources adapted to the class situation, and so on".

[ 14 ] In capitalist society movement between classes is a possibility. Hence the use of the term "The American Dream " to show the ability of people to ascend to a higher class through hard work and ingenuity. "Class composition is forever changing, to the point where there may be a completely new set of families".

[ 15 ] Weber saw four classes: the propertied class, the non-propertied class, the petit bourgeoisie and the manual labourer class.

See also [ edit ] Class privilege Economic class References [ edit ] ^ a b Hurst 2007 , p. 202.

^ Weber 1980 , pp. 531–540.

^ Weber 1946 , pp. 180–195.

^ Weber 2010 .

^ Waters & Waters 2015 .

^ a b Lemert 2004 , p. 116.

^ Hurst 2007 , p. 203.

^ a b Hurst 2007 , p. 204.

^ Weber 2010 , pp. 142–148.

^ Waters & Waters 2015 , pp. 37–40.

^ a b Hurst 2007 , p. 206.

^ Lemert 2004 , p. 117.

^ Lemert 2004 , p. 118.

^ Schumpeter 1951 , pp. 163–164.

^ Schumpeter 1951 , p. 165.

Bibliography [ edit ] Hurst, Charles E. (2007).

Social Inequality: Forms, Causes, and Consequences (6th ed.). Boston MA: Allyn and Bacon.

ISBN 978-0205484362 .

Lemert, Charles (2004).

Social Theory: The Multicultural and Classic Readings (3rd ed.). Boulder CO: Westview Press .

ISBN 978-0813342177 .

Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1951).

Imperialism and Social Classes . Fairfield NJ: Kelley.

ISBN 0678000204 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Waters, Tony; Waters, Dagmar, eds. (2015).

Weber's Rationalism and Modern Society: New Translations on Politics, Bureaucracy and Social Stratification . New York: Palgrave MacMillan .

Weber, Max (1980) [1922]. Winckelmann, Johannes (ed.).

Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft: Grundriss der verstehenden Soziologie [ Economy and Society: Outline of Understanding Sociology ] (in German) (5th ed.). Tübingen, Mohr: Marianne Weber.

Weber, Max (1946).

From Max Weber . Translated by Gerth, Hans; Wright Mills, C. New York: Free Press.

Weber, Max (2010). "The distribution of power within the community: Classes, Stände , Parties".

Journal of Classical Sociology .

10 (137). Translated by Waters, Dagmar; Waters, Tony. others.

Further reading [ edit ] Waters, Tony, and Dagmar Waters (2010).  "The New Zeppelin University Translation of Weber's 'Classes, Stände , Parties'" (2010) 10 Journal of Classical Sociology 153.

Weber, Max (1964).

The Theory of Social and Economic Organization , ed. Talcott Parsons. New York: Free P.

Weber, Max (1978).

Economy and Society:  an Outline of Interpretive Sociology [trans. of 1964 edn of Weber 1922], ed. Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich. Berkeley: U. California P.

Weber, Max (2015).  "The Distribution of Power with the Gemeinschaft: Classes, Stände , Parties", trans. Dagmar Waters, Tony Waters editors and translators, in Weber's Rationalism and Modern Society: New Translations on Politics, Bureaucracy and Social Stratification." New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

Text of 2015 translation of Classes, Staende, Parties by Max Weber.

v t e Max Weber Bibliography List of speeches Liberalism German politics Books Zur Geschichte der Handelsgesellschaften im Mittelalter (1889) Roman Agrarian History and Its Significance for Public and Private Law (1891) Condition of Farm Labour in Eastern Germany (1892) The Stock Exchange (1896) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905) The Economic Ethics of the World Religions The Religion of China (1915) The Religion of India (1916) Ancient Judaism (1921) Sociology of Religion (1920) The City (1921) Economy and Society (1922) Essays " The 'Objectivity' of Knowledge in Social Science and Social Policy " (1904) " The Protestant Sects and the Spirit of Capitalism " (1904) " The Rejection and the Meaning of the World " (1916) Lectures " Science as a Vocation " (1917) " Politics as a Vocation " (1919) General Economic History (1923) Concepts Bureaucracy Charisma Disenchantment Ethic of ultimate ends Ideal type Inner-worldly asceticism Iron cage Life chances Methodological individualism Monopoly on violence Patrimonialism Protestant work ethic Rationalisation Social action Affectional Traditional Instrumental Value-rational Three-component theory of stratification Tripartite classification of authority Charismatic Rational-legal Traditional Value-freedom Verstehen People Max Weber Sr.

(father) Alfred Weber (brother) Marianne Weber (wife) Related Verein für Socialpolitik Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik German Sociological Association German Democratic Party Max Weber Foundation v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Three-component_theory_of_stratification&oldid=1275188554 " Categories : 1922 introductions Max Weber Sociological theories Social status Social stratification Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 16:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Three-component theory of stratification 4 languages Add topic

