Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Positive density-dependence Toggle Positive density-dependence subsection 1.1 Examples 2 Negative density-dependence Toggle Negative density-dependence subsection 2.1 Examples 3 In macroparasite life cycles 4 Implications for parasite persistence and control Toggle Implications for parasite persistence and control subsection 4.1 Extinction threshold 5 Implications for parasite distribution 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Density dependence 5 languages Français 한국어 日本語 Norsk bokmål 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in population ecology In population ecology , density-dependent processes occur when population growth rates are regulated by the density of a population .

[ 1 ] This article will focus on density dependence in the context of macroparasite life cycles.

Positive density-dependence [ edit ] Positive density-dependence, density-dependent facilitation, or the Allee effect describes a situation in which population growth is facilitated by increased population density.

[ citation needed ] Examples [ edit ] In dioecious (separate sex) obligatory parasites, mated female worms are required to complete a transmission cycle. At low parasite densities, the probability of a female worm encountering a male worm and forming a mating pair can become so low that reproduction is restricted due to single sex infections. At higher parasite densities, the probability of mating pairs forming and successful reproduction increases. This has been observed in the population dynamics of Schistosomes .

[ 2 ] Positive density-dependence processes occur in macroparasite life cycles that rely on vectors with a cibarial armature, such as Anopheles or Culex mosquitoes. For Wuchereria bancrofti , a filarial nematode, well-developed cibarial armatures in vectors can damage ingested microfilariae and impede the development of infective L3 larvae . At low microfilariae densities, most microfilariae can be ruptured by teeth, preventing successful development of infective L3 larvae. As more larvae are ingested, the ones that become entangled in the teeth may protect the remaining larvae, which are then left undamaged during ingestion.

[ 3 ] Positive density-dependence processes may also occur in macroparasite infections that lead to immunosuppression .

Onchocerca volvulus infection promotes immunosuppressive processes within the human host that suppress immunity against incoming infective L3 larvae. This suppression of anti-parasite immunity causes parasite establishment rates to increase with higher parasite burden.

[ 4 ] Negative density-dependence [ edit ] Negative density-dependence, or density-dependent restriction, describes a situation in which population growth is curtailed by crowding, predators and competition.

[ citation needed ] In cell biology , it describes the reduction in cell division. When a cell population reaches a certain density, the amount of required growth factors and nutrients available to each cell becomes insufficient to allow continued cell growth .

[ citation needed ] This is also true for other organisms because an increased density means an increase in intraspecific competition . Greater competition means an individual has a decreased contribution to the next generation i.e. offspring. 
Density-dependent mortality can be overcompensating, undercompensating or exactly compensating.

[ citation needed ] There also exists density-independent inhibition , where other factors such as weather or environmental conditions and disturbances may affect a population's carrying capacity .

[ citation needed ] An example of a density-dependent variable is crowding and competition.

Examples [ edit ] Density-dependent fecundity Density-dependent fecundity exists, where the birth rate falls as competition increases. In the context of gastrointestinal nematodes, the weight of female Ascaris lumbricoides and its rates of egg production decrease as host infection intensity increases. Thus, the per-capita contribution of each worm to transmission decreases as a function of infection intensity.

[ 5 ] Parasite-induced vector mortality Parasite-induced vector mortality is a form of negative density-dependence. The Onchocerciasis life cycle involves transmission via a black fly vector. In this life-cycle, the life expectancy of the black fly vector decreases as the worm load ingested by the vector increases. Because O. volvulus microfilariae require at least seven days to mature into infective L3 larvae in the black fly, the worm load is restricted to levels that allow the black fly to survive for long enough to pass infective L3 larvae onto humans.

[ 6 ] In macroparasite life cycles [ edit ] Density-dependence processes (red) in filariasis life cycle In macroparasite life cycles, density-dependent processes can influence parasite fecundity, survival, and establishment. Density-dependent processes can act across multiple points of the macroparasite life cycle. For filarial worms , density-dependent processes can act at the host/vector interface or within the host/vector life-cycle stages. At the host/vector interface, density-dependence may influence the input of L3 larvae into the host's skin and the ingestion of microfilariae by the vector. Within the life-cycle stages taking place in the vector, density-dependence may influence the development of L3 larvae in vectors and vector life expectancy. Within the life-cycle stages taking place in the host, density-dependence may influence the development of microfilariae and host life expectancy.

[ 7 ] In reality, combinations of negative (restriction) and positive (facilitation) density-dependent processes occur in the life cycles of parasites. However, the extent to which one process predominates over the other vary widely according to the parasite, vector, and host involved. This is illustrated by the W. bancrofti life cycle. In Culex mosquitoes, which lack a well-developed cibarial armature, restriction processes predominate. Thus, the number of L3 larvae per mosquito declines as the number of ingested microfilariae increases. Conversely, in Aedes and Anopheles mosquitoes, which have well-developed cibarial armatures, facilitation processes predominate. Consequently, the number of L3 larvae per mosquito increases as the number of ingested microfilariae increases.

[ 3 ] Implications for parasite persistence and control [ edit ] Negative density-dependent (restriction) processes contribute to the resilience of macroparasite populations. At high parasite populations, restriction processes tend to restrict population growth rates and contribute to the stability of these populations. Interventions that lead to a reduction in parasite populations will cause a relaxation of density-dependent restrictions , increasing per-capita rates of reproduction or survival, thereby contributing to population persistence and resilience.

[ 7 ] Contrariwise, positive density-dependent or facilitation processes make elimination of a parasite population more likely. Facilitation processes cause the reproductive success of the parasite to decrease with lower worm burden.  Thus, control measures that reduce parasite burden will automatically reduce per-capita reproductive success and increase the likelihood of elimination when facilitation processes predominate.

[ 8 ] Extinction threshold [ edit ] The extinction threshold refers to minimum parasite density level for the parasite to persist in a population. Interventions that reduce parasite density to a level below this threshold will ultimately lead to the extinction of that parasite in that population.

Facilitation processes increase the extinction threshold, making it easier to achieve using parasite control interventions. Conversely, restriction processes complicates control measures by decreasing the extinction threshold.

[ 8 ] Implications for parasite distribution [ edit ] Anderson and Gordon (1982) propose that the distribution of macroparasites in a host population is regulated by a combination of positive and negative density-dependent processes. In overdispersed distributions, a small proportion of hosts harbour most of the parasite population. Positive density-dependent processes contribute to overdispersion of parasite populations, whereas negative density-dependent processes contribute to underdispersion of parasite populations. As mean parasite burden increases, negative density-dependent processes become more prominent and the distribution of the parasite population tends to become less overdispersed.

[ 9 ] Consequently, interventions that lead to a reduction in parasite burden will tend to cause the parasite distribution to become overdispersed. For instance, time-series data for Onchocerciasis infection demonstrates that 10 years of vector control lead to reduced parasite burden with a more overdispersed distribution.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Frequency-dependent selection Plant density Janzen–Connell hypothesis References [ edit ] ^ Hixon, M (2009), "Density Dependence and Independence", Encyclopedia of Life Sciences , Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, doi : 10.1002/9780470015902.a0021219 , ISBN 978-0470016176 ^ May, R.M. (1977). "Togetherness among Schistosomes: its effects on the dynamics of the infection".

Mathematical Biosciences .

35 ( 3– 4): 301– 343.

doi : 10.1016/0025-5564(77)90030-X .

^ a b Snow, L.C. (2006). "Transmission dynamics of lymphatic filariasis: vector-specific density dependence in the development of Wuchereria bancrofti infective larvae in mosquitoes".

Medical and Veterinary Entomology .

20 (3): 261– 272.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2915.2006.00629.x .

PMID 17044876 .

S2CID 23152390 .

^ Duerr, H.P. (2003). "Density-dependent parasite establishment suggests infection-associated immunosuppression as an important mechanism for parasite density regulation in onchocerciasis".

Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene .

97 (2): 242– 250.

doi : 10.1016/S0035-9203(03)90132-5 .

PMID 14584385 .

^ Walker, M (2009).

"Density-dependent effects on the weight of female Ascaris lumbricoides infections of humans and its impact on patterns of egg production" .

Parasites & Vectors .

2 (1): 11.

doi : 10.1186/1756-3305-2-11 .

PMC 2672930 .

PMID 19208229 .

^ Basanez, M.G. (1996). "Density-dependent processes in the onchocerciasis: relationship between microfilarial intake and mortality of the simuliid vector".

Parasitology .

113 (4). Cambridge University Press: 331– 355.

doi : 10.1017/S003118200006649X .

PMID 8873475 .

S2CID 42555004 .

^ a b Churcher, T.S. (2006). "Density dependence and the control of helminth parasites".

Journal of Animal Ecology .

75 (6): 1313– 1320.

Bibcode : 2006JAnEc..75.1313C .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2656.2006.01154.x .

PMID 17032363 .

^ a b Duerr, H.P. (2005). "Determinants of the eradicability of filarial infections: a conceptual approach".

Trends in Parasitology .

21 (2): 88– 96.

doi : 10.1016/j.pt.2004.11.011 .

PMID 15664532 .

^ Anderson, R.M. (1982). "Processes influencing the distribution of parasite numbers within host populations with special emphasis on parasite-induced host mortalities".

Parasitology .

85 (2): 373– 398.

doi : 10.1017/S0031182000055347 .

PMID 7145478 .

S2CID 19196511 .

^ Plaisier, A.P. (1996).

Modelling Onchocerciasis Transmission and Control . Rotterdam: Erasmus University.

ISBN 90-72245-68-7 .

External links [ edit ] Density dependence Eradicability of filarial diseases v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Density_dependence&oldid=1295400899 " Categories : Cell cycle Cellular processes Epidemiology Evolutionary biology concepts Population dynamics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 14:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Density dependence 5 languages Add topic

