Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Photosensitivity 2 Histology 3 Retinal mosaic 4 Signaling Toggle Signaling subsection 4.1 Hyperpolarization 4.2 Bipolar cells 4.3 Advantages 5 Difference between rods and cones 6 Development 7 Ganglion cell photoreceptors 8 Non-human photoreceptors 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Photoreceptor cell 35 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of neuroepithelial cell This article is about cellular photoreceptors. For other types of photoreceptors, see Photoreceptor (disambiguation) .

Photoreceptor cell Functional parts of the rods and cones , which are two of the three types of photosensitive cells in the retina Identifiers MeSH D010786 NeuroLex ID sao226523927 FMA 85613 86740, 85613 Anatomical terms of neuroanatomy [ edit on Wikidata ] A photoreceptor cell is a specialized type of neuroepithelial cell found in the retina that is capable of visual phototransduction . The great biological importance of photoreceptors is that they convert light (visible electromagnetic radiation ) into signals that can stimulate biological processes. To be more specific, photoreceptor proteins in the cell absorb photons , triggering a change in the cell's membrane potential .

There are currently three known types of photoreceptor cells in mammalian eyes: rods , cones , and intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells . The two classic photoreceptor cells are rods and cones, each contributing information used by the visual system to form an image of the environment, sight . Rods primarily mediate scotopic vision (dim conditions) whereas cones primarily mediate photopic vision (bright conditions), but the processes in each that supports phototransduction is similar.

[ 1 ] The intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells were discovered during the 1990s.

[ 2 ] These cells are thought not to contribute to sight directly, but have a role in the entrainment of the circadian rhythm and the pupillary reflex .

Photosensitivity [ edit ] Normalized human photoreceptor absorbances for different wavelengths of light [ 3 ] Each photoreceptor absorbs light according to its spectral sensitivity (absorptance), which is determined by the photoreceptor proteins expressed in that cell. Humans have three classes of cones (L, M, S) that each differ in spectral sensitivity and 'prefer' photons of different wavelengths (see graph). For example, the peak wavelength of the S-cone's spectral sensitivity is approximately 420 nm (nanometers, a measure of wavelength), so it is more likely to absorb a photon at 420 nm than at any other wavelength. Light of a longer wavelength can also produce the same response from an S-cone, but it would have to be brighter to do so.

In accordance with the principle of univariance , a photoreceptor's output signal is proportional only to the number of photons absorbed. The photoreceptors can not measure the wavelength of light that it absorbs and therefore does not detect color on its own. Rather, it is the ratios of responses of the three types of cone cells that can estimate wavelength, and therefore enable color vision .

Histology [ edit ] Anatomy of rods and cones varies slightly.

Rod and cone photoreceptors are found on the outermost layer of the retina ; they both have the same basic structure.  Closest to the visual field (and farthest from the brain) is the axon terminal, which releases a neurotransmitter called glutamate to bipolar cells . Farther back is the cell body , which contains the cell's organelles . Farther back still is the inner segment, a specialized part of the cell full of mitochondria . The chief function of the inner segment is to provide ATP (energy) for the sodium-potassium pump . Finally, closest to the brain (and farthest from the field of view) is the outer segment, the part of the photoreceptor that absorbs light . Outer segments are actually modified cilia [ 5 ] [ 6 ] that contain disks filled with opsin , the molecule that absorbs photons, as well as voltage-gated sodium channels .

The membranous photoreceptor protein opsin contains a pigment molecule called retinal . In rod cells, these together are called rhodopsin . In cone cells, there are different types of opsins that combine with retinal to form pigments called photopsins . Three different classes of photopsins in the cones react to different ranges of light frequency, a selectivity that allows the visual system to transduce color . The function of the photoreceptor cell is to convert the light information of the photon into a form of information communicable to the nervous system and readily usable to the organism: This conversion is called signal transduction .

The opsin found in the intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cells of the retina is called melanopsin . These cells are involved in various reflexive responses of the brain and body to the presence of (day)light, such as the regulation of circadian rhythms , pupillary reflex and other non-visual responses to light. Melanopsin functionally resembles invertebrate opsins.

Retinal mosaic [ edit ] Main article: Retinal mosaic Illustration of the distribution of cone cells in the fovea of an individual with normal color vision (left), and a color blind (protanopic) retina. Note that the center of the fovea holds very few blue-sensitive cones.

Distribution of rods and cones along a line passing through the fovea and the blind spot of a human eye [ 7 ] Most vertebrate photoreceptors are located in the retina. The distribution of rods and cones (and classes thereof) in the retina is called the retinal mosaic . Each human retina has approximately 6 million cones and 120 million rods.

[ 8 ] At the "center" of the retina (the point directly behind the lens) lies the fovea (or fovea centralis), which contains only cone cells; and is the region capable of producing the highest visual acuity or highest resolution .  Across the rest of the retina, rods and cones are intermingled.  No photoreceptors are found at the blind spot , the area where ganglion cell fibers are collected into the optic nerve and leave the eye.

[ 9 ] The distribution of cone classes (L, M, S) are also nonhomogenous, with no S-cones in the fovea, and the ratio of L-cones to M-cones differing between individuals.

The number and ratio of rods to cones varies among species, dependent on whether an animal is primarily diurnal or nocturnal . Certain owls, such as the nocturnal tawny owl , [ 10 ] have a tremendous number of rods in their retinae. Other vertebrates will also have  a different number of cone classes, ranging from monochromats to pentachromats .

Signaling [ edit ] The absorption of light leads to an isomeric change in the retinal molecule.

Main article: Visual phototransduction The path of a visual signal is described by the phototransduction cascade , the mechanism by which the energy of a photon signals a mechanism in the cell that leads to its electrical polarization. This polarization ultimately leads to either the transmittance or inhibition of a neural signal that will be fed to the brain via the optic nerve . The steps that apply to the phototransduction pathway from vertebrate rod/cone photoreceptors are: The Vertebrate visual opsin in the disc membrane of the outer segment absorbs a photon, changing the configuration of a retinal Schiff base cofactor inside the protein from the cis-form to the trans-form, causing the retinal to change shape.

This results in a series of unstable intermediates, the last of which binds stronger to a G protein in the membrane , called transducin , and activates it. This is the first amplification step – each photoactivated opsin triggers activation of about 100 transducins.

Each transducin then activates the enzyme cGMP-specific phosphodiesterase (PDE).

PDE then catalyzes the hydrolysis of cGMP to 5' GMP. This is the second amplification step, where a single PDE hydrolyses about 1000 cGMP molecules.

The net concentration of intracellular cGMP is reduced (due to its conversion to 5' GMP via PDE), resulting in the closure of cyclic nucleotide-gated Na + ion channels located in the photoreceptor outer segment membrane.

As a result, sodium ions can no longer enter the cell, and the photoreceptor outer segment membrane becomes hyperpolarized , due to the charge inside the membrane becoming more negative.

This change in the cell's membrane potential causes voltage-gated calcium channels to close. This leads to a decrease in the influx of calcium ions into the cell and thus the intracellular calcium ion concentration falls.

A decrease in the intracellular calcium concentration means that less glutamate is released via calcium-induced exocytosis to the bipolar cell (see below). (The decreased calcium level slows the release of the neurotransmitter glutamate , which excites the postsynaptic bipolar cells and horizontal cells .) ATP provided by the inner segment powers the sodium-potassium pump. This pump is necessary to reset the initial state of the outer segment by taking the sodium ions that are entering the cell and pumping them back out.

Hyperpolarization [ edit ] Unlike most sensory receptor cells, photoreceptors actually become hyperpolarized when stimulated; and conversely are depolarized when not stimulated. This means that glutamate is released continuously when the cell is unstimulated, and stimulus causes release to stop. In the dark, cells have a relatively high concentration of cyclic guanosine 3'-5' monophosphate (cGMP), which opens cGMP-gated ion channels . These channels are nonspecific, allowing movement of both sodium and calcium ions when open. The movement of these positively charged ions into the cell (driven by their respective electrochemical gradient ) depolarizes the membrane, and leads to the release of the neurotransmitter glutamate .

Unstimulated (in the dark), cyclic-nucleotide gated channels in the outer segment are open because cyclic GMP (cGMP) is bound to them. Hence, positively charged ions (namely sodium ions ) enter the photoreceptor, depolarizing it to about −40 mV ( resting potential in other nerve cells is usually −65 mV). This depolarization current is often known as dark current.

Bipolar cells [ edit ] The photoreceptors ( rods and cones ) transmit to the bipolar cells, which transmit then to the retinal ganglion cells. Retinal ganglion cell axons collectively form the optic nerve , via which they project to the brain.

[ 8 ] The rod and cone photoreceptors signal their absorption of photons via a decrease in the release of the neurotransmitter glutamate to bipolar cells at its axon terminal. Since the photoreceptor is depolarized in the dark, a high amount of glutamate is being released to bipolar cells in the dark. Absorption of a photon will hyperpolarize the photoreceptor and therefore result in the release of less glutamate at the presynaptic terminal to the bipolar cell.

Every rod or cone photoreceptor releases the same neurotransmitter, glutamate. However, the effect of glutamate differs in the bipolar cells, depending upon the type of receptor imbedded in that cell's membrane . When glutamate binds to an ionotropic receptor , the bipolar cell will depolarize (and therefore will hyperpolarize with light as less glutamate is released). On the other hand, binding of glutamate to a metabotropic receptor results in a hyperpolarization, so this bipolar cell will depolarize to light as less glutamate is released.

In essence, this property allows for one population of bipolar cells that gets excited by light and another population that gets inhibited by it, even though all photoreceptors show the same response to light. This complexity becomes both important and necessary for detecting color , contrast , edges , etc.

Advantages [ edit ] Phototransduction in rods and cones is somewhat unusual in that the stimulus (in this case, light) reduces the cell's response or firing rate, different from most other sensory systems in which a stimulus increases the cell's response or firing rate. This difference has important functional consequences: the classic (rod or cone) photoreceptor is depolarized in the dark, which means many sodium ions are flowing into the cell. Thus, the random opening or closing of sodium channels will not affect the membrane potential of the cell; only the closing of a large number of channels, through absorption of a photon, will affect it and signal that light is in the visual field. This system may have less noise relative to sensory transduction schema that increase rate of neural firing in response to stimulus, like touch and olfaction .

there is a lot of amplification in two stages of classic phototransduction: one pigment will activate many molecules of transducin , and one PDE will cleave many cGMPs. This amplification means that even the absorption of one photon will affect membrane potential and signal to the brain that light is in the visual field. This is the main feature that differentiates rod photoreceptors from cone photoreceptors. Rods are extremely sensitive and have the capacity of registering a single photon of light, unlike cones. On the other hand, cones are known to have very fast kinetics in terms of rate of amplification of phototransduction, unlike rods.

Difference between rods and cones [ edit ] Main articles: Cone cell and Rod cell Comparison of human rod and cone cells, from Eric Kandel et al. in Principles of Neural Science .

[ 11 ] Rods Cones Used for scotopic vision (vision under low light conditions) Used for photopic vision (vision under high light conditions) Very light sensitive ; sensitive to scattered light Not very light sensitive; sensitive only to direct light Loss causes night blindness Loss causes legal blindness Low visual acuity High visual acuity; better spatial resolution Not present in fovea Concentrated in fovea Slow response to light, stimuli added over time Fast response to light, can perceive more rapid changes in stimuli Have more pigment than cones, so can detect lower light levels Have less pigment than rods, require more light to detect images Stacks of membrane-enclosed disks are unattached to cell membrane directly Disks are attached to outer membrane About 120 million rods distributed around the retina [ 8 ] About 6 million cones distributed in each retina [ 8 ] One type of photosensitive pigment Three types of photosensitive pigment in humans Confer achromatic vision Confer color vision Development [ edit ] The key events mediating rod versus S cone versus M cone differentiation are induced by several transcription factors, including RORbeta, OTX2, NRL, CRX, NR2E3 and TRbeta2.  The S cone fate represents the default photoreceptor program; however, differential transcriptional activity can bring about rod or M cone generation.  L cones are present in primates, however there is not much known for their developmental program due to use of rodents in research.  There are five steps to developing photoreceptors: proliferation of multi-potent retinal progenitor cells (RPCs); restriction of competence of RPCs; cell fate specification; photoreceptor gene expression;  and lastly axonal growth, synapse formation and outer segment growth.

Early Notch signaling maintains progenitor cycling.  Photoreceptor precursors come about through inhibition of Notch signaling and increased activity of various factors including achaete-scute homologue 1.  OTX2 activity commits cells to the photoreceptor fate.  CRX further defines the photoreceptor specific panel of genes being expressed.  NRL expression leads to the rod fate.  NR2E3 further restricts cells to the rod fate by repressing cone genes.  RORbeta is needed for both rod and cone development.   TRbeta2 mediates the M cone fate.  If any of the previously mentioned factors' functions are ablated, the default photoreceptor is a S cone.  These events take place at different time periods for different species and include a complex pattern of activities that bring about a spectrum of phenotypes.  If these regulatory networks are disrupted, retinitis pigmentosa , macular degeneration or other visual deficits may result.

[ 12 ] Ganglion cell photoreceptors [ edit ] Main article: Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cell Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) are a subset (≈1–3%) of retinal ganglion cells , unlike other retinal ganglion cells, are intrinsically photosensitive due to the presence of melanopsin , a light-sensitive protein. Therefore they constitute a third class of photoreceptors, in addition to rod and cone cells .

[ 13 ] In humans the ipRGCs contribute to non-image-forming functions like circadian rhythms, behavior and pupillary light reflex .

[ 14 ] Peak spectral sensitivity of the receptor is between 460 and 482 nm.

[ 14 ] However, they may also contribute to a rudimentary visual pathway enabling conscious sight and brightness detection.

[ 14 ] Classic photoreceptors (rods and cones) also feed into the novel visual system, which may contribute to color constancy. ipRGCs could be instrumental in understanding many diseases including major causes of blindness worldwide like glaucoma, a disease that affects ganglion cells, and the study of the receptor offered potential as a new avenue to explore in trying to find treatments for blindness.

ipRGCs were only definitively detected ipRGCs in humans during landmark experiments in 2007 on rodless, coneless humans.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] As had been found in other mammals, the identity of the non-rod non-cone photoreceptor in humans was found to be a ganglion cell in the inner retina. The researchers had tracked down patients with rare diseases wiping out classic rod and cone photoreceptor function but preserving ganglion cell function.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Despite having no rods or cones the patients continued to exhibit circadian photoentrainment, circadian behavioural patterns, melanopsin suppression, and pupil reactions, with peak spectral sensitivities to environmental and experimental light matching that for the melanopsin photopigment. Their brains could also associate vision with light of this frequency.

Non-human photoreceptors [ edit ] Rod and cone photoreceptors are common to almost all vertebrates. The pineal and parapineal glands are photoreceptive in non-mammalian vertebrates, but not in mammals. Birds have photoactive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-contacting neurons within the paraventricular organ that respond to light in the absence of input from the eyes or neurotransmitters.

[ 17 ] Invertebrate photoreceptors in organisms such as insects and molluscs are different in both their morphological organization and their underlying biochemical pathways. This article describes human photoreceptors.

See also [ edit ] Visual phototransduction G protein-coupled receptor Sensory system Photosensitive Photosensitive ganglion cell Horizontal cell Bipolar cell Amacrine cell References [ edit ] ^ "eye, human." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Ultimate Reference Suite. Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 2010.

^ Foster, R.G.; Provencio, I.; Hudson, D.; Fiske, S.; Grip, W.; Menaker, M. (1991). "Circadian photoreception in the retinally degenerate mouse (rd/rd)".

Journal of Comparative Physiology A .

169 (1): 39– 50.

doi : 10.1007/BF00198171 .

PMID 1941717 .

S2CID 1124159 .

^ Bowmaker J.K. & Dartnall H.J.A. (1980).

"Visual pigments of rods and cones in a human retina" .

J. Physiol .

298 : 501– 511.

doi : 10.1113/jphysiol.1980.sp013097 .

PMC 1279132 .

PMID 7359434 .

^ Human Physiology and Mechanisms of Disease by Arthur C. Guyton (1992) ISBN 0-7216-3299-8 p. 373 ^ Richardson, T.M. (1969). "Cytoplasmic and ciliary connections between the inner and outer segments of mammalian visual receptors".

Vision Research .

9 (7): 727– 731.

doi : 10.1016/0042-6989(69)90010-8 .

PMID 4979023 .

^ Louvi, A.; Grove, E. A. (2011).

"Cilia in the CNS: The quiet organelle claims center stage" .

Neuron .

69 (6): 1046– 1060.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.03.002 .

PMC 3070490 .

PMID 21435552 .

^ Foundations of Vision , Brian A. Wandell ^ a b c d Schacter, Daniel L. (2011).

Psychology Second Edition . New York: Worth Publishers. pp.

136–137 .

ISBN 978-1-4292-3719-2 .

^ Goldstein, E. Bruce (2007).

Sensation and Perception (7 ed.). Thomson and Wadswoth.

^ "Owl Eye Information" .

owls.org . World Owl Trust. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018 . Retrieved 1 May 2017 .

^ Kandel, E. R.; Schwartz, J.H.; Jessell, T.M. (2000).

Principles of Neural Science (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp.

507–513 .

ISBN 0-8385-7701-6 .

^ Swaroop, Anand; Douglas Kim; Douglas Forrest (August 2010).

"Transcriptional Regulation of Photoreceptor Development and Homeostasis in the Mammalian Retina" .

Nature Reviews Neuroscience .

11 (8): 563– 576.

doi : 10.1038/nrn2880 .

PMC 11346175 .

PMID 20648062 .

S2CID 6034699 .

^ Do MT, Yau KW (October 2010).

"Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells" .

Physiological Reviews .

90 (4): 1547– 81.

doi : 10.1152/physrev.00013.2010 .

PMC 4374737 .

PMID 20959623 .

^ a b c Zaidi FH, et al. (2007).

"Short-wavelength light sensitivity of circadian, pupillary, and visual awareness in humans lacking an outer retina" .

Current Biology .

17 (24): 2122– 8.

Bibcode : 2007CBio...17.2122Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2007.11.034 .

PMC 2151130 .

PMID 18082405 .

^ a b Coghlan A.

Blind people 'see' sunrise and sunset . New Scientist, 26 December 2007, issue 2635.

^ a b Medical News Today.

Normal Responses To Non-visual Effects Of Light Retained By Blind Humans Lacking Rods And Cones Archived 2009-02-06 at the Wayback Machine . 14 December 2007.

^ "Scientists document light-sensitive birds eye within bird brain" .

birdsnews.com . Birds News. Archived from the original on 2 July 2017 . Retrieved 20 July 2017 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Campbell, Neil A. & Reece, Jane B. (2002).

Biology . San Francisco: Benjamin Cummings. pp.

1064–1067 .

ISBN 0-8053-6624-5 .

Freeman, Scott (2002).

Biological Science (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall. pp.

835–837 .

ISBN 0-13-140941-7 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Photoreceptor cells at Wikimedia Commons NIF Search – Photoreceptor Cell via the Neuroscience Information Framework v t e Anatomy of the globe of the human eye Fibrous tunic (outer) Sclera Episcleral layer Schlemm's canal Trabecular meshwork Cornea Limbus layers Epithelium Bowman's Stroma Dua's layer Descemet's Endothelium 1:posterior segment 2:ora serrata 3:ciliary muscle 4:ciliary zonules 5:Schlemm's canal 6:pupil 7:anterior chamber 8:cornea 9:iris 10:lens cortex 11:lens nucleus 12:ciliary process 13:conjunctiva 14:inferior oblique muscule 15:inferior rectus muscule 16:medial rectus muscle 17:retinal arteries and veins 18:optic disc 19:dura mater 20:central retinal artery 21:central retinal vein 22:optic nerve 23:vorticose vein 24:bulbar sheath 25:macula 26:fovea  27:sclera 28:choroid 29:superior rectus muscle 30:retina Uvea / vascular tunic (middle) Choroid Capillary lamina of choroid Bruch's membrane Sattler's layer Ciliary body Ciliary processes Ciliary muscle Pars plicata Pars plana Iris Stroma Pupil Iris dilator muscle Iris sphincter muscle Retina (inner) Layers Inner limiting membrane Nerve fiber layer Ganglion cell layer Inner plexiform layer Inner nuclear layer Outer plexiform layer Outer nuclear layer External limiting membrane Layer of rods and cones Retinal pigment epithelium Cells Photoreceptor cells ( Cone cell , Rod cell ) → ( Horizontal cell ) → Bipolar cell → ( Amacrine cell ) → Retina ganglion cell ( Midget cell , Parasol cell , Bistratified cell , Giant retina ganglion cells , Photosensitive ganglion cell ) → Diencephalon : P cell , M cell , K cell , Muller glia Other Macula Perifoveal area Parafoveal area Fovea Foveal avascular zone Foveola Optic disc Optic cup Ora serrata Anatomical regions of the eye Anterior segment Adnexa ( Eyebrow , Eyelid , Conjunctiva , Lacrimal system , Orbit ) Fibrous tunic Anterior chamber Aqueous humour Iris Posterior chamber Ciliary body Lens Capsule of lens Zonule of Zinn Posterior segment Vitreous chamber Vitreous body Retina Choroid Other Keratocytes Ocular immune system Optical coherence tomography Eye care professional Eye disease Refractive error Accommodation Physiological Optics Visual perception v t e Nervous tissue CNS Tissue Types Grey matter White matter Projection fibers Association fiber Commissural fiber Lemniscus Nerve tract Decussation Neuropil Meninges Cell Types Neuronal Pyramidal Purkinje Granule Von Economo Medium spiny Interneuron Glial Astrocyte Ependymal cells Tanycyte Oligodendrocyte progenitor cell Oligodendrocyte Microglia PNS General Dorsal Root Ganglion Ramus Ventral Root Ramus Ramus communicans Gray White Autonomic ganglion ( Preganglionic nerve fibers Postganglionic nerve fibers ) Nerve fascicle Funiculus Connective tissues Epineurium Perineurium Endoneurium Neuroglia Myelination : Schwann cell Neurilemma Myelin incisure Node of Ranvier Internodal segment Satellite glial cell Neurons / nerve fibers Parts Soma Axon hillock Axon Telodendron Axon terminals Axoplasm Axolemma Neurofibril/neurofilament Dendrite Nissl body Dendritic spine Apical dendrite / Basal dendrite Types Bipolar Unipolar Pseudounipolar Multipolar Interneuron Renshaw Afferent nerve fiber / Sensory neuron GSA GVA SSA SVA fibers Ia or Aα Ib or Golgi or Aα II or Aβ and Aγ III or Aδ or fast pain IV or C or slow pain Efferent nerve fiber / Motor neuron GSE GVE SVE Upper motor neuron Lower motor neuron α motorneuron β motorneuron γ motorneuron Termination Synapse Electrical synapse / Gap junction Chemical synapse Synaptic vesicle Active zone Postsynaptic density Autapse Ribbon synapse Neuromuscular junction Sensory receptors Meissner's corpuscle Merkel nerve ending Pacinian corpuscle Ruffini ending Muscle spindle Free nerve ending Nociceptor Olfactory receptor neuron Photoreceptor cell Hair cell Taste receptor Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nqmkl
Cached time: 20250817045032
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.476 seconds
Real time usage: 0.590 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2929/1000000
Revision size: 26453/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 125192/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1725/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 90393/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.278/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7118612/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  482.614      1 -total
 30.88%  149.039      1 Template:Reflist
 24.21%  116.860     12 Template:Navbox
 20.13%   97.167      7 Template:Cite_journal
 18.90%   91.220      1 Template:Eye_anatomy
 15.21%   73.394      1 Template:Infobox_neuron
 14.75%   71.180      1 Template:Infobox_anatomy
 14.01%   67.601      1 Template:Infobox
 11.79%   56.900      1 Template:Short_description
  6.76%   32.645      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:401150:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045032 and revision id 1290886433. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Photoreceptor_cell&oldid=1290886433 " Categories : Human eye anatomy Histology Photoreceptor cells Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 May 2025, at 18:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Photoreceptor cell 35 languages Add topic

