Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In primarily Protestant countries Toggle In primarily Protestant countries subsection 1.1 British Empire 1.1.1 Great Britain 1.1.2 Gordon Riots 1780 1.1.3 19th century 1.1.4 Early 20th century 1.1.5 Since 1945 1.1.6 Ireland 1.1.6.1 Laws which restricted the rights of Irish Catholics 1.1.7 Northern Ireland 1.1.8 Canada 1.1.9 French language schools in Canada 1.1.10 Newfoundland 1.1.11 Australia 1.1.12 New Zealand 1.2 German Empire 1.2.1 Nazi Germany 1.3 Netherlands 1.4 Nordic countries 1.4.1 Norway 1.4.2 Swedish Empire 1.5 United States 1.5.1 Colonial era 1.5.2 New nation 1.5.3 1840s–1850s 1.5.4 1860s–1890s 1.5.5 20th and 21st centuries 2 In primarily Catholic countries Toggle In primarily Catholic countries subsection 2.1 Austria 2.1.1 Austria-Hungary 2.2 Brazil 2.3 Colombia 2.4 Cuba 2.5 France 2.6 Italy 2.7 Ireland 2.8 Mexico 2.9 Nicaragua 2.10 Poland 2.11 Spain 3 In mixed Catholic-Protestant countries Toggle In mixed Catholic-Protestant countries subsection 3.1 Switzerland 4 In primarily Orthodox countries Toggle In primarily Orthodox countries subsection 4.1 Byzantine Empire 4.2 Russian Empire 4.3 Former Yugoslavia 4.4 Greece 4.5 Ukraine 5 Non-Christian nations Toggle Non-Christian nations subsection 5.1 Bangladesh 5.2 Burkina Faso 5.3 China 5.4 East Timor 5.5 Japan 5.6 Pakistan 5.7 North Korea 5.8 South Korea 5.9 Sri Lanka 5.9.1 Government actions 5.9.2 Anti-Catholic violence 5.10 Suppression of the Jesuits 6 In popular culture 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 United States, Canada and Mexico 10.2 Europe 10.3 Asia and Pacific 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Catholicism 28 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hostility or prejudice towards Catholics Not to be confused with Criticism of the Catholic Church .

A notable 1875 editorial cartoon by Thomas Nast , a German immigrant to the United States who had been raised as a Catholic. It portrays bishops as crocodiles who are attacking public schools, with the connivance of Irish Catholic politicians. Published in Harper's Weekly, May 8,1875 Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Persecutions of the Catholic Church Overview Historical persecution of Christians Catholic Church persecutions 1939–1958 Eradication of the Church under Stalinism Eastern Catholic persecutions Persecution of Christians in the modern era Roman Empire Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire Diocletianic Persecution Neo-Persian Empire Sasanian conquest of Jerusalem Byzantine Empire Massacre of the Latins Japan Martyrs of Japan India Violence against Christians in India 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka China Martyr Saints of China Vietnam Vietnamese Martyrs Canada Canadian Martyrs United States Know Nothing Oregon Compulsory Education Act Pierce v. Society of Sisters Philadelphia nativist riots Ursuline Convent riots Norway Anti-Catholicism in Norway Great Britain and Ireland Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom List of Catholic martyrs of the English Reformation Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Irish Catholic Martyrs Dissolution of the Monasteries Penal Laws Cromwellian conquest of Ireland France Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution War in the Vendée Martyrs of Compiègne Massacre in the Rue Haxo Expulsion of congregations Spain Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Red Terror Dilectissima Nobis Martyrs of Turon Martyrs of Daimiel Bartolomé Blanco Innocencio of Mary Immaculate José María of Manila 233 Spanish Martyrs 498 Spanish Martyrs 522 Spanish Martyrs Burning of convents in Spain (1931) Germany Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany Mit brennender Sorge Kulturkampf Poland Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland Polish anti-religious campaign 1945–1990 108 Blessed Polish Martyrs Russia Martyrs of Pratulin Conversion of Chelm Eparchy Anti-Catholicism in the Soviet Union Eastern Catholic victims of Soviet persecutions Mexico Cristero War Saints Anti-clericalism in Mexico El Salvador Four U.S. missionaries 1989 murders of Jesuits Catholicism portal v t e Wolf at the Door, Gaunt and Hungry." Don't let him in. Thomas Nast cartoon against both Samuel Tilden and the Roman Catholic Church (i.e. If the Democrat Tilden was elected President the Public School system would be "Endangered" by the Roman Catholic Church.) Published in Harper's Weekly, September 16, 1876 Anti-Catholicism is hostility towards Catholics and opposition to the Catholic Church , its clergy , and its adherents.

[ 1 ] Scholars have identified four categories of anti-Catholicism: constitutional-national, theological, popular and socio-cultural.

[ 2 ] At various points after the Reformation , many majority- Protestant states, including England , Northern Ireland , Prussia and Germany , Scotland , and the United States , turned anti-Catholicism, opposition to the authority of Catholic clergy ( anti-clericalism ), opposition to the authority of the pope ( anti-papalism ), mockery of Catholic rituals , and opposition to Catholic adherents into major political themes and policies of religious discrimination and religious persecution .

[ 3 ] Major examples of populist groups that have targeted Catholics in recent history include Ulster loyalists in Northern Ireland during the Troubles and the second Ku Klux Klan in the United States.

Historically, Catholics who lived in Protestant countries were frequently suspected of conspiring against the state in furtherance of papal interests. In majority Protestant countries which experienced large scale immigration , such as the United States and Australia , suspicion of Catholic immigrants and/or discrimination against them frequently overlapped or was conflated with nativist , xenophobic , ethnocentric and/or racist sentiments (e.g.

anti-Irish sentiment , anti-Filipino sentiment , anti-Italianism , anti-Spanish sentiment , and anti-Slavic sentiment , specifically anti-Polish sentiment ).

In the early modern period , anti-clerical governments often attacked the Pope's ability to appoint bishops in order to ensure that the Church would not be independent from the State, confiscated Church property, expelled Catholic religious orders such as the Jesuits , banned Classical Christian education , and sought to replace it with a State-controlled school system.

[ 4 ] In primarily Protestant countries [ edit ] Main article: Catholic–Protestant relations See also: Antichrist , Great Apostasy , Protestant Reformation , and History of Protestantism From a series of woodcuts (1545) usually referred to as the Papstspotbilder or Papstspottbilder , [ 5 ] by Lucas Cranach , commissioned by Martin Luther .

[ 6 ] "Kissing the Pope's feet"; [ 7 ] German peasants respond to a papal bull of Pope Paul III . Caption reads: "Don't frighten us Pope, with your ban, and don't be such a furious man. Otherwise we shall turn around and show you our rears".

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Passional Christi und Antichristi , by Lucas Cranach the Elder , from Luther's 1521 Passionary of the Christ and Antichrist . The Pope as the Antichrist , signing and selling indulgences .

Protestant Reformers , including Martin Luther , John Calvin , John Wycliffe , Henry VIII , Thomas Cranmer , John Thomas , Ellen G. White , John Knox , Charles Taze Russell , Isaac Newton , Roger Williams , Cotton Mather , and John Wesley , as well as most Protestants of the 16th–19th centuries, identified the Papacy with the Antichrist .

[ 10 ] The Centuriators of Magdeburg , a group of Lutheran scholars in Magdeburg which was headed by Matthias Flacius , wrote the 12-volume Magdeburg Centuries in order to discredit the Papacy and lead other Christians to recognize the Pope as the Antichrist. The fifth round of talks in the Lutheran–Catholic dialogue notes, In calling the pope the "Antichrist", the early Lutherans stood in a tradition that reached back into the eleventh century . Not only dissidents and heretics but even saints had called the bishop of Rome the "Antichrist" when they wished to castigate his abuse of power . What Lutherans incorrectly understood as a papal claim to unlimited authority over everything and everyone reminded them of the Apocalyptic imagery of Daniel 11 , a passage that had been applied to the pope as the Antichrist of the last days even prior to the Reformation.

[ 11 ] Doctrinal works of literature which were published by the Lutherans , the Reformed churches , the Presbyterians , the Baptists , the Anabaptists , and the Methodists contain references to the Pope as the Antichrist, including the Smalcald Articles , Article 4 (1537), [ 12 ] the Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope (1537), [ 13 ] the Westminster Confession , Article 25.6 (1646), and the 1689 Baptist Confession of Faith , Article 26.4. In 1754, John Wesley published his Explanatory Notes Upon the New Testament , which is currently an official Doctrinal Standard of the United Methodist Church . In his notes on the Book of Revelation (chapter 13), he commented: "The whole succession of Popes from Gregory VII are undoubtedly Antichrists. Yet this hinders not, but that the last Pope in this succession will be more eminently the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, adding to that of his predecessors a peculiar degree of wickedness from the bottomless pit." [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Referring to the Book of Revelation, Edward Gibbon stated that "The advantage of turning those mysterious prophecies against the See of Rome , inspired the Protestants with uncommon veneration for so useful an ally." [ 16 ] Protestants condemned the Catholic policy of mandatory celibacy for priests.

[ 17 ] During the Enlightenment Era , which spanned the 17th and 18th centuries, with its strong emphasis on the need for religious toleration , the Inquisition was a favorite target of attack for intellectuals.

[ 18 ] British Empire [ edit ] Great Britain [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom Further information: Catholic Church in England and Wales , Catholic Church in Ireland , Catholic Church in Scotland , and Catholic Church in the United Kingdom Foxe's Book of Martyrs glorified Protestant martyrs and shaped a lasting negative image of Catholicism in Britain.

Institutional anti-Catholicism in Britain and Ireland began with the English Reformation under Henry VIII , and the Scottish Reformation under John Knox . The Act of Supremacy of 1534 declared the English crown to be "the only supreme head on earth of the Church in England" in place of the pope. Any act of allegiance to the latter was considered treasonous because the papacy claimed to have both spiritual and political power over its followers. It was under this act that saints Thomas More and John Fisher were executed and became martyrs for the Catholic faith.

Queen Mary , Henry's daughter, was a devout Catholic. She tried to reverse the Reformation during her five years as Queen (1553-1558), marrying the Catholic king of Spain and executing Protestant leaders. Protestants reviled her as "Bloody Mary".

[ 19 ] The Protestant Tutor (1713), by Benjamin Harris Anti-Catholicism among many of the English and Scots was not only grounded in their fear that the pope sought to reimpose religio-spiritual authority over England and Scotland, it was also grounded in their fear that the pope also sought to impose secular power over them in alliance with their arch-enemies France and Spain. In 1570, Pope Pius V sought to depose Elizabeth I of England with the papal bull Regnans in Excelsis , which declared that she was a heretic and purportedly dissolved the duty of all of Elizabeth's subjects to maintain their allegiance to her. This rendered Elizabeth's subjects who persisted in their allegiance to the Catholic Church politically suspect, and it also made the position of her Catholic subjects largely untenable if they tried to maintain both allegiances at once. The Recusancy Acts, which made worship in the Anglican Church a legal obligation, date back to Elizabeth's reign.

Assassination plots in which Catholics were prime movers fueled anti-Catholicism in England. These plots included the famous Gunpowder Plot , in which Guy Fawkes and other conspirators plotted to blow up the English Parliament while it was in session.

[ 20 ] The fictitious " Popish Plot " involving Titus Oates was a hoax that many Protestants believed to be true, exacerbating Anglican-Catholic relations.

The Glorious Revolution of 1688–1689 involved the overthrow of King James II, of the Stuart dynasty, who favoured the Catholics, and his replacement by a Dutch Protestant. For decades the Stuarts were supported by France in plots to invade and conquer Britain, and anti-Catholicism persisted.

[ 21 ] The Gordon Riots , by Charles Green Gordon Riots 1780 [ edit ] Main article: Gordon Riots The Gordon Riots of 1780 was a violent anti-Catholic riot in London against the Papists Act 1778 . Passed by Parliament , the new law was supposed to reduce official discrimination against British Catholics .

Lord George Gordon , head of the Protestant Association, warned that the law would enable Catholics who were serving in the British Army to become a dangerous threat. The protest evolved into riots and widespread looting . Local magistrates feared reprisals and as a result, they did not enforce the riot act. The riots were not suppressed until the Army moved in and dispersed the crowds by shooting them, killing hundreds of rioters. The violence lasted from 2 June to 9 June 1780. Public opinion, especially in middle-class and elite circles, repudiated anti-Catholicism and lower-class violence, and it also rallied behind the government of Lord North . Demands for the establishment of a police force in London were subsequently made.

[ 22 ] 19th century [ edit ] Anglo-French conflicts during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars , which lasted from 1793 until 1815, saw the rise of anti-Catholicism as an underlying method to unify the Protestant populations of England, Scotland and Wales. Permeating through all social classes , antagonism towards Catholicism became firmly enmeshed with British national identity . As noted by English historian Linda Colley in her seminal work Britons: Forging of a Nation 1707–1837 , the "defensive unity brought on by war with a Catholic French ' other ' helped transform Great Britain from a new and largely artificial polity into a nation with a strong self-image rooted in Protestantism." [ 23 ] Catholics in Ireland gained the right to vote in the 1790s but they were politically inert for another three decades. Finally, they were mobilized by Daniel O'Connell into majorities in most of the Irish parliamentary districts. They could only elect, but Catholics could not be seated in parliament. The Catholic emancipation issue became a major crisis. Previously anti-Catholic politicians led by the Duke of Wellington and Robert Peel reversed themselves to prevent massive violence. All Catholics in Britain were "emancipated" in the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 ; that is, they were freed from most of the penalties and restrictions they faced. Anti-Catholic attitudes continued, however.

[ 24 ] Early 20th century [ edit ] In 1937, ten young men and boys, aged from 13 to 23, burned to death in a fire on a farm in Kirkintilloch , Scotland. All were seasonal workers from Achill Sound in County Mayo, Ireland.

The Vanguard , the official newspaper of the Scottish Protestant League , referred to the event in the following text: The Scandal of Kirkintilloch is not that some Irishmen have lost their lives in a fire; it is that Irish Papists brought up in disloyalty and superstition are engaged in jobs which should belong by right to Scottish Protestants.

The Kirkintilloch sensation again reminds the People of Scotland that Rome's Irish Scum still over-run our land.

[ 25 ] Since 1945 [ edit ] Since World War II , anti-Catholic feeling in England, Scotland and Wales has abated somewhat. Ecumenical dialogue between Anglicans and Catholics culminated in the first meeting between an Archbishop of Canterbury and a Pope since the Reformation when Archbishop Geoffrey Fisher visited Rome in 1960. Since then, the dialogue has continued through envoys and standing conferences. Meanwhile, the nonconformist churches such as the Methodists, the Church of Scotland, and the established Church of England, have all dramatically declined in membership. Membership in the Catholic Church continues to grow in Britain, thanks to the immigration of Irish and more recently, the immigration of Polish workers.

[ 26 ] [ citation needed ] Conflict and rivalry between Catholicism and Protestantism since the 1920s, especially since the 1960s, has centered on the Troubles in Northern Ireland .

[ 27 ] Anti-Catholicism in Britain was long represented by the burning of an effigy of the Catholic conspirator Guy Fawkes during widespread celebrations of Guy Fawkes Night every 5 November.

[ 28 ] However, this celebration has lost most of its anti-Catholic connotations. According to Clive D. Field, only faint remnants of anti-Catholicism are found today.

[ 29 ] Ireland [ edit ] After the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland , huge areas of land were confiscated and the Irish Catholics were banished to the lands of Connacht .

An illustration of the anti-Catholic Peep o' Day Boys association As punishment for the rebellion of 1641 , almost all of the lands which were owned by Irish Catholics were confiscated and given to Protestant settlers . Under the Penal Laws , no Irish Catholic could sit in the Parliament of Ireland , even though some 90% of Ireland's population was native Irish Catholic when the first of these bans was introduced in 1691.

[ 30 ] Tensions between Irish Catholics and Protestants have been blamed for much of " The Troubles ".

During the 18th century, the Peep o' Day Boys , an agrarian association composed of Irish Protestants, engaged in numerous acts of anti-Catholic violence through County Armagh . These acts culminated in the Armagh disturbances , a period of intense sectarian conflict during the 1780's and 1790's between the Peep o' Day Boys and the Catholic Defenders . The Peep o' Day Boys would conduct early morning raids on Catholic homes to confiscate weapons, which Irish Catholics were forbidden from owning under the Penal Laws. This led to confrontations between them and the Defenders, which culminated in the Battle of the Diamond , a confrontation which saw six killed and many more wounded. Though the Orange Order would denounce the actions of the Peep o' Day Boys, further anti-Catholic violence would continue to erupt in Ireland in the years leading up the Irish Rebellion of 1798 .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Laws which restricted the rights of Irish Catholics [ edit ] The Great Famine of Ireland was exacerbated by the imposition of anti-Catholic laws. In the 17th and 18th centuries, the penal laws prohibited Irish Catholics from either purchasing or leasing land, from voting, from holding political office, from living either within 5 miles (8 km) away from a corporate town, from obtaining an education, from entering a profession, and doing many of the other things which a person needed to do in order to succeed and prosper in society.

[ 33 ] The laws were largely reformed under the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1793 , and Catholics could again sit in parliament following the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829 .

Northern Ireland [ edit ] Northern Ireland came into existence in 1921, following the Government of Ireland Act 1920 . Though Catholics were a majority on the island of Ireland, comprising 74% of the population in 1911, they were a third of the population in Northern Ireland.

In 1934, Sir James Craig , the first Prime Minister of Northern Ireland , said, "Since we took up office we have tried to be absolutely fair towards all the citizens of Northern Ireland... They still boast of Southern Ireland being a Catholic State. All I boast of is that we are a Protestant Parliament and a Protestant State." In 1957, Harry Midgley , the Minister of Education in Northern Ireland, said, in Portadown Orange Hall, "All the minority are traitors and have always been traitors to the Government of Northern Ireland." The first Catholic to be appointed a minister in Northern Ireland was Gerard Newe , in 1971.

In 1986, at the annual conference of the Democratic Unionist Party , MP for Mid Ulster William McCrea interrupted councillor Ethel Smyth when she said she regretted the death of Sean Downes, a 24-year-old Catholic civilian who had been killed by a plastic bullet fired by the RUC during an anti-internment march in Andersonstown in 1984. McCrea shouted, "No. No. I'll not condemn the death of John Downes [sic]. No Fenian. Never. No".

[ 34 ] In Northern Ireland and Scotland, Fenian is used by some as a derogatory word for Roman Catholics.

[ 35 ] In 2001 and 2002, the Holy Cross dispute occurred in the Ardoyne area of north Belfast . The Holy Cross school, a Catholic primary school for girls, is situated in the middle of a Protestant area. In June 2001—during the last week of school before the summer break—Protestant loyalists began picketing the school, claiming that Catholics were regularly attacking their homes and denying them access to facilities. The picket resumed on 3 September, when the new school term began. For weeks, hundreds of loyalist protesters tried to stop the schoolchildren and their parents from walking to school through their area. Hundreds of riot police , backed up by British soldiers , escorted the children and parents through the protest each day. Some protesters shouted sectarian abuse and threw stones, bricks, fireworks, blast bombs and urine-filled balloons at the schoolchildren, their parents and the RUC . The "scenes of frightened Catholic schoolgirls running a gauntlet of abuse from loyalist protesters as they walked to school captured world headlines". Death threats were made against the parents and school staff by the Red Hand Defenders , a loyalist paramilitary group.

[ 36 ] Canada [ edit ] Further information: Anti-French sentiment , Anti-Quebec sentiment , and Catholicism in Canada Fears of the Catholic Church were quite strong in the 19th century, especially among Presbyterian and other Protestant Irish immigrants across Canada.

[ 37 ] In 1853, the Gavazzi Riots left 10 dead in Quebec in the wake of Catholic Irish protests against anti-Catholic speeches by ex-monk Alessandro Gavazzi .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] The most influential newspaper in Canada, The Globe of Toronto, was edited by George Brown , a Presbyterian immigrant from Ireland who ridiculed and denounced the Catholic Church, Jesuits , priests, nunneries, etc.

[ 40 ] Irish Protestants remained a political force until the 20th century. Many belonged to the Orange Order , [ 37 ] an anti-Catholic organization with chapters across Canada that was most powerful during the late 19th century.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] A key leader was Dalton McCarthy (1836–1898), a Protestant who had immigrated from Ireland. In the late 19th century he mobilized the "Orange" or Protestant Irish, and fiercely fought against Irish Catholics as well as the French Catholics. He especially crusaded for the abolition of the French language in Manitoba and Ontario schools.

[ 43 ] In response to the 2021 Canadian Indian residential school gravesite discoveries , numerous churches and monuments in Western Canada have been vandalized or burned down.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] French language schools in Canada [ edit ] One of the most controversial issues was public support for Catholic French-language schools. Although the Confederation Agreement of 1867 guaranteed the status of Catholic schools when they were legalized by provincial governments, disputes erupted in numerous provinces, especially in the Manitoba Schools Question in the 1890s and in Ontario in the 1910s.

[ 47 ] In Ontario, Regulation 17 was a regulation by the Ontario Ministry of Education that restricted the use of French as a language of instruction to the first two years of schooling. French Canada reacted vehemently and lost, dooming its French-language Catholic schools. This was a central reason for French Canada's distance from the World War I effort, as its young men refused to enlist.

[ 48 ] Protestant elements succeeded in blocking the growth of French-language Catholic public schools. However, the Irish Catholics generally supported the English language position which was advocated by the Protestants.

[ 49 ] Newfoundland [ edit ] Newfoundland long experienced social and political tensions between the large Irish Catholic working-class, on the one hand and the Anglican elite on the other.

[ 50 ] In the 1850s, the Catholic bishop organized his flock and made them stalwarts of the Liberal party. Nasty rhetoric was the prevailing style elections; bloody riots were common during the 1861 election.

[ 51 ] The Protestants narrowly elected Hugh Hoyles as the Conservative Prime Minister. Hoyles unexpectedly reversed his long record of militant Protestant activism and worked to defuse tensions. He shared patronage and power with the Catholics; all jobs and patronage were split between the various religious bodies on a per capita basis. This 'denominational compromise' was further extended to education when all religious schools were put on the basis which the Catholics had enjoyed since the 1840s. Alone in North America Newfoundland had a state funded system of denominational schools. The compromise worked and politics ceased to be about religion and became concerned with purely political and economic issues.

[ 52 ] Australia [ edit ] The presence of Catholicism in Australia came with the 1788 arrival of the First Fleet of British convict ships at Sydney. The colonial authorities blocked a Catholic clerical presence until 1820, reflecting the legal disabilities of Catholics in Britain. Some of the Irish convicts had been transported to Australia for political crimes or social rebellion and authorities remained suspicious of the minority religion.

[ 53 ] Catholic convicts were compelled to attend Church of England services and their children and orphans were raised as Anglicans.

[ 54 ] The first Catholic priests to arrive came as convicts following the Irish 1798 Rebellion . In 1803, Fr James Dixon was conditionally emancipated and permitted to celebrate Mass, but following the Irish led Castle Hill Rebellion of 1804, Dixon's permission was revoked. Fr Jeremiah Flynn , an Irish Cistercian , was appointed as Prefect Apostolic of New Holland and set out uninvited from Britain for the colony. Watched by authorities, Flynn secretly performed priestly duties before being arrested and deported to London. Reaction to the affair in Britain led to two further priests being allowed to travel to the colony in 1820.

[ 53 ] The Church of England was disestablished in the Colony of New South Wales by the Church Act of 1836 . Drafted by the Catholic attorney-general John Plunkett , the act established legal equality for Anglicans, Catholics and Presbyterians and was later extended to Methodists.

[ 55 ] By the late 19th century approximately a quarter of the population of Australia were Irish Australians .

[ 56 ] Many were descended from the 40,000 Irish Catholics who were transported as convicts to Australia before 1867. The majority consisted of British and Irish Protestants.

[ citation needed ] The Catholics dominated the labour unions and the Labor Party. The growth of school systems in the late 19th century typically involved religious issues, pitting Protestants against Catholics. The issue of independence for Ireland was long a sore point, until the matter was resolved by the Irish War of Independence .

[ 57 ] Limited freedom of belief is protected by Section 116 of the Constitution of Australia , but sectarianism in Australia was prominent (though generally nonviolent) in the 20th century, flaring during the First World War , again reflecting Ireland's place within the Empire, and the Catholic minority remained subject to discrimination and suspicion.

[ 58 ] During the First World War, the Irish gave support for the war effort and comprised 20% of the army in France.

[ 59 ] However, the labour unions and the Irish in particular, strongly opposed conscription, and in alliance with like-minded farmers, defeated it in national plebiscites in 1916 and 1917 . The Anglicans in particular talked of Catholic "disloyalty".

[ 60 ] By the 1920s, Australia had its first Catholic prime minister .

[ 61 ] During the 1950s, the split in the Australian Labor Party between allies and opponents of the Catholic anti-Communist B. A. Santamaria meant that the party (in Victoria and Queensland more than elsewhere) was effectively divided between pro-Catholic and anti-Catholic elements. As a result of such disunity the ALP was defeated at every single national election between 1955 and 1972. In the late 20th century, the Catholic Church replaced the Anglican Church as the largest single Christian body in Australia ; and it continues to be so in the 21st century, although it still has fewer members than do the various Protestant churches combined.

While older sectarian divides declined, commentators have observed a re-emergence of anti-Catholicism in Australia in recent decades amid rising secularism and broader anti-Christian movements.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] New Zealand [ edit ] According to New Zealand historian Michael King , the situation in New Zealand has never been as clear as in Australia.

Catholics first arrived in New Zealand in 1769, and the Church has had a continuous presence in the country from the time of permanent settlement by Irish Catholics in the 1820s, with the first Maori converted to Catholicism in the 1830s.

[ 66 ] The signing of the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840, which formalised New Zealand's status as a British colony and instigated substantial immigration from England and Scotland , resulted in the country developing a predominantly Protestant religious character. Nonetheless, French bishop Jean Baptiste Pompallier was able to negotiate the inclusion of a clause guaranteeing freedom of religion in some of the versions of the treaties signed and oral promises during meetings beforehand.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] New Zealand has had several Catholic prime ministers , which is indicative of the widespread acceptance of Catholicism within the country; Jim Bolger , who lead the Fourth National Government of the 1990s, was the country's fourth Catholic prime minister; Bill English , who lead the Fifth National Government from 2016 to 2017, was the fifth and most recent. Probably the most notable of New Zealand's Catholic prime ministers was Michael Joseph Savage , an Australian -born trade unionist and social reformer who instigated numerous progressive policies as leader of the First Labour Government of the 1930s.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] German Empire [ edit ] Main articles: Kulturkampf and History of the Catholic Church in Germany Between Berlin and Rome . Bismarck (left) confronts Pope Pius IX, 1875.

Unification into the German Empire in 1871 saw a country with a Protestant majority and large Catholic minority, speaking German or Polish. Anti-Catholicism was common.

[ 71 ] The powerful German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck – a devout Lutheran – forged an alliance with secular liberals in 1871–1878 to launch a Kulturkampf (literally, "culture struggle") especially in Prussia, the largest state in the new German Empire to destroy the political power of the Catholic Church and the Pope. Catholics were numerous in the South (Bavaria, Baden-Wuerttemberg) and west (Rhineland) and fought back. Bismarck intended to end Catholics' loyalty with Rome ( ultramontanism ) and subordinate all Germans to the power of his state.

Priests and bishops who resisted the Kulturkampf were arrested or removed from their positions. By the height of anti-Catholic legislation, half of the Prussian bishops were in prison or in exile, a quarter of the parishes had no priest, half the monks and nuns had left Prussia, a third of the monasteries and convents were closed, 1800 parish priests were imprisoned or exiled, and thousands of laymen were imprisoned for helping the priests.

[ 72 ] There were anti-Polish elements in Greater Poland and Silesia.

[ 73 ] The Catholics refused to comply; they strengthened their Centre Party.

Pius IX died in 1878 and was replaced by more conciliatory Pope Leo XIII who negotiated away most of the anti-Catholic laws beginning in 1880. Bismarck himself broke with the anti-Catholic Liberals and worked with the Catholic Centre Party to fight Socialism.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Pope Leo officially declared the end of the Kulturkampf on 23 May 1887.

Nazi Germany [ edit ] See also: Catholic Church and Nazi Germany , Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany , and Kirchenkampf The Catholic Church faced repression in Nazi Germany (1933–1945).

Hitler despised the Church even though he had been brought up in a Catholic home. The long-term aim of many Nazis was the de-Christianization of Germany and the establishment of a form of Germanic paganism which would replace Christianity.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] however Richard J. Evans writes that Hitler believed that in the long run National Socialism and religion would not be able to co-exist, stressing repeatedly that Nazism was a secular ideology, founded on modern science: "Science, he declared, would easily destroy the last remaining vestiges of superstition". Germany could not tolerate the intervention of foreign influences such as the Pope and "Priests, he said, were 'black bugs', 'abortions in black cassocks ' ".

[ 85 ] Nazi ideology desired the subordination of the Church to the State and could not accept an autonomous establishment, whose legitimacy did not spring from the government.

[ 86 ] From the beginning, the Catholic Church faced general persecution, regimentation and oppression.

[ 87 ] Aggressive anti-Church radicals like Alfred Rosenberg and Martin Bormann saw the conflict with the Churches as a priority concern, and anti-Church and anti-clerical sentiments were strong among grassroots party activists.

[ 88 ] To many Nazis, Catholics were suspected of insufficient patriotism, or even of disloyalty to the Fatherland, and of serving the interests of "sinister alien forces".

[ 89 ] Adolf Hitler had some regard for the organisational power of Catholicism, but towards its teachings he showed nothing but the sharpest hostility, calling them "the systematic cultivation of the human failure": [ 90 ] To Hitler, Christianity was a religion that was only fit for slaves and he detested its ethics.

Alan Bullock wrote: "Its teaching, he declared, was a rebellion against the natural law of selection by struggle and the survival of the fittest ". For political reasons, Hitler was prepared to restrain his anti-clericalism, seeing danger in strengthening the Church by persecuting it, but he intended to wage a show-down against it after the war.

[ 91 ] Joseph Goebbels, the Minister for Propaganda, led the Nazi persecution of the Catholic clergy and wrote that there was "an insoluble opposition between the Christian and a heroic-German world view".

[ 88 ] Hitler's chosen deputy, Martin Bormann, was a rigid guardian of Nazi orthodoxy and saw Christianity and Nazism as "incompatible", as did the official Nazi philosopher, Alfred Rosenberg , who wrote in Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) that the Catholic Church were among the chief enemies of the Germans.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] In 1934, the Sanctum Officium put Rosenberg's book on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum (forbidden books list of the Church) for scorning and rejecting "all dogmas of the Catholic Church, indeed the very fundamentals of the Christian religion".

[ 95 ] The Nazis claimed that they had jurisdiction over all collective and social activities and based on their claim, they infiltrated all collective and social institutions, interfered in all of the activities which they performed, and banned them if they did not become Nazified, including Catholic schools, youth groups, workers' clubs and cultural societies.

[ 96 ] Hitler moved quickly to eliminate Political Catholicism , rounding up members of the Catholic aligned Bavarian People's Party and Catholic Centre Party , which ceased to exist in early July 1933. Vice Chancellor Papen meanwhile, amid continuing molestation of Catholic clergy and organisations, negotiated a Reich concordat with the Holy See, which prohibited clergy from participating in politics.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Hitler then proceeded to close all Catholic institutions whose functions were not strictly religious: [ 99 ] It quickly became clear that [Hitler] intended to imprison the Catholics, as it were, in their own churches. They could celebrate Mass and retain their rituals as much as they liked, but they could have nothing at all to do with German society otherwise. Catholic schools and newspapers were closed, and a propaganda campaign against the church was launched.

— Extract from An Honourable Defeat by Anton Gill Almost immediately after agreeing the Concordat, the Nazis promulgated their sterilization law, an offensive policy in the eyes of the Catholic Church and moved to dissolve the Catholic Youth League. Clergy, nuns and lay leaders began to be targeted, leading to thousands of arrests over the ensuing years, often on trumped up charges of currency smuggling or "immorality".

[ 100 ] In Hitler's Night of the Long Knives purge, Erich Klausener , the head of Catholic Action , was assassinated.

[ 101 ] Adalbert Probst , national director of the Catholic Youth Sports Association, Fritz Gerlich , editor of Munich's Catholic weekly and Edgar Jung , one of the authors of the Marburg speech , were among the other Catholic opposition figures killed in the purge.

[ 102 ] By 1937, the Church hierarchy in Germany, which had initially attempted to co-operate with the new government, had become highly disillusioned. In March, Pope Pius XI issued the Mit brennender Sorge encyclical – accusing the Nazis of violations of the Concordat, and of sowing the "tares of suspicion, discord, hatred, calumny, of secret and open fundamental hostility to Christ and His Church". The Pope noted on the horizon the "threatening storm clouds" of religious wars of extermination over Germany.

[ 100 ] The Nazis responded with, an intensification of the Church Struggle .

[ 88 ] There were mass arrests of clergy and Church presses were expropriated.

[ 103 ] Goebbels renewed the regime's crackdown and propaganda against Catholics. By 1939 all Catholic denominational schools had been disbanded or converted to public facilities.

[ 104 ] By 1941, all Church press had been banned.

Later Catholic protests included the 22 March 1942 pastoral letter by the German bishops on "The Struggle against Christianity and the Church".

[ 105 ] About 30 per cent of Catholic priests were disciplined by police during the Nazi era.

[ 106 ] In effort to counter the strength and influence of spiritual resistance, the security services monitored Catholic clergy very closely – instructing that agents monitor every diocese, that the bishops' reports to the Vatican should be obtained and that bishops' activities be discovered and reported.

[ 107 ] Priests were frequently denounced, arrested, or sent to concentration camps – many to the dedicated clergy barracks at Dachau. Of a total of 2,720 clergy imprisoned at Dachau, some 2,579 (or 95%) were Catholic.

[ 108 ] Nazi policy towards the Church was at its most severe in the territories it annexed to Greater Germany, where the Nazis set about systematically dismantling the Church – arresting its leaders, exiling its clergymen, closing its churches, monasteries and convents. Many clergymen were murdered.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] Netherlands [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church in the Netherlands The independence of the Netherlands from Spanish rule led to the formation of a majority Protestant country in which the dominant form of Protestantism was Calvinism . In Amsterdam , Catholic priests were driven out of the city [ 112 ] and following the Dutch takeover, all Catholic churches were converted into Protestant churches.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] Amsterdam's relationship with the Catholic Church was not normalized until the 20th century.

[ 115 ] Nordic countries [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church in the Nordic countries Norway [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Catholicism in Norway After the dissolution of Denmark-Norway in 1814, the new Norwegian Constitution of 1814, did not grant religious freedom , as it stated that both Jews and Jesuits were denied entrance to the Kingdom of Norway . It also stated that attendance in a Lutheran church was compulsory, effectively banning Catholics. The ban on Catholicism was lifted in 1842 , and the ban on Jews was lifted in 1851 . At first, there were multiple restrictions on the practice of Catholicism by Norwegians and only foreign citizens were freely allowed to practice it. The first post-reformation parish was founded in 1843 , Catholics were only allowed to celebrate Mass in this one parish. In 1845 most of the restrictions on the practice of non-Lutheran Christianity were lifted, and Catholics were now allowed to freely practice their religion, but Monasticism and the Jesuits were not allowed in the country until 1897 and 1956 respectively.

[ 116 ] Swedish Empire [ edit ] During the period of great power in Sweden , conversions to Catholicism were punished with fines or imprisonment and in exceptional cases, death. Sweden during the Thirty Years War saw itself as the protector of Protestantism in all of Europe against the pope. The Linköping Bloodbath of 20 March 1600 saw several prominent Catholic nobles beheaded by order of King Charles IX of Sweden . The executions were partially motivated by the Polish invasion of Sweden and a threat of a potential Catholic takeover under Polish king Sigismund III Vasa , who planned to reconvert Sweden back to Catholicism. The Battle of Stångebro prevented Sigismund from conquering and reconverting Sweden. Catholic nobles were put in a majority of leading positions by Sigismund In the Swedish government without the approval of the Swedish people or parliament. The conspiracy provoked new laws preventing Catholics from holding leading government positions in the Swedish government. Due to the Austrian emperor winning a lot of great victories before Sweden joined. The war and Swedish successes cemented Protestantism's continued survival in the Holy Roman Empire and the following anti-Catholicism ingrained in the religion.

Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden was known as the "Lion from the North". He did prevent the pillaging of Catholic villages of Swedish troops by proclaiming Protestant moral superiority in 1631, while Catholic armies were plundering Saxony. He did not wear any armour during the Battle of Rain against the Catholics and proclaimed he was divinely chosen by God to lead the Protestants to glory, and so felt he needed no protection in battle.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Russian Orthodox populations had the right to practice their faith since their incorporation in 1617 after the Ingrian War and never faced similar persecution. Even after Eastern Orthodoxy was legalized, there remained an extreme anti-Catholic sentiment in Sweden which was widely supported by German nobility and German Protestants in Swedish territories.

Only in 1781 did Catholics have the right to worship once again in Sweden, the latest of all major religions except Judaism that was legalized in the same era, even though Judaism had already been in practice tolerated since Charles XII of Sweden brought Muslim and Jewish advisors with him from the Ottoman Empire.

[ 119 ] While Protestant Swedes could not join any other religious organization until 1873, still, in 1849, Catholic converts were punished with imprisonment. Conversion to Catholicism was punished with fines or imprisonment even after the reform.

[ 120 ] Catholics could not become a minister of the Swedish government or work as teachers or nurses in Sweden until 1951.

[ 121 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Catholicism in the United States Further information: Catholic Church in the United States , Freedom of religion in the United States , History of the Catholic Church in the United States , and Religious discrimination in the United States John Higham described anti-Catholicism as "the most luxuriant, tenacious tradition of paranoiac agitation in American history ." [ 122 ] Jenkins, Philip.

The New Anti-Catholicism: The Last Acceptable Prejudice (Oxford University Press, New ed. 2004). British anti-Catholicism was exported to the United States. Two types of anti-Catholic rhetoric existed in colonial society. The first, which was derived from the heritage of the Protestant Reformation and the religious wars of the sixteenth century , consisted of the "Anti-Christ" and the "Whore of Babylon" variety and it dominated Anti-Catholic thought until the late seventeenth century. The second was a more secular variety which focused on the supposed intrigue of the Catholics and accused them of plotting to extend medieval despotism worldwide.

[ 123 ] Historian Arthur Schlesinger Sr.

has called anti-Catholicism "the deepest-held bias in the history of the American people".

[ 124 ] Historian Joseph G. Mannard says that wars reduced anti-Catholicism: "enough Catholics supported the War for Independence to erase many old myths about the inherently treasonable nature of Catholicism.... During the Civil War the heavy enlistments of Irish and Germans into the Union Army helped to dispel notions of immigrant and Catholic disloyalty." [ 123 ] Colonial era [ edit ] American anti-Catholicism has its origins in the Protestant Reformation which generated anti-Catholic propaganda for various political and dynastic reasons. Because the Protestant Reformation justified itself as an effort to correct what it perceived were the errors and the excesses of the Catholic Church, it formed strong positions against the Catholic bishops and the Papacy in particular. These positions were brought to New England by English colonists who were predominantly Puritans . They opposed not only the Catholic Church but also the Church of England which, due to its perpetuation of some Catholic doctrines and practices, was deemed insufficiently "reformed". Furthermore, English and Scottish identity to a large extent was based on opposition to Catholicism. "To be English was to be anti-Catholic," writes Robert Curran.

[ 125 ] Rev.

Branford Clarke illustration in the Ku Klux Klan , Heroes of the Fiery Cross (1928) by Bishop Alma White , published by the Pillar of Fire Church in Zarephath, New Jersey Branford Clarke illustration in The Ku Klux Klan in Prophecy (1925) by Bishop Alma White, published by the Pillar of Fire Church in Zarephath, New Jersey Because many of the British colonists, such as the Puritans and Congregationalists , were fleeing religious persecution by the Church of England, much of early American religious culture exhibited the more extreme anti-Catholic bias of these Protestant denominations. Monsignor John Tracy Ellis wrote that a "universal anti-Catholic bias was brought to Jamestown in 1607 and vigorously cultivated in all the thirteen colonies from Massachusetts to Georgia".

[ 126 ] Colonial charters and laws often contained specific proscriptions against Catholics. For example, the second Massachusetts charter of October 7, 1691, decreed "that forever hereafter there shall be liberty of conscience allowed in the worship of God to all Christians, except Papists , inhabiting, or which shall inhabit or be resident within, such Province or Territory".

[ 127 ] Historians have only identified one Catholic who lived in colonial Boston – Ann Glover . She was hanged as a witch in 1688, four years before the much more famous witchcraft trials in nearby Salem .

[ 128 ] Monsignor Ellis noted that a common hatred of the Catholic Church could unite Anglican clerics and Puritan ministers despite their differences and conflicts. One of the Intolerable Acts passed by the British Parliament that helped fuel the American Revolution was the Quebec Act of 1774, which granted freedom of worship to Roman Catholics in Canada.

[ 129 ] New nation [ edit ] The patriot reliance on Catholic France for military, financial and diplomatic aid led to a sharp drop in anti-Catholic rhetoric. Indeed, the king replaced the pope as the demon patriots had to fight against. Anti-Catholicism remained strong among loyalists, some of whom went to Canada after the war while most remained in the new nation. By the 1780s, Catholics were extended legal toleration in all of the New England states that previously had been so hostile. "In the midst of war and crisis, New Englanders gave up not only their allegiance to Britain but one of their most dearly held prejudices." [ 130 ] George Washington was a vigorous promoter of tolerance for all religious denominations as commander of the army (1775–1783) where he suppressed anti-Catholic celebrations in the Army and appealed to French Catholics in Canada to join the American Revolution; a few hundred of them did. Likewise he guaranteed a high degree of freedom of religion as president (1789–1797), when he often attended services of different denominations.

[ 131 ] The military alliance with Catholic France in 1778 changed attitudes radically in Boston. Local leaders enthusiastically welcomed French naval and military officers, realizing the alliance was critical to winning independence. The Catholic chaplain of the French army reported in 1781 that he was continually receiving "new civilities" from the best families in Boston; he also noted that "the people in general retain their own prejudices." By 1790, about 500 Catholics in Boston formed the first Catholic Church there.

[ 132 ] Fear of the pope agitated some of America's Founding Fathers . For example, in 1788, John Jay urged the New York Legislature to prohibit Catholics from holding office. The legislature refused, but did pass a law designed to reach the same goal by requiring all office-holders to renounce foreign authorities "in all matters ecclesiastical as well as civil".

[ 133 ] Thomas Jefferson , looking at the Catholic Church in France, wrote, "History, I believe, furnishes no example of a priest-ridden people maintaining a free civil government", [ 134 ] and "In every country and in every age, the priest has been hostile to liberty. He is always in alliance with the despot, abetting his abuses in return for protection to his own." [ 135 ] 1840s–1850s [ edit ] Burning of St. Augustine Church during the Philadelphia nativist riots in 1844 Anti-Catholic fears reached a peak in the nineteenth century when the Protestant population became alarmed by the influx of Catholic immigrants. Irish and German Catholic immigrants in particular were pouring into the US at rapid speeds in the early decades of the nineteenth century. Some settled in urban centers in the East, but a large portion also began moving to the unsettled western land along the Mississippi River Valley. The land provided the resources that they would need to survive in their new home, but it also created tensions with the Protestant Americans looking to inhabit the land themselves. Theories about the Roman Catholic Church's intentions were abundant since it appeared that the church was impeding on the Protestants' right to the western lands.

[ 136 ] Some Protestant ministers preached the belief that the Catholic Church is the Whore of Babylon which is described in the Book of Revelation .

[ 137 ] The resulting "nativist" movement, which achieved prominence in the 1840s, was whipped into a frenzy of anti-Catholicism that led to mob violence, most notably the Philadelphia Nativist Riot of 1844. Historian David Montgomery argues that the Irish Catholic Democrats in Philadelphia had successfully appealed to the upper-class Whig leadership. The Whigs wanted to split the Democratic coalition, so they approved Bishop Kendrick's request that Catholic children be allowed to use their own Bible. That approval outraged the evangelical Protestant leadership, which rallied its support in Philadelphia and nationwide. Montgomery states: The school controversy, however, had united 94 leading clergymen of the city in a common pledge to strengthen Protestant education and "awaken the attention of the community to the dangers which... threaten these United States from the assaults of Romanism." The American Tract Society took up the battle cry and launched a national crusade to save the nation from the "spiritual despotism" of Rome. The whole Protestant edifice of churches, Bible societies, temperance societies, and missionary agencies was thus interposed against Catholic electoral maneuvers ... at the very moment when those maneuvers were enjoying some success.

[ 138 ] The nativist movement found expression in a national political movement called the "American" or Know-Nothing Party of 1854–1856. It had considerable success in local and state elections in 1854–55 by emphasizing nativism and warning against Catholics and immigrants. It nominated former president Millard Fillmore as its presidential candidate in the 1856 election . However, Fillmore was not anti-Catholic or nativist; his campaign concentrated almost entirely on national unity. Historian Tyler Anbinder says, "The American party had dropped nativism from its agenda." Fillmore won 22% of the national popular vote.

[ 139 ] During this period of time, discussions of public versus religious education were growing in both urban and rural settings. Protestants and Catholics alike understood the importance of educating the youth; however, finding common ground on how to approach education became a challenge with differing values mixing together.

[ 140 ] While the push for moderated school systems increased in the mid-nineteenth century, government oversight was common, especially in less-populated, rural regions. As such, the local church and community tended to create educational systems centered on their particular faith, and education was largely seen as a group effort.

[ 141 ] In urban areas, public education was more closely monitored and at the forefront of politics since cities saw the largest increases in immigrant population which brought in new children to educate.

[ 142 ] Many Catholic immigrants coming into the United States found it was more comforting to stay tightly-knit with those of the same nationality, leading churches to create their own educational facilities for the children within a particular community. Every immigrant group coming from a Catholic country had unique saints to venerate and views on how to educate their children, so ethnic groups tended to stick together in order to preserve their traditions. Classes were taught in the immigrants' native language in an attempt to keep their culture alive as well, but many American Protestants viewed this negatively, as though the immigrants were unwilling to adjust to their new lives in an English-speaking nation.

[ 142 ] The push for public education came from a hope that America would become a more prosperous place if it were made up of well-rounded, well-educated individuals. And because immigrants made up a large portion of the population, common education had to be established.

[ 141 ] Many Catholic communities wanted to remain separate, though, since public education tended to have Biblical influence from the Protestant Christian King James Bible . Major disputes erupted because the Catholic church did not want their youth to be educated under Protestant ideologies, as most public schools read Bible hymns and utilized McGuffey Readers , which featured Biblical passages teaching moral lessons to students from a Protestant point of view.

[ 141 ] The disagreements between faiths led leaders of public education systems, typically Protestant in faith, to advocate for disintegration between schools. To the leaders, the Catholic community was not worthwhile and had too many differences from Protestantism; therefore, they assumed, combining educational systems would only bring about further complications. Additionally, combining systems meant leaders on either side would have to give up their authority in dictating the ideas and lessons pushed to the forefront in public education.

[ 140 ] Anti-Catholicism among American Jews further intensified in the 1850s during the international controversy over the Edgardo Mortara case, when a baptized Jewish boy in the Papal States was removed from his family and refused to return to them.

1860s–1890s [ edit ] The First Vatican Council convened in 1869 and caused another rift to form between Catholics and Protestants. The Council passed the doctrine of papal infallibility , claiming that the pope, like Peter in ancient Christianity, retained an ability to make definitive decisions about official doctrinal disputes over faith and morals.

[ 143 ] Protestants viewed this as an attempt for the Roman Catholic Church and the pope, who was Pope Pius IX at the time, to establish greater power over their Catholic followers.

[ 144 ] This distrust of Rome continued to infiltrate the educational facilities in the United States as well, leading to the fight for eliminating government-funded Catholic schooling. Many cities made attempts to integrate school systems, though there were varying degrees of success. One of the successful attempts was allowing Catholic teachers to find work within public schools, teaching children of countless denominations.

[ 142 ] But there were instances of limiting Catholics in public education as seen in Poughkeepsie, NY, in 1873 when a law was passed that forbade Catholic garments from being worn within public education facilities—it was not repealed until 1898.

[ 142 ] In the Orange Riots in New York City in 1871 and 1872, Irish Catholics violently attacked Irish Protestants, who carried orange banners.

[ 145 ] In 1875, another attempt at limiting Catholic funding came about in the form of the Blaine Amendment. It was brought into the courts after James G. Blaine , who was searching for a campaign platform for presidency, created an argument for defunding parochial, or denominational, schools. Though it was not explicitly stated to be against Catholicism, Catholic versus public education had been a heated topic for several years by this point. Many newspapers argued that Blaine wanted to build his following from those who held anti-Catholic beliefs. Although the amendment was vetoed, it made lasting impacts on the United States.

[ 146 ] After 1875, many states passed constitutional provisions, called " Blaine Amendments ", forbidding tax money be used to fund parochial schools.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] In 2002, the United States Supreme Court partially vitiated these amendments, when they ruled that vouchers were constitutional if tax dollars followed a child to a school even if the school were religious.

[ 149 ] A favorite rhetorical device in the 1870s was using the code words for Catholicism: "superstition, ambition and ignorance".

[ 150 ] President Ulysses Grant in a major speech to veterans in October 1875 warned that America again faced an enemy: religious schools.  Grant saw another civil war in the "near future": it would not be between North and South, but will be between "patriotism and intelligence on the one side and superstition, ambition and ignorance on the other." [ 151 ] According to historian Charles W. Calhoun , "at various points in his life, Grant had bristled privately at what he considered religious communicants' thralldom to a domineering clergy, but he did not specifically mention Catholicism in his speech. Still, Catholic journals decried the president's seeming exploitation of religious bigotry." [ 152 ] In his December 1875 Annual Message to Congress, Grant urged taxation on "vast amounts of untaxed church property" which Professor John McGreevey says was "a transparently anti-Catholic measure since only the Catholic Church owned vast amounts of property – in schools, orphanages, and charitable institutions".  Grant told Congress such legislation would protect American citizens from tyranny "whether directed by the demagogue or by priestcraft." [ 153 ] 20th and 21st centuries [ edit ] Among the kneeling Catholics are men who are marked K of C ( Knights of Columbus ) and Tammany ( Tammany Hall ), both politically powerful groups; illustrated by the Southern Mafia .

Guardians of Liberty 1943 Anti-Catholicism played a major role in the defeat of Al Smith , the Democratic nominee for president in 1928. Smith did very well in Catholic precincts, but he did poorly in the South relative to previous Democratic presidential candidates, as well as among the Lutherans of the North. His candidacy was also hampered by his close ties to the notorious Tammany Hall political machine in New York City and his strong opposition to prohibition . His cause was uphill in any case, because he faced a popular Republican leadership in a year of peace and unprecedented prosperity.

[ 154 ] The passage of the 18th Amendment in 1919, a culmination of a half-century of anti-liquor agitation, also fueled anti-Catholic sentiment. Prohibition enjoyed strong support among dry pietistic Protestants, and equally strong opposition by wet Catholics, Episcopalians , and German Lutherans. The drys focused their distrust on the Catholics who showed little popular support for the enforcement of prohibition laws, and when the Great Depression began in 1929, there was increasing sentiment that the government needed the tax revenue which the repeal of Prohibition would bring.

[ 155 ] Over 10 million Protestant soldiers who served in World War II came into close contact with Catholic soldiers; they got along well and, after the war, they played a central role in spreading a greater level of ethnic and religious toleration for Catholics among other white Americans .

[ 156 ] Although anti-Catholic sentiment declined in the U.S. in the 1960s, particularly after John F. Kennedy became the first Catholic U.S. president, [ 157 ] traces of it persist in both the media and popular culture.

[ 158 ] In March 2000, the Catholic League criticized Slate magazine and journalist Jack Shafer for a piece the League described as taking "delight in justifying anti-Catholicism." [ 159 ] [ 160 ] Anti-Catholic hate crimes against persons and property have also continued to occur. The summer of 2020 saw a wave of anti-Catholic acts which ranged from the vandalization of churches [ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] and cathedrals; [ 164 ] [ 165 ] to the destruction and often the decapitation of statues, particularly statues of St Junipero Serra , [ 166 ] [ 167 ] [ 168 ] Mary , [ 169 ] [ 170 ] and Jesus ; [ 171 ] [ 172 ] in states including Illinois [ 173 ] and Florida.

[ 174 ] Many of these acts are tied to other political movements, the most notable of them is the QAnon movement, but other far right groups have also espoused anti-Catholic sentiment. One popular conspiracy theory is based on the belief that the three stars on the DC flag stand for London, the Vatican and Washington.

[ 175 ] Another far-right conspiracy claims the pope was arrested for sexual abuse.

[ 176 ] In primarily Catholic countries [ edit ] Anti-clericalism is a historical movement that opposes religious (generally Catholic) institutional power and influence in all aspects of public and political life, and the involvement of religion in the everyday life of the citizen. It suggests a more active and partisan role than mere laïcité . The goal of anticlericalism is sometimes to reduce religion to a purely private belief-system with no public profile or influence. However, many times it has included outright suppression of all aspects of faith.

Anticlericalism has at times been violent, leading to murders and the desecration, destruction and seizure of Church property. Anticlericalism in one form or another has existed throughout most of Christian history, and it is considered to be one of the major popular forces underlying the 16th century reformation. Some of the philosophers of the Enlightenment , including Voltaire , continually attacked the Catholic Church, both its leadership and its priests, claiming that many of its clergy were morally corrupt. These assaults in part led to the suppression of the Jesuits , and played a major part in the wholesale attacks on the very existence of the Church during the French Revolution in the Reign of Terror and the program of dechristianization . Similar attacks on the Church occurred in Mexico and Portugal since their 1910 revolutions and in Spain during the twentieth century.

Austria [ edit ] Suppression of convents under Joseph II, 1782 Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II (emperor 1765–1790) opposed what he called "contemplative" religious institutions – reclusive Catholic institutions that he perceived as doing nothing positive for the community.

[ 177 ] Although Joseph II was himself a Catholic, he also believed in firm state control of ecclesiastical matters outside of the strictly religious sphere and decreed that Austrian bishops could not communicate directly with the Roman Curia .

[ 178 ] His policies are included in what is called Josephinism , that promoted the subjection of the Catholic Church in the Habsburg lands to service for the state.

[ 179 ] The Secularization Decree issued on 12 January 1782 banned several monastic orders not involved in teaching or healing and liquidated 140 monasteries. The banned monastic orders: Jesuits , Camaldolese , Order of Friars Minor Capuchin , Carmelites , Carthusians , Poor Clares , Order of Saint Benedict , Cistercians , Dominican Order (Order of Preachers), Franciscans , Pauline Fathers and Premonstratensians , and their wealth was taken over by the Religious Fund.

Austria-Hungary [ edit ] Georg Ritter von Schönerer (1842–1921) was an Austrian landowner and politician of Austria-Hungary . He was a major opponent of political Catholicism and the founder of the movement Away from Rome!

, aimed the conversion of all the Catholic German-speaking population of Austria to Lutheranism , or, in some cases, to the Old Catholic Churches .

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] Brazil [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church in Brazil Cartoon alluding to the Religious Issue crisis in Brazil Brazil has the largest number of Catholics in the world, [ 182 ] and as a result, it has not experienced any large anti-Catholic movements.

During the 19th century, the Religious Issue was the name given to the crisis when Freemasons in the Brazilian government imprisoned two Catholic bishops for enforcing the Church's prohibition against Freemasonry .

Even during times in which the Church was experiencing intense conservatism , such as the era of the Brazilian military dictatorship , anti-Catholicism was not advocated by the left-wing movements (instead, Liberation theology gained force). However, with the growing number of Protestants (especially Neo-Pentecostals ) in the country, anti-Catholicism has gained strength. A pivotal moment during the rise of anti-Catholicism was the kicking of the saint episode in 1995. However, owing to the protests of the Catholic majority, the perpetrator was transferred to South Africa for the duration of the controversy.

During the COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil , drug dealers took advantage of the pandemic to unite five slums in Rio de Janeiro imposing evangelical Protestantism on the area and attacking Catholics (and also members of Umbanda ).

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Colombia [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church in Colombia Anti-Catholic and anti-clerical sentiments, some of which were spurred by an anti-clerical conspiracy theory which was circulating in Colombia during the mid-twentieth century, led to the persecution and killing of Catholics, most specifically, the persecution and killing of members of the Catholic clergy, during the events which are known as La Violencia .

[ 185 ] Cuba [ edit ] Cuba , under the rule of the atheist Fidel Castro , succeeded in reducing the ability of the Catholic Church to work by deporting one archbishop and 150 Spanish priests, by discriminating against Catholics in public life and education and refusing to accept them as members of the Communist Party .

[ 186 ] The subsequent flight of 300,000 Cubans from the island also helped to diminish the Church there.

[ 186 ] France [ edit ] The Michelade massacre of Catholics by Huguenots in 1567 Nuns in a cart taking them to the guillotine in Cambrai during the Reign of Terror on 26 June 1794 During the French Revolution (1789–1795), the clergy and the laity were persecuted and Church property was confiscated and destroyed by the new government as part of a process of Dechristianization , the aims of which were the destruction of Catholic practices and the destruction of the very faith itself, culminating in the imposition of the atheistic Cult of Reason followed by the imposition of the deistic Cult of the Supreme Being .

[ 187 ] The persecution led Catholics who lived in the west of France to wage a counterrevolution, the War in the Vendée , and when the state was victorious, it killed tens of thousands of Catholics. A few historians have called the killings a genocide .

[ 188 ] However, most historians believe that the killings constituted a brutal crackdown against political enemies rather than a genocide.

[ 189 ] The French invasions of Italy (1796–1799) included an assault on Rome and the exile of Pope Pius VI in 1798.

Relations improved in 1802 when Napoleon came to terms with the Pope in the Concordat of 1801 .

[ 190 ] It allowed the Church to operate but did not give back the lands; it proved satisfactory for a century. By 1815 the Papacy supported the growing alliance against Napoleon, and was re-instated as the State Church during the conservative Bourbon Restoration of 1815–1830. The brief French Revolution of 1848 again opposed the Church, but the Second French Empire (1851–1871) gave it full support. The history of 1789–1871 had established two camps – the left against the Church and the right supporting it – that largely continued until the Vatican II process in 1962–1965.

[ 191 ] The Government of France's Third Republic (1871–1940) was dominated by anti-clericalism, the desire to secularise the State and cultural life, based on an obsession with being faithful to the most extreme currents of the French Revolution.

[ 192 ] This was the position of the radicals and socialists.

[ 193 ] in 1902 Émile Combes became Minister of the Interior, and the main energy of the government was devoted to furthering an anti-clerical agenda.

[ 194 ] The parties of the Left, Socialists and Radicals, united upon this question in the Bloc republicain , supported Combes in his application of the law of 1901 on the religious associations, and voted the new bill on the congregations (1904). By 1904, through his efforts, nearly 10,000 religious schools had been closed and thousands of priests and nuns left France rather than be persecuted.

[ 195 ] Under his guidance parliament passed the 1905 French law on the separation of Church and State , which reversed the Napoleonic arrangement of 1801.

[ 196 ] In the Affaire Des Fiches , in France in 1904–1905, it was discovered that the militantly anticlerical War Minister under Combes, General Louis André , had imposed religious discrimination upon the French armed forces by using the Masonic Grand Orient de France 's huge card index documenting which military officers were practicing Catholics and attended Mass and then blocking them from all future promotions. Exposure of the policy in the National Assembly by the opposition almost caused the government to fall; instead Emile Combes retired.

[ 197 ] Italy [ edit ] Italian troops breaching the Aurelian Walls at Porta Pia during the Capture of Rome .

Breccia di Porta Pia (1880), by Carlo Ademollo . Afterwards, the Pope declared himself a " Prisoner in the Vatican ".

In the Napoleonic era, anti-clericalism was a powerful political force.

[ 198 ] From 1860 through 1870, the new Italian government, under the House of Savoy , outlawed all religious orders, both male and female, including the Franciscans , the Dominicans and the Jesuits , closed down their monasteries and confiscated their property, and imprisoned or banished bishops who opposed this (see Kulturkampf ).

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] Italy took over Rome in 1870 when it lost its French protection; the Pope declared himself a prisoner in the Vatican . Relations were finally normalized in 1929 with the Lateran Treaty .

[ 201 ] Ireland [ edit ] Following the defeat of the Catholic King James II by William III at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690 , the Protestant Ascendancy installed by the English Crown through Plantations , sought to consolidate their power and prevent any resurgence of Catholic influence. To achieve this, they enacted a series of laws known as the Penal Laws , designed to systematically oppress Catholics and other non-Anglican religious groups.

[ 202 ] The Penal laws imposed a number of civil disabilities among Catholics , such as fines for participating in Catholic Worship, and even Capital Punishment for priests found to be practicing their ministry within Great Britain and Ireland. Catholics were also prohibited from being landed , Voting, Teaching, Holding any Public Office and bringing religious paraphernalia from Rome into Britain [ 203 ] Mexico [ edit ] Following the Reform War , President Benito Juárez issued a decree nationalizing Church properties, separating Church and State, and suppressing religious orders.

In the wake of the Mexican Revolution , the Mexican Constitution of 1917 contained further anti-clerical provisions. Article 3 called for secular education in the schools and prohibited the Church from engaging in primary education; Article 5 outlawed monastic orders; Article 24 forbade public worship outside the confines of churches; and Article 27 placed restrictions on the right of religious organizations to hold property. Article 130 deprived clergy members of political rights.

Mexican President Plutarco Elías Calles 's strict enforcement of previous anti-clerical legislation denying priests' rights, enacted as the Calles Law , prompted the Mexican Episcopate to suspend all Catholic worship in Mexico from August 1, 1926, and sparked the bloody Cristero War of 1926–1929 in which some 50,000 peasants took up arms against the government. Their slogan was "¡Viva Cristo Rey!" (Long live Christ the King!).

The effects of the war on the Church were profound. Between 1926 and 1934 at least 40 priests were killed.

[ 204 ] Where there were 4,500 priests serving the people before the rebellion, in 1934 there were only 334 priests licensed by the government to serve fifteen million people, the rest having been eliminated by emigration, expulsion, assassination or not obtaining licenses.

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] It appears that ten states were left without any priests.

[ 205 ] Other sources indicate that the persecution was such that, by 1935, 17 states had no registered priests.

[ 206 ] Some of the Catholic casualties of this struggle are known as the Saints of the Cristero War .

[ 204 ] [ 207 ] Events relating to this were famously portrayed in the novel The Power and the Glory by Graham Greene .

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] Nicaragua [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Catholic Church in Nicaragua § Persecution .

[ edit ] In recent years the Catholic Church has experienced persecution at the hands of the Government, led by Daniel Ortega . As of November 2022, 11 Catholic priests remained in custody, most of which for political offences.

Rolando Alvarez , Bishop of Manuaga and a prominent critic of Ortega, was arrested in 2023, and then exiled in January 2024.  Several Catholic media outlets were shuttered by the Government, and police harassment of Catholics and clergy was widespread, [ 210 ] with Catholic charity Aid to the Church in Need (ACN) considering Nicaragua the country of most concern regarding persecution of the Church in all of Latin America in 2022.

[ 211 ] The situation led Pope Francis to publicly express his concern over lack of religious freedom in Nicaragua.

[ 212 ] The crackdown on the Church [ 213 ] is a response to growing criticism of the regime and its human and civil rights abuses by the Church hierarchy and priests. Initially the Churches opened their doors to welcome people fleeing regime forces after demonstrations, and to care for those wounded in confrontations with the authorities, which led the Government to accuse the Catholic Church of siding with the demonstrators, according to the testimony of one priest who spoke, under anonymity for fear of reprisals, to ACN. The priest in question claimed to have personally rescued 19 demonstrators with AK-47 bullet wounds, after the hospitals had been ordered not to help them. "During those days, the people on our church benches were not listening to the Gospel, they were living it", said the priest.

[ 214 ] In 2023, the country was scored 2 out of 4 for religious freedom.

[ 215 ] In the same year, the country was ranked as the 50th most difficult place in the world to be a Christian.

[ 216 ] In recent years, the Catholic Church in Nicaragua has faced increased scrutiny and actions from government authorities. In a notable event, the Nicaraguan police, known for their loyalty to President Daniel Ortega's administration, announced an investigation into several dioceses for potential money laundering. According to their reports, significant sums were discovered in various Church facilities, and there were allegations of illegal withdrawals from bank accounts that were legally frozen.

[ 217 ] In March 2022, Nicaragua withdrew its approval of Archbishop Waldemar Stanislaw Sommertag, Apostolic Nuncio in Managua and ordered him to leave the country.

[ 218 ] In March 2023,  Nicaragua officially severed ties with the Holy See.

[ 219 ] In August 2023, the Nicaraguan government banned the Jesuits and seized their assets.

[ 220 ] According to Catholic charity Aid to the Church in Need , at least 46 priests were under arrest at some point in Nicaragua in 2023. Many of these priests ended up being exiled at the beginning of 2024.

[ 221 ] The government has banned traditional Holy Week processions since 2023. Some churches that obtained special permission to hold them are now restricted to short walks toward their main altars. According to Nicaraguan lawyer in exile Martha Patricia Molina, there has been a crackdown aimed at preventing participants from performing the Judeas passion plays, which are "theatrical representations of the passion and death of Christ".

[ 222 ] Poland [ edit ] Polish priest and other Polish civilians as German hostages awaiting execution in Bydgoszcz , Poland, September 1939 Funeral of Jerzy Popiełuszko , a Catholic priest killed by Communist authorities For the situation in Russian Poland, see Anticatholicism in Russian Empire Catholicism in Poland , the religion of the vast majority of the population, was severely persecuted during World War II , following the Nazi invasion of the country and its subsequent annexation into Germany. Over 3 million Catholics of Polish descent were murdered during the Invasion of Poland , including 3 bishops, 52 priests, 26 monks, 3 seminarians, 8 nuns and 9 lay people, later beatified in 1999 by Pope John Paul II as the 108 Martyrs of World War II .

[ 223 ] The Roman Catholic Church was even more violently suppressed in Reichsgau Wartheland and the General Government .

[ 224 ] Churches were closed, and clergy were deported, imprisoned, or killed, [ 224 ] among them was Maximilian Kolbe , a Pole of German descent. Between 1939 and 1945, 2,935 members [ 225 ] of the Polish clergy (18% [ 226 ] ) were killed in concentration camps. In the city of Chełmno , for example, 48% of the Catholic clergy were killed.

Catholicism continued to be persecuted under the Communist regime from the 1950s. Contemporary Stalinist ideology claimed that the Church and religion in general were about to disintegrate. Initially, Archbishop Wyszyński entered into an agreement with the Communist authorities, which was signed on 14 February 1950 by the Polish episcopate and the government. The Agreement regulated the matters of the Church in Poland. However, in May of that year, the Sejm breached the Agreement by passing a law for the confiscation of Church property.

On 12 January 1953, Wyszyński was elevated to the rank of cardinal by Pius XII as another wave of persecution began in Poland. When the bishops voiced their opposition to state interference in ecclesiastical appointments, mass trials and the internment of priests began – the cardinal being one of its victims. On 25 September 1953 he was imprisoned at Grudziądz , and later placed under house arrest in monasteries in Prudnik near Opole and in Komańcza Monastery in the Bieszczady Mountains . He was released on 26 October 1956.

Pope John Paul II , who was born in Poland as Karol Wojtyla, often cited the persecution of Polish Catholics in his stance against Communism.

Spain [ edit ] Anti-clericalism in Spain at the start of the Spanish Civil War resulted in the killing of almost 7,000 clergy, the destruction of hundreds of churches and the persecution of lay people in Spain's Red Terror .

[ 227 ] Hundreds of Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War have been beatified and hundreds more in October 2007.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] In mixed Catholic-Protestant countries [ edit ] Switzerland [ edit ] The Jesuits (Societas Jesu) were banned from all activities in either clerical or pedagogical functions by Article 51 of the Swiss constitution in 1848. The reason for the ban was the perceived threat to the stability of the state resulting from Jesuit advocacy of traditional Catholicism; it followed the Roman Catholic cantons forming an unconstitutional separate alliance leading to civil war . In June 1973, 55% of Swiss voters approved removing the ban on the Jesuits (as well as Article 52 which banned monasteries and convents from Switzerland). (See Kulturkampf and Religion in Switzerland ) [ citation needed ] In primarily Orthodox countries [ edit ] Main article: Catholic–Eastern Orthodox relations Byzantine Empire [ edit ] In the East–West Schism of 1054, the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church broke their full communion with each other because of Ecclesiastical differences , Theological, and Liturgical disputes .

[ 230 ] In April 1182, the Eastern Orthodox population of the Byzantine Empire committed a large-scale massacre against the Catholic population of Constantinople , [ 231 ] [ 232 ] this massacre is known as the Massacre of the Latins and it further worsened relations and increased enmity between Eastern Orthodoxy and Catholicism.

[ 233 ] Russian Empire [ edit ] Main articles: Catholic Church in Russia , Pope Pius IX and Russia , Pope Pius X and Russia , and Pope Leo XIII and Russia Expulsion of the Imperial Russian envoy Felix von Meyendorff to the Holy See by Pope Pius IX for insulting the Catholic faith.

During Russian rule, Catholics, primarily Poles and Lithuanians , suffered great persecution not only because of their ethnic-national background, but also for religious reasons. Especially after the uprisings of 1831 and 1863 , and within the process of Russification (understanding that there is a strong link between religion and nationality), the tsarist authorities were anxious to promote the conversion of these peoples to the official faith, intervening in public education in those regions (an Orthodox religious education was compulsory) and censoring the actions of the Catholic Church.

[ 234 ] In particular, attention was focused on the public actions of the Church, such as masses or funerals, because they could serve as the focus of protests against the occupation. Many priests were imprisoned or deported because of their activities in defense of their religion and ethnicity. In the late nineteenth century, however, there was a progressive relaxation of the control of Catholic institutions by the Russian authorities.

[ 235 ] Additionally, all the Eastern Catholic population was forced to convert to the Orthodox faith, with refusal often being met with violence and even murder, like the martyrs of Pratulin .

Former Yugoslavia [ edit ] See also: Chetnik war crimes in World War II During World War II in Yugoslavia , the Chetniks killed an estimated 18,000–32,000 Croats , who were mostly Roman Catholic.

[ 236 ] The terror tactics against the Croats were, to at least an extent, a reaction to the genocide which the Ustaše committed against the Serbs .

[ 237 ] Along with mass murder, the Ustashe conducted religious persecution of Serbs that included a policy of forced conversion from Eastern Orthodoxy to Roman Catholicism, often with the participation of local Catholic priests .

[ 238 ] [ 239 ] However, the largest Chetnik massacres took place in eastern Bosnia, where they preceded significant Ustashe operations.

[ 240 ] Croats (and Muslims) who lived in areas that were intended to be parts of Greater Serbia were supposed to be cleansed of non-Serbs, in accordance with Mihailović's directive of 20 December 1941.

[ 237 ] About 300 villages and small towns were destroyed, along with a large number of mosques and Catholic churches.

[ 241 ] Fifty-two Catholic priests were killed by Chetniks throughout the war.

[ 242 ] A number of Catholic nuns were also raped and killed, [ 242 ] including the killing of several nuns from Goražde in December 1941.

During the war in Croatia , the ICTY determined that ethnic Croats were persecuted on political, racial and religious grounds, as part of a general campaign of killings and forced-removals of Croat civilians. This included the deliberate destruction of religious buildings and monuments.

[ 243 ] Approximately 450 Catholic churches were destroyed or severely damaged, with another 250 suffering lesser damages. In addition, approximately 151 rectories, 31 monasteries, and 57 cemeteries were destroyed or severely damaged.

[ 244 ] While another 269 religious buildings were destroyed during the Bosnian War .

[ 245 ] Greece [ edit ] In a 1827 report, Blancis enumerated crimes (assaults, killings, thefts, etc) committed by orthodox settlers against Catholics .

[ 246 ] Ukraine [ edit ] Main articles: Catholic Church in Ukraine and Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church See also: Freedom of religion in Ukraine , History of Christianity in Ukraine , and Religion in Ukraine The Kisielin massacre was a slaughter of Polish worshippers on 11 July 1943 during a Sunday mass .

The Khmelnytsky Uprising in the 17th century has a symbolic meaning in the history of Ukraine 's relationship with Poland . It ended the Polish Catholic szlachta ′s domination over the Ukrainian Orthodox population. The insurgency was accompanied by mass atrocities committed by Cossacks against prisoners of war and the civilian population, including Latin and Ruthenian Catholic clergy.

[ 247 ] Attacks on Catholic Poles during the massacres in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia in 1943–1945 were marked with extreme brutality. The UPA 's actions resulted in up to 100,000 Polish deaths.

[ 248 ] The Roman Catholic Church suffered huge losses in UPA attacks.

[ 249 ] According to Norman Davies , "Roman Catholic priests were axed or crucified. Churches were burned with all their parishioners." [ 250 ] An OUN order from early 1944 stated: Liquidate all Polish traces. Destroy all walls in the Catholic Church and other Polish prayer houses." [ 251 ] In the separatist region which is known as the Donetsk People's Republic , the government has declared that the Russian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate is the state religion in 2014, and Protestant churches have been occupied by paramilitaries.

[ 252 ] Jehovah's Witnesses have lost their property, and their Kingdom Halls have been occupied by rebels in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

[ 253 ] Roman Catholic , Greek Catholic , Ukrainian Orthodox , and Protestant clergy have been kidnapped by groups such as the Russian Orthodox Army , and they have also been accused of opposing Russian Orthodox values.

[ 254 ] Human Rights Watch says that the bodies of several members of the Church of the Transfiguration were found in a mass grave in 2014.

[ 255 ] Non-Christian nations [ edit ] Bangladesh [ edit ] Main articles: Catholic Church in Bangladesh , Persecution of Christians § Bangladesh , Freedom of religion in Bangladesh , and Religion in Bangladesh On 3 June 2001, nine people were killed by a bomb explosion at a Roman Catholic church in the Gopalganj District .

[ 256 ] Burkina Faso [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church in Burkina Faso On May 12, 2019, six Catholics including a priest were killed by gunmen who rode on motorcycles and stormed a church in Dablo during a Sunday morning mass.

[ 257 ] A day later, on May 13, 2019, four people were killed and a statue of the Virgin Mary was destroyed by armed men in an attack on Catholic parishioners during a religious procession in the remote village of Zimtenga.

[ 258 ] China [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church in China The Daoguang Emperor modified an existing law, making the spread of Catholicism punishable by death.

[ 259 ] During the Boxer Rebellion , Catholic missionaries and their families were murdered by Boxer rebels.

[ 260 ] During the 1905 Tibetan Rebellion , Tibetan rebels murdered Catholics and Tibetan converts.

[ 261 ] Since the founding of the People's Republic of China , all religions including Catholicism only operate under state control .

[ 262 ] However, many Catholics do not accept State control of the Church and as a result, they worship clandestinely.

[ 263 ] There has been some rapprochement between the Chinese government and the Vatican.

[ 264 ] Chinese Christians have reportedly been persecuted in both official and unsanctioned churches.

[ 265 ] In 2018, the Associated Press reported that China's paramount leader Xi Jinping "is waging the most severe systematic suppression of Christianity in the country since religious freedom was written into the Chinese constitution in 1982", [ 266 ] which has involved "destroying crosses, burning bibles, shutting churches and ordering followers to sign papers renouncing their faith".

[ 267 ] Japanese soldiers murdered the French Canadian Jesuit Catholic priests Armand Lalonde, Alphonse Dubé and Prosper Bernard in Feng County, Jiangsu on 18 March 1943.

[ 268 ] [ 269 ] [ 270 ] [ 271 ] Japanese soldiers murdered Catholic priests and monks in January 1939 in Hejian and September 1941 in Yuntaishan.

[ 272 ] [ 273 ] Several figures of Catholic Saints and convents and churches were destroyed by Japanese in Hong Kong.

[ 274 ] East Timor [ edit ] The Japanese murdered Christians and forced girls into prostitution in Timor and Sumba, desecrating sacred vessels and vestments in churches and using the churches as brothels. Javanese girls were brought as prostitutes by the Japanese to Flores and Buru.

[ 275 ] Japan [ edit ] Main articles: Catholic Church in Japan and History of the Catholic Church in Japan See also: 26 Martyrs of Japan , Martyrs of Japan , and Kakure Kirishitan The 26 Martyrs of Japan at Nagasaki , 1628 engraving On 5 February 1597 a group of twenty-six Catholics were killed on the orders of Toyotomi Hideyoshi .

[ 276 ] During the Tokugawa Shogunate , Japanese Catholics were suppressed, leading to an armed rebellion during the 1630s. After the rebellion was crushed, Catholicism was further suppressed and many Japanese Catholics went underground .

[ 277 ] [ 278 ] Catholicism was not openly restored to Japan until the 1850s .

Pakistan [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Catholic Church in Pakistan § Persecution .

[ edit ] The Catholic Church continues to be persecuted. As recently as April 2009 armed men attacked a group of Christians in Taiser Town, near Karachi . They set ablaze six Christian houses and injured three Christians, including an 11-year-old boy, who was in critical condition in the hospital.

[ 279 ] The minorities in Swat Valley are fleeing the area as the Taliban have imposed a tax on non-Muslims, the Catholic Bishops' Conference president Archbishop Lawrence Saldanha has said, urging the Pakistani president and prime minister to intervene. The government has recently allowed the imposition of Sharia laws in parts of the North West Frontier Province much to the detriment of non-Muslims.

[ 280 ] In 2009, Pakistan is the only country in the world with a "blasphemy law". The constitution also ensures that a non-Muslim cannot become president, prime minister, or any of the 11 senior most government positions in the country.

[ 281 ] On 30 July 2009, tensions arose in the Christian village of Korian after pages containing Islamic inscriptions were found in front of a Christian home. Muslims then accused a family there of blasphemy against Islam. On 1 August 2009, a Muslim mob raided a Christian settlement in Gojra , vandalizing and looting houses and causing the deaths of eight people and injuries to many others. Fifty Christian homes were destroyed. Pope Benedict XVI expressed profound sorrow at anti-Christian riots in Pakistan and appealed to everyone to renounce violence and take up again the path of peace. He communicated this message in a telegram to Faisalabad Bishop Joseph Coutts .

[ 282 ] St. Thomas' Church, Wah Cantt, was attacked by a group of armed men on 28 March 2011 which resulted in damages. It is believed that the incident was related to the recent episode of the burning of the Quran by Pastor Terry Jones in the U.S.

[ 283 ] The situation in Pakistan deteriorated to such an extent that by 2013 large numbers of Christians started to seek asylum overseas.

[ 284 ] [ 285 ] North Korea [ edit ] Main articles: Catholic Church in North Korea and Persecution of Christians in North Korea South Korea [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church in South Korea Sri Lanka [ edit ] Main article: Catholic Church in Sri Lanka Government actions [ edit ] In Sri Lanka , A Buddhist -influenced government took over 600 parish schools in 1960 without compensation and secularized them.

[ 286 ] Attempts were made by future governments to restore some autonomy.

Anti-Catholic violence [ edit ] Further information: Buddhism and Christianity , Buddhism and violence § Sri Lanka , and 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings Since 2000, in a context of rising violence against religious minorities, i.e. Christians, Muslims and Hindus , multiple attacks on Catholic churches occurred. For instance, in 2009, a mob of 1,000 smashed the interior of a church in the town of Crooswatta, assaulting parishioners with clubs, swords and stones, forcing several of them to be treated in hospitals. In 2013, vandals smashed a statue of the Virgin Mary as well as a tabernacle, and they also tried to burn the Eucharist at a church in Angulana, near Colombo .

[ 287 ] The term "anti-Catholic Catholic" has come to be applied to Catholics who are perceived to view the Catholic Church with animosity.

Traditionalist or conservative Catholics frequently use it as a descriptive term for modernist or liberal Catholics , especially those modernist or liberal Catholics who seek to reform Church doctrine, make secularist critiques of the Catholic Church, or place secular principles above Church teachings.

[ 288 ] [ 289 ] Those who take issue with the Catholic theology of sexuality are especially prone to be given this label.

[ 290 ] Suppression of the Jesuits [ edit ] Main article: Suppression of the Society of Jesus Prime Minister Pombal of Portugal was aggressively hostile to the Jesuit order because it reported to an Italian power – the Pope – and it also tried to operate independently rather than operate under the control of the government. In Portugal as well as in much of Catholic Europe, he waged a full-scale war against the Jesuits. The Jesuit order was suppressed in the Portuguese Empire (1759), France (1764), the Two Sicilies , Malta , Parma , the Spanish Empire (1767), and Austria and Hungary (1782). The Pope himself suppressed the order everywhere in 1773, but it survived in Russia and Prussia . The suppression of the Jesuits was a major blow to Catholic education across Europe, with nearly 1000 secondary schools and seminaries were shut down. Their lands, buildings, and endowments were confiscated; their teachers were scattered. Although Jesuit education had become old fashioned in Poland and other areas, it was the main educational support network for Catholic intellectuals, senior clergy, and prominent families. Governments unsuccessfully attempted to replace all of those schools, but there were far too few non-clerical teachers who were suitable.

[ 291 ] The Jesuit order was restored by the pope in 1814 and it flourished in terms of rebuilding schools and educational institutions but it never regained its enormous political power.

[ 292 ] The suppression of the Jesuits has been described as "an unmitigated disaster for Catholicism." The political weakness of the once-powerful institution was on public display for more ridicule and bullying . The Church lost its best educational system, its best missionary system, and its most innovative thinkers. Intellectually, it would take two centuries for the Church to fully recover.

[ 293 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Catholicism in literature and media Anti-Catholic stereotypes are a long-standing feature of English literature , popular fiction , and pornography .

Gothic fiction is particularly rich in this regard. Lustful priests, cruel abbesses, immured nuns, and sadistic inquisitors appear in such works as The Italian by Ann Radcliffe , The Monk by Matthew Lewis , Melmoth the Wanderer by Charles Maturin and " The Pit and the Pendulum " by Edgar Allan Poe .

[ 294 ] Additionally, priests, clergymen, and even regular Catholic laity are oftentimes portrayed as pedophiles in media, due to the sex abuse scandals within the church in recent times.

[ 295 ] [ 296 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Christian sentiment Anti-clericalism "Popery" Black Propaganda against Portugal and Spain Catholic–Eastern Orthodox relations Catholic–Protestant relations History of the Catholic Church History of Christianity History of the Eastern Orthodox Church History of Protestantism Hindu terrorism Hindutva Violence against Christians in India Violence against Muslims in independent India Persecution of Christians Protestant Revolution (Maryland) Sectarian violence among Christians References [ edit ] ^ Anti-catholicism. Dictionary.com. WordNet 3.0. Princeton University.

(accessed: November 13, 2008).

^ John Wolffe, "A Comparative Historical Categorisation of Anti-Catholicism." Journal of Religious History 39.2 (2015): 182–202.

^ Mehmet Karabela (2021).

Islamic Thought Through Protestant Eyes . New York: Routledge. pp.

1– 10.

ISBN 978-0-367-54954-1 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ John W. O'Malley SJ, The Jesuits: A History from Ignatius to the Present (2017).

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Oberman, Heiko Augustinus (1 January 1994).

The Impact of the Reformation: Essays . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-8028-0732-8 – via Google Books.

^ Luther's Last Battles: Politics And Polemics 1531–46 By Mark U. Edwards, Jr.

Fortress Press, 2004.

ISBN 978-0-8006-3735-4 ^ HIC OSCULA PEDIBUS PAPAE FIGUNTUR ^ "Nicht Bapst: nicht schreck uns mit deim ban, Und sey nicht so zorniger man. Wir thun sonst ein gegen wehre, Und zeigen dirs Bel vedere" ^ Mark U. Edwards, Jr., Luther's Last Battles: Politics And Polemics 1531–46 (2004), p. 199 ^ Mehmet Karabela (2021).

Islamic Thought Through Protestant Eyes . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-367-54954-1 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Joseph A. Burgess; Jeffrey Gros, eds. (1989).

Building Unity .

New York : Paulist Press. p. 140.

ISBN 978-0-8091-3040-5 .

^ "Smalcald Articles - Book of Concord" . 8 November 2019. Archived from the original on 10 October 2008 . Retrieved 9 February 2009 .

^ Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope Archived 2008-10-10 at the Wayback Machine in the Triglot translation of the Book of Concord ^ Archived copy at the Library of Congress (May 8, 2009).

^ "UMC.org: The official online ministry of The United Methodist Church" .

^ Edward Gibbon (1994 edition, edited by David Womersley), The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire .

Penguin Books : Vol. 1, 469.

^ Mark A. Noll; Carolyn Nystrom (2008).

Is the Reformation Over?: An Evangelical Assessment of Contemporary Roman Catholicism . Baker Academic. pp.

236– 237.

ISBN 978-0-8010-3575-3 .

^ Edward Peters (1989).

Inquisition . U of California Press. pp.

155– 188.

ISBN 978-0-520-06630-4 .

^ David M. Loades, The Reign of Mary Tudor: Politics, Government and Religion in England, 1553–58 (1991) ^ McConnel, James (2011). "Remembering the 1605 Gunpowder Plot in Ireland, 1605–1920".

Journal of British Studies .

50 (4): 863– 891.

doi : 10.1086/661200 .

S2CID 145376199 .

^ Colin Haydon, Anti-Catholicism in eighteenth-century England, c. 1714–80: A political and social study (Manchester University Press, 1993) ^ Dorothy Marshall, Eighteenth Century England (1974) pp. 469–472 ^ Marjule Anne Drury, "Anti-Catholicism in Germany, Britain, and the United States: A Review and Critique of Recent Scholarship" Church History (2001) 70#1 ^ E. R. Norman.

Anti-Catholicism in Victorian England (1968) ^ "The Scandal of Kirkintilloch".

Vanguard . Lanarkshire. 1 October 1937.

^ J.R.H. Moorman (1973) A History of the Church in England . London, A&C Black: 457 ^ John D. Brewer, and Gareth I. Higgins, Anti-catholicism in Northern Ireland, 1600–1998: the mote and the beam (1998) ^ Steven Roud (2006) The English Year . London, Penguin: 455–463 ^ Clive D. Field, "No Popery's Ghost." Journal of Religion in Europe 7#2 (2014): 116–149.

^ Laws in Ireland for the Suppression of Popery Archived 2008-01-03 at the Wayback Machine at University of Minnesota Law School ^ S. J. Connolly (2008).

Divided Kingdom, Ireland 1630–1800 . Oxford University Press. pp.

453– 455.

ISBN 978-0-19-958387-4 .

^ S. J. Connolly (2007).

Oxford Companion to Irish History . Oxford University Press. p. 461.

ISBN 978-0-19-923483-7 .

^ MacManus, Seumas (1944).

The Story of the Irish Race . New York: The Devin-Adair Company. pp.

458– 459.

^ Feargal Cochrane, Unionist Politics and the Politics of Unionism since the Anglo-Irish Agreement (Cork: Cork University Press, 2001), p. 155 ^ "Fenian" .

TheFreeDictionary.com .

^ Heatley, Colm.

Interface, Flashpoints in Northern Ireland . Chapter 1: Alliance Avenue and Holy Cross Dispute .

Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN) ^ a b Miller, James R. (1985). "Anti-Catholic Thought in Victorian Canada".

Canadian Historical Review .

66 (4): 474– 494.

doi : 10.3138/chr-066-04-03 .

S2CID 161882813 .

^ Bernard Aspinwall, "Rev. Alessandro Gavazzi (1808–1889) and Scottish Identity: A Chapter in Nineteenth Century Anti-Catholicism." Recusant History 28#1 (2006): 129–152 ^ Horner, Dan (2011). " 'Shame upon you as men!': Contesting Authority in the Aftermath of Montreal's Gavazzi Riot".

Histoire Sociale/Social History .

44 (1): 29– 52.

doi : 10.1353/his.2011.0006 .

S2CID 55335177 .

^ J.M.C. Careless, Brown of the Globe: Volume One: Voice of Upper Canada 1818-1859 (1959) 1:172–174 ^ Kenny, Stephen (2002). "A Prejudice that Rarely Utters Its Name: A Historiographical and Historical Reflection upon North American Anti-Catholicism".

American Review of Canadian Studies .

32 (4): 639– 672.

doi : 10.1080/02722010209481678 .

S2CID 143681268 .

^ See Hereward Senior "Orange Order" in Canadian Encyclopedia (2015).

^ J. R. Miller, "'As a Politician He is a Great Enigma': The Social and Political Ideas of D'Alton McCarthy." Canadian Historical Review 58.4 (1977): 399–422.

^ Bilefsky, Dan (22 June 2021).

"Fire Destroys Two Catholic Churches on Canadian Indigenous Land" .

The New York Times .

^ "Statue of Pope John Paul II outside Edmonton Catholic church painted red | CBC News" .

^ " 'Of course it's suspicious': 2 more Catholic churches burn in B.C.'s Southern Interior | Globalnews.ca" .

^ Prang, Margaret (1960). "Clerics, Politicians, and the Bilingual Schools Issue in Ontario, 1910–1917".

Canadian Historical Review .

41 (4): 281– 307.

doi : 10.3138/chr-041-04-01 .

S2CID 159985043 .

^ Robert Craig Brown, and Ramsay Cook, Canada, 1896–1921: A nation transformed (1974) pp. 253–262 ^ Jack Cecillon, "Turbulent Times in the Diocese of London: Bishop Fallon and the French-Language Controversy, 1910–18".

Ontario History (1995) 87#4 pp: 369–395.

^ John Edward FitzGerald, Conflict and culture in Irish-Newfoundland Roman Catholicism, 18291850 (U of Ottawa, 1997) online Archived 2021-11-11 at the Wayback Machine online.

^ Jeff A. Webb, "The Election Riots of 1861" (2001) online edition ^ Frederick Jones, "HOYLES, Sir HUGH WILLIAM," in Dictionary of Canadian Biography vol. 11, University of Toronto/Université Laval, 2003–, accessed May 25, 2015, online .

^ a b "The Catholic Community in Australia" . Catholic Australia. Archived from the original on 2012-03-24 . Retrieved 2012-07-31 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Australia" . Newadvent.org . Retrieved 2012-07-31 .

^ Stephen A. Chavura and Ian Tregenza. "A Political History of the Secular in Australia, 1788–1945." in Timothy Stanley, ed., Religion after Secularization in Australia (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015) pp. 3–31.

^ Mike Cronin; Daryl Adair (2006).

The Wearing of the Green: A History of St Patrick's Day . Routledge. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0-203-00714-3 .

^ O'Farrell, Patrick James (1987). "Chapter Six: Rebels".

The Irish in Australia . NSWU Press.

ISBN 978-0-86840-146-1 .

^ Griffin, James. "Mannix, Daniel (1864–1963)".

Australian Dictionary of Biography . National Centre of Biography, Australian National University – via Australian Dictionary of Biography.

^ Jeffrey Grey (2008-02-28).

A Military History of Australia . Cambridge University Press. p. 90.

ISBN 978-1-139-46828-2 .

^ Gilbert, Alan D. (1971). "Protestants, Catholics and Loyalty: An Aspect of the Conscription Controversies, 1916–1917".

Politics .

6 (1): 15– 25.

doi : 10.1080/00323267108401230 .

^ Robertson, J. R. "Scullin, James Henry (1876–1953)".

Australian Dictionary of Biography . National Centre of Biography, Australian National University – via Australian Dictionary of Biography.

^ Henderson, Gerard (5 October 2004).

"Abbott, Pell and the new sectarianism" .

The Age .

^ "I'll wear ovaries T-shirt again: Nettle" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 10 February 2006.

^ For the lynch mob, priests are guilty until proven innocent ; www.dailytelegraph.com.au; march 16, 2019 ^ Archbishop Coleridge says ABC not interested in the 'real story' of the Catholic Church ; http://catholicleader.com.au ; July 26, 2017 ^ ( God's Farthest Outpost, A History of Catholics in New Zealand , Viking, 1997, p. 9) ^ "Article four and Hobson's choice" .

The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 2022-11-10 .

^ Colenso, William (1890).

The Authentic and Genuine History of the Signing of the Treaty of Waitangi Wellington: Government Printer. Retrieved 2 February 2013.

^ Fresne, Karl Du (2017-07-25).

"New Zealand politics isn't as anti-Catholic as Britain's" .

Stuff . Retrieved 2022-11-10 .

^ Taonga, New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage Te Manatu.

"Building a national Catholic Church" .

Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved 2022-11-10 .

^ Michael B. Gross, The war against Catholicism: Liberalism and the anti-Catholic imagination in nineteenth-century Germany (U of Michigan Press, 2004).

^ Helmstadter, Richard J., Freedom and religion in the nineteenth century , p. 19, Stanford Univ. Press 1997 ^ (in English) Norman Davies (1982).

God's Playground . Columbia University Press. pp.

126– 127.

^ Michael B. Gross, The War against Catholicism: Liberalism and the Anti-Catholic Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Germany (2005) ^ Ronald J. Ross, The Failure of Bismarck's Kulturkampf: Catholicism and State Power in Imperial Germany, 1871–1887 (Catholic University of America Press, 1998) ^ Sharkey, Word for Word/The Case Against the Nazis; How Hitler's Forces Planned To Destroy German Christianity , New York Times, 13 January 2002 ^ The Nazi Master Plan: The Persecution of the Christian Churches Archived 2013-09-26 at the Wayback Machine , Rutgers Journal of Law and Religion, Winter 2001, publishing evidence compiled by the O.S.S. for the Nuremberg war-crimes trials of 1945 and 1946 ^ Griffin, Roger (2006).

"Introduction: Part 1: Defining Fascism: Fascism's relation to religion" . In Blamires, Cyprian (ed.).

World fascism: a historical encyclopedia, Volume 1 . ABC–CLIO. p. 10.

ISBN 978-1-57607-940-9 .

There is no doubt that in the long run Nazi leaders such as Hitler and Himmler intended to eradicate Christianity just as ruthlessly as any other rival ideology, even if in the short term they had to be content to make compromises with it.

^ Mosse, George Lachmann , Nazi culture: intellectual, cultural and social life in the Third Reich , p. 240, Univ of Wisconsin Press, 2003: "Had the Nazis won the war their ecclesiastical policies would have gone beyond those of the German Christians, to the utter destruction of both the Protestant and the Catholic Church." ^ Shirer, William L.

, Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany , p. 240, Simon and Schuster, 1990: "And even fewer paused to reflect that under the leadership of Rosenberg, Bormann and Himmler, who were backed by Hitler, the Nazi regime would eventually destroy Christianity in Germany, if it could, and replace it with the old paganism of the early tribal Germanic gods and the new paganism of the Nazi extremists." ^ Fischel, Jack R.

, Historical Dictionary of the Holocaust , p. 123, Scarecrow Press, 2010: "The objective was to either destroy Christianity and restore the German gods of antiquity or to turn Jesus into an Aryan." ^ Dill, Marshall, Germany: a modern history , p. 365, University of Michigan Press, 1970: "It seems no exaggeration to insist that the greatest challenge the Nazis had to face was their effort to eradicate Christianity in Germany or at least to subjugate it to their general world outlook." ^ Wheaton, Eliot Barculo (1968).

Prelude to calamity: the Nazi revolution, 1933–35: with a background survey of the Weimar era . Doubleday. pp. 290, 363.

ISBN 978-0-575-00184-8 .

Hitler ... determined 'to eradicate Christianity in Germany root and branch.' ^ Bendersky, Joseph W., A concise history of Nazi Germany , p. 147, Rowman & Littlefield, 2007: "Consequently, it was Hitler's long range goal to eliminate the churches once he had consolidated control over his European empire." ^ Richard J. Evans ; The Third Reich at War ; Penguin Press; New York 2009, p. 547.

^ Theodore S. Hamerow; On the Road to the Wolf's Lair – German Resistance to Hitler; Belknap Press of Harvard University Press; 1997; ISBN 0-674-63680-5 ; p. 196.

^ Peter Hoffmann; The History of the German Resistance 1933-1945; 3rd Edn (First English Edn); McDonald & Jane's; London; 1977; p. 14 ^ a b c Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography; 2008 Edn; WW Norton & Company; London; pp. 381–382.

^ Theodore S. Hamerow; On the Road to the Wolf's Lair – German Resistance to Hitler; Belknap Press of Harvard University Press; 1997; ISBN 0-674-63680-5 ; p. 74.

^ Alan Bullock .

Hitler: A Study in Tyranny ; HarperPerennial Edition 1991; p. 218.

^ Alan Bullock .

Hitler: A Study in Tyranny ; HarperPerennial Edition 1991; p. 219.

^ Encyclopædia Britannica Online: Fascism - Identification with Christianity ; 2013. Web. 14 April 2013 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Online - Martin Bormann ; web 25 April 2013 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica Online - Alfred Rosenberg ; web 25 April 2013.

^ Richard Bonney; Confronting the Nazi War on Christianity: the Kulturkampf Newsletters, 1936-1939 ; International Academic Publishers; Bern; 2009; ISBN 978-3-03911-904-2 ; p. 122.

^ Theodore S. Hamerow; On the Road to the Wolf's Lair – German Resistance to Hitler; Belknap Press of Harvard University Press; 1997; ISBN 0-674-63680-5 ; p. 136.

^ Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography ; 2008 Edn; W.W. Norton & Company; London; p. 290.

^ Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography; 2008 Edn; WW Norton & Company; London; p. 295.

^ Anton Gill ; An Honourable Defeat; A History of the German Resistance to Hitler ; Heinemann; London; 1994; p. 57.

^ a b William L. Shirer; The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich; Secker & Warburg; London; 1960; pp. 234–235.

^ Ian Kershaw; Hitler a Biography; 2008 Edn; WW Norton & Company; London; p. 315 ^ John S. Conway; The Nazi Persecution of the Churches, 1933–1945; Regent College Publishing; 2001; ISBN 1-57383-080-1 (US); p. 92.

^ Joachim Fest ; Plotting Hitler's Death: The German Resistance to Hitler 1933–1945 ; Weidenfeld & Nicolson; London; p. 374.

^ Evans, Richard J. (2005). The Third Reich in Power. New York: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-303790-3 ; pp. 245–246.

^ Fest, Joachim (1996).

Plotting Hitler's Death: The German Resistance to Hitler 1933–1945 . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson; p. 377.

^ Evans, Richard J. (2005). The Third Reich in Power. New York: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-303790-3 ; p. 244.

^ Paul Berben; Dachau: The Official History 1933–1945; Norfolk Press; London; 1975; ISBN 978-0-85211-009-6 ; pp. 141–2 ^ Paul Berben; Dachau: The Official History 1933–1945 ; Norfolk Press; London; 1975; ISBN 978-0-85211-009-6 ; pp. 276–277 ^ Libionka, Dariusz (2004).

"The Catholic Church in Poland and the Holocaust, 1939–1945" (PDF) . In Carol Rittner; Stephen D. Smith; Irena Steinfeldt (eds.).

The Holocaust And The Christian World: Reflections On The Past Challenges For The Future . New Leaf Press. pp.

74– 78.

ISBN 978-0-89221-591-1 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-04-17 . Retrieved 2013-09-19 .

^ "Poles: Victims of the Nazi Era" . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 28 November 2005 . Retrieved 24 May 2013 .

^ Norman Davies; Rising '44: the Battle for Warsaw; Viking; 2003; p. 92.

^ World and Its Peoples . Marshall Cavendish. 2010. p. 558.

ISBN 978-0-7614-7890-4 .

^ Let's Go Amsterdam 5th Edition . Macmillan. 2007. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-312-37454-9 .

^ Esser, Raingard (2012).

The Politics of Memory: The Writing of Partition in the Seventeenth-Century Low Countries . Brill. p. 34.

ISBN 978-90-04-20807-0 .

^ Arab, Pooyan Tamimi (2017).

Amplifying Islam in the European Soundscape: Religious Pluralism and Secularism in the Netherlands . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 173.

ISBN 978-1-4742-9144-6 .

^ Oftestad, Bernt T. (2013).

Norway and the Jesuit Order: A History of Anti-Catholicism . Brill Rodopi. pp.

209– 222.

ISBN 978-94-012-0963-2 .

^ Prinz, Oliver C. (2005) (in German). Der Einfluss von Heeresverfassung und Soldatenbild auf die Entwicklung des Militärstrafrechts. Osnabrücker Schriften zur Rechtsgeschichte. 7. Osnabrück: V&R unipress. pp. 40–41.

ISBN 3-89971-129-7 . Referring to Kroener, Bernhard R. (1993). "Militärgeschichte des Mittelalters und der frühen Neuzeit bis 1648. Vom Lehnskrieger zum Söldner". In Neugebauer, Karl-Volker (in German). Grundzüge der deutschen Militärgeschichte. 1. Freiburg: Rombach. p. 32.

^ Kuosa, Tauno (1963). Jokamiehen Suomen historia II. Sata sotaista vuotta ("Everyman's Finnish History II: Hundred Warlike Years"). Helsinki: Werner Söderström Publishing Ltd.. (Finnish) ^ Påminner om Karl XII:s brev om religionsfrihet (2016) 21 march https://www.svt.se/nyheter/lokalt/skane/paminner-om-karl-xii-s-brev-om-religionsfrihet ^ ^ [a b c d e] Alwall, Jonas (2003). "Muslimerna och religionsfriheten". i Ingvar Svanberg & David Westerlund. Blågul islam? Muslimer i Sverige.

ISBN 91-578-0308-0 ^ ^ Se Yvonne Maria Werners artikel "Katolicism och religionsfrihet", Signum 2002; 9 ^ Jenkins, Philip (2004).

The New Anti-Catholicism: The Last Acceptable Prejudice . Oxford University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0-19-517604-9 .

^ a b Mannard, Joseph G. (1981).

American Anti-Catholicism and its Literature . Archived from the original on 2009-10-27.

^ "The Coming Catholic Church" [ permanent dead link ] . By David Gibson.

HarperCollins : Published 2004.

^ Robert Emmett Curran, Papist Devils: Catholics in British America, 1574–1783 (2014) pp 201–202 ^ Ellis, John Tracy (1956).

American Catholicism .

^ The Charter Granted by their Majesties King William and Queen Mary, to the Inhabitants of the Province of the Massachusetts-Bay in New-England , Publisher: Boston, in New-England: Printed by S. Kneeland, by Order of His Excellency the Governor, Council and House of Representatives, (1759), p. 9.

[1] ^ Thomas H. O'Connor (1998).

Boston Catholics: A History of the Church and Its People . UPNE. p. 6.

ISBN 978-1-55553-359-5 .

^ Elizabeth Fenton, "Birth of a Protestant nation: Catholic Canadians, religious pluralism, and national unity in the early US Republic." Early American Literature 41.1 (2006): 29–57.

^ Francis Cogliano, No King, No Popery: Anti-Catholicism in Revolutionary New England (1995) pp 154–155, quote p 155.

online Archived 2019-04-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ Paul F. Boller, George Washington & Religion (1983) p 125.

^ O'Connor (1998).

Boston Catholics . UPNE. pp.

13 –16.

ISBN 978-1-55553-359-5 .

^ Kaminski, John P. (March 2002).

"Religion and the Founding Fathers" (PDF) .

Annotation . pp. 1, 4.

ISSN 0160-8460 .

^ Letter to Alexander von Humboldt , December 6, 1813 ^ Jefferson letter to Horatio G. Spafford, March 17, 1814 ^ Le Beau, Bryan (1991).

" "Saving the West from the Pope": Anti-Catholic Propaganda and the Settlement of the Mississippi River Valley" .

American Studies .

32 (1): 101– 114.

ISSN 0026-3079 .

JSTOR 40642429 .

^ Bilhartz, Terry D. (1986).

Urban Religion and the Second Great Awakening . Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. p. 115.

ISBN 978-0-8386-3227-7 .

^ Montgomery, David (1972). "The Shuttle and the Cross: Weavers and Artisans in the Kensington Riots of 1844".

Journal of Social History .

5 (4): 427.

doi : 10.1353/jsh/5.4.411 .

JSTOR 3786374 .

^ Tyler Anbinder (1992).

Nativism and Slavery: The Northern Know Nothings and the Politics of the 1850s . Oxford UP. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0-19-508922-6 .

^ a b Tyack, David, and Elizabeth Hansot (1981).

"Conflict and Consensus in American Public Education" .

Daedalus .

110 (3): 1– 25.

JSTOR 20024738 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Neem, Johann N. (2017).

Democracy's Schools: The Rise of Public Education in America . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4214-2321-0 .

^ a b c d Lazerson, Marvin (1977).

"Understanding American Catholic Educational History" .

History of Education Quarterly .

17 (3): 297– 317.

doi : 10.2307/367880 .

ISSN 0018-2680 .

JSTOR 367880 .

S2CID 147145994 .

^ "Papal Infallibility" .

Catholic Answers . Retrieved 2023-08-26 .

^ Verhoeven, Timothy (2014).

"Transatlantic Connections: American Anti-Catholicism and the First Vatican Council (1869–70)" .

The Catholic Historical Review .

100 (4): 695– 720.

doi : 10.1353/cat.2014.0218 .

ISSN 1534-0708 .

S2CID 159458501 .

^ Michael Gordon, The Orange riots: Irish political violence in New York City, 1870 and 1871 (1993) ^ Green, Stephen K. (1992).

"The Blaine Amendment Reconsidered" .

The American Journal of Legal History .

36 (1): 38– 69.

doi : 10.2307/845452 .

JSTOR 845452 .

^ "Blaine Amendments" . The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty. Archived from the original on 2002-10-04.

^ Tony Mauro (2003-05-20).

"High court agrees to settle Part II of voucher battle" .

firstamendmentcenter.org .

First Amendment Center . Archived from the original on December 29, 2003 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 .

^ Bush, Jeb (March 4, 2009).

NO: Choice forces educators to improve . The Atlanta Constitution-Journal.

^ On the meaning of the code words see Paul E. Peterson; Michael W. McConnell (2017).

Scalia's Constitution: Essays on Law and Education . Springer. p. 78.

ISBN 978-3-319-58931-2 .

, Steven Green (2010).

The Second Disestablishment: Church and State in Nineteenth-Century America . Oxford University Press. p. 293.

ISBN 978-0-19-974159-5 .

, and T. Jeremy Gunn; John Witte Jr. (2012).

No Establishment of Religion: America's Original Contribution to Religious Liberty . Oxford University Press. pp. 356+.

ISBN 978-0-19-998601-9 .

^ John T. McGreevy (2003).

Catholicism and American Freedom: A History . W.W. Norton. p.

91 .

ISBN 978-0-393-04760-8 .

^ Charles W. Calhoun The Presidency of Ulysses S Grant (2017) p. 505.

^ McGreevy (2003).

Catholicism and American Freedom: A History . W. W. Norton & Company. p.

92 .

ISBN 978-0-393-04760-8 .

^ Moore, Edmund Arthur (1956).

A Catholic Runs for President: The Campaign of 1928 . Ronald Press Company.

^ David E. Kyvig, Repealing national prohibition (Kent State University Press, 2000) ^ Thomas A. Bruscino (2010).

A Nation Forged in War: How World War II Taught Americans to Get Along . U. of Tennessee Press. pp.

214– 215.

ISBN 978-1-57233-695-7 .

^ "America's dark and not-very-distant history of hating Catholics" .

The Guardian . March 7, 2016.

^ Phillip Jenkins.

The New Anti-Catholicism: The Last Acceptable Prejudice . Oxford University Press, 2003.

^ "SLATE JUSTIFIES ANTI-CATHOLICISM" .

CatholicLeague.org . 16 March 2000 . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

^ Shafer, Jack (12 March 2000).

"Don't Hate Andrew Sullivan Because He's Catholic" .

Slate.com . The Slate Group . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

^ " 'Native Land' graffiti in Fremont mission being investigated as hate crime" .

The Mercury News . 2020-07-05 . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ Lambert, Ben (2020-07-17).

"Archdiocese: New Haven Catholic church vandalized with 'satanic,' 'anarchist' symbols" .

New Haven Register . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ "Vandals spray paint graffiti on South City church" .

Fox 2 . 2020-01-30 . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ Narizhnaya, Khristina; Rosenberg, Rebecca; Celona, Larry (2020-06-18).

"Two protesters arrested for St. Patrick's Cathedral vandalism" .

New York Post . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ Rousselle, Christine.

"Churches in 6 states damaged by violent protests" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ "Junipero Serra statue toppled in downtown L.A." KTLA . 2020-06-21 . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ "Statues of Junipero Serra, Ulysses S. Grant toppled at Golden Gate Park" .

The Mercury News . 2020-06-20 . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ "Protesters tear down statue of Spanish missionary and saint Junipero Serra in Sacramento" .

www.msn.com . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ "Statue of Virgin Mary beheaded at Tennessee parish" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ Kale, Wilk (12 July 2020).

"Virgin Mary statue vandalized, church leaders say" .

nwitimes.com . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ Rosa, Christian De La (2020-07-16).

"Church members searching for answers after statue of Jesus Christ is decapitated" .

WPLG . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ Californian, The Bakersfield (4 June 2020).

"Vandal hits Wasco church" .

The Bakersfield Californian . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ Camarillo, Emmanuel (2020-04-16).

"Man out on bond on hate crime charges tried to burn down Palos Hills church: police" .

Chicago Sun-Times . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ Fedschun, Travis (2020-07-12).

"Florida man crashes into church, sets it on fire with parishioners inside, sheriff says" .

Fox News . Retrieved 2020-07-25 .

^ "What Every American Should Know: Washington DC – Times Square Chronicles" . 24 January 2021 . Retrieved 2021-04-10 .

^ "Fact check: Article falsely reports arrest of Pope Francis" .

Reuters . 2021-01-12 . Retrieved 2021-04-10 .

^ Franz, H. (1910).

"Joseph II" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Okey, Robin (2002), The Habsburg Monarchy c. 1765–1918 , New York: Palgrave MacMillan ^ Austria – Early reign of Joseph II, 1780–85 .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online .

^ The science of the swastika , Bernard Thomas Mees.

^ Whiteside, Andrew G. (1975).

The Socialism of Fools: Georg Ritter von Schönerer and Austrian Pan-Germanism . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. p. 66.

ISBN 978-0-52002-434-2 .

^ IBGE – Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Brazilian Institute for Geography and Statistics).

Religion in Brazil – 2000 Census . Retrieved 2009-01-06.

^ "Traficante evangélico cria "Complexo de Israel" em favelas do Rio e ataca católicos e umbandistas" . Fórum. 2020-07-25.

^ "Traficantes usam pandemia para criar 'Complexo de Israel' unindo cinco favelas na Zona Norte do Rio" .

G1 . 2020-07-24.

^ Williford, Thomas J. Armando los espiritus: Political Rhetoric in Colombia on the Eve of La Violencia, 1930–1945 pp. 217–278 (Vanderbilt University 2005) ^ a b Chadwick, A History of Christianity (1995), p. 266 ^ Tallet, Frank Religion, Society and Politics in France Since 1789 pp. 1–2, 1991 Continuum International Publishing ^ See Reynald Secher.

A French Genocide: The Vendee (2003) ^ Farewell, Revolution: Disputed Legacies: France, 1789/1989 . Cornell University Press. 1995. p. 100.

ISBN 978-0-8014-2718-3 .

^ Nigel Aston, Religion and revolution in France, 1780–1804 (Catholic University of America Press, 2000) pp 279–335 ^ Kenneth Scott Latourette, Christianity in a Revolutionary Age. Vol. I: The 19th Century in Europe; Background and the Roman Catholic Phase (1969), pp 127–146, 399–415 ^ Timothy Verhoeven.

Transatlantic Anti-Catholicism: France and the United States in the Nineteenth Century (Palgrave MacMillan, 2010) ^ Foster, J. R.; Jean Marie Mayeur; Madeleine Rebérioux (1988).

The Third Republic from Its Origins to the Great War, 1871–1914 . Cambridge University Press. p. 84.

ISBN 978-0-521-35857-6 .

^ "Emile Combes who boasted of taking office for the sole purpose of destroying the religious orders. He closed thousands of what were not then called 'faith schools'" Bigots united in the Guardian, 9 October 2005 ^ Burns, Michael France and the Dreyfus Affair: A Documentary History p. 171 (1999 Palgrave Macmillan) ^ Paul Sabatier, Disestablishment in France (1906) online ^ Franklin 2006 , p. 9 (footnote 26) cites Larkin, Maurice, Church and State after the Dreyfus Affair , pp.

138– 141 : "Freemasonry in France", Austral Light , 6 : 164– 172, 241– 250, 1905 ^ Michael Broers, The Politics of Religion in Napoleonic Italy. The War against God, 1801–1814 (2002) Online ^ Ulrich Muller (2009-11-25).

"Congregation of the Most Precious Blood" .

Catholic Encyclopedia 1913 . Catholic Encyclopedia.

^ Michael Ott (2009-11-25).

"Pope Pius IX" .

Catholic Encyclopedia 1913 . Catholic Encyclopedia.

^ Edward Townley (2002).

Mussolini and Italy . Heinemann. p. 90.

ISBN 978-0-435-32725-5 .

^ "The Protestant Ascendency | Protestant Ireland History" .

www.discoveringireland.com . Retrieved 2025-01-24 .

^ "Penal Laws | Catholicism, Discrimination, Intolerance | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2025-01-24 .

^ a b c Van Hove, Brian Blood-Drenched Altars Archived 2017-11-09 at the Wayback Machine Faith & Reason 1994 ^ a b Scheina, Robert L.

Latin America's Wars: The Age of the Caudillo, 1791–1899 p. 33 (2003
Brassey's) ISBN 978-1-57488-452-4 ^ Ruiz, Ramón Eduardo Triumphs and Tragedy: A History of the Mexican People p. 393 (1993 W. W. Norton & Company) ISBN 978-0-393-31066-5 ^ Mark Almond (1996) Revolution: 500 Years of Struggle For Change : 136–137 ^ Barbara A. Tenenbaum and Georgette M. Dorn (eds.), Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture (New York: Scribner's, 1996).

^ Ridgeway, Stan (2001). "Monoculture, Monopoly, and the Mexican Revolution: Tomáás Garrido Canabal and the Standard Fruit Company in Tabasco (1920–1935)".

Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos .

17 (1): 143– 169.

doi : 10.1525/msem.2001.17.1.143 .

JSTOR 10.1525/msem.2001.17.1.143 .

^ "Nicaragua bishop on hunger strike to protest police harassment" .

ACN International . 2022-05-24 . Retrieved 2022-11-21 .

^ ACN (2022-07-04).

"Nicaragua leads in cases of religious persecution in Latin America" .

ACN International . Retrieved 2022-11-21 .

^ "Angelus, 21 August 2022 | Francis" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2022-11-21 .

^ "Persecution in Nicaragua: ACN calls for prayers" .

ACN International . 2022-08-25 . Retrieved 2022-11-21 .

^ "Nicaragua: A Church on the side of its people" .

ACN International . 2019-04-28 . Retrieved 2022-11-21 .

^ Freedom House website, retrieved 2023-08-08 ^ Open Doors website, retrieved 2023-08-08 ^ "Nicaragua accuses Catholic Church of money laundering, freezes accounts" .

Reuters . 2023-05-28 . Retrieved 2023-08-29 .

^ Vatican News website, article dated March 12, 2022 ^ Vatican News website, article dated March 13, 2023 ^ "Nicaraguan government bans Jesuit order and says all its property will be confiscated" .

Associated Press . 24 August 2023 . Retrieved 1 September 2023 .

^ ACN (2024-01-09).

"Dozens of priests arrested in 2023 as authoritarian regimes crack down on Church" .

ACN International . Retrieved 2024-04-26 .

^ Silva, Walter Sánchez (2025-04-15).

"Nicaragua once again bans Holy Week processions" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 2025-04-16 .

^ Online, Catholic.

"108 Polish Martyrs – Saints & Angels" .

Catholic Online .

^ a b John S. Conway, "The Nazi Persecution of the Churches, 1933–1945", Regent College Publishing, 1997 ^ Weigel, George (2001).

Witness to Hope – The Biography of Pope John Paul II . HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-018793-4 .

^ Craughwell, Thomas J., The Gentile Holocaust Catholic Culture. Retrieved July 18, 2008.

^ de la Cueva, Julio. "Religious Persecution, Anticlerical Tradition and Revolution: On Atrocities against the Clergy during the Spanish Civil War".

Journal of Contemporary History .

33 (3): 355.

^ "New Evangelization with the Saints" .

L'Osservatore Romano . Eternal Word Television Network. 28 November 2001.

^ Stephanie Innes (2007-12-06).

"Tucson priests one step away from sainthood" . Archived from the original on December 3, 2008 . Retrieved 6 May 2015 .

^ Cross, Frank Leslie; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005).

"Great Schism" .

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford: University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Middle Ages: 950–1250 . Cambridge University Press. 1986. pp.

506 –508.

ISBN 978-0-521-26645-1 .

^ Gregory, Timothy (2010).

A History of Byzantium . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 309.

ISBN 978-1-4051-8471-7 .

^ Vasiliev, Aleksandr (1958).

History of the Byzantine Empire. 2, Volume 2 . University of Wisconsin Press. p.

446 .

ISBN 978-0-299-80926-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Weeks, Theodore (2001). "Religion and Russification: Russian Language in the Catholic Churches of the 'Northwest Provinces' after 1863".

Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History .

2 (1): 87– 110.

doi : 10.1353/kri.2008.0090 .

S2CID 159901288 .

^ Weeks, Ted (2011).

"Religion, nationality, or politics: Catholicism in the Russian empire, 1863–1905" .

Journal of Eurasian Studies .

2 (1): 52– 59.

doi : 10.1016/j.euras.2010.10.008 .

^ Vladimir Geiger (2012).

"Human Losses of the Croats in World War II and the Immediate Post-War Period Caused by the Chetniks (Yugoslav Army in the Fatherland) and the Partisans (People's Liberation Army and the Partisan Detachments of Yugoslavia/Yugoslav Army) and the Communist Authorities: Numerical Indicators" .

Review of Croatian History .

VIII (1). Croatian Institute of History: 86.

^ a b Tomasevich 1975 , p. 259.

^ McCormick, Robert B. (2014).

Croatia Under Ante Pavelic: America, the Ustase and Croatian Genocide in World War II . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

81– 82.

ISBN 978-0-85772-535-6 .

^ Subotic, Jelena (2019).

Yellow Star, Red Star: Holocaust Remembrance after Communism . Cornell University Press. p. 103.

ISBN 978-1-5017-4241-5 .

^ Hoare 2006 , p. 143.

^ Ramet 2006 , p. 146.

^ a b Sobolevski 2004 , p. 149.

^ "Case Information Sheet – Milan Babić" (PDF) . Retrieved 22 October 2018 .

^ "Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Croatia vs. Yugoslavia)" (PDF) . International Court of Justice. 2 July 1999. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 April 2012 .

^ Darlington, John (2020).

Fake Heritage: Why We Rebuild Monuments . Yale University Press. p. 144.

ISBN 978-0-300-24676-6 .

^ Kousouris, Dimitris.

The Catholic communities of the Aegean Archipelago during the Greek revolution, 1821-1830 .

^ Batista, Jakub (2014).

"Chmielnicki Massacres (1648–1649)" . In Mikaberidze, Alexander (ed.).

Atrocities, Massacres, and War Crimes: An Encyclopedia . Vol. 1.

Santa Barbara, California : ABC-CLIO . pp.

100– 101.

ISBN 978-1-59884-926-4 .

^ Ahonen, Pertti (2008).

Peoples on the Move: Population Transfers and Ethnic Cleansing Policies During World War II and Its Aftermath . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 99.

^ "OUN i UPA od walk do ludobójstwa" .

Rzeczpospolita (in Polish).

Ogromne straty ze strony OUN-UPA poniósł Kościół rzymskokatolicki, naturalny u wierzących chrześcijan szacunek dla duchownych, świątyń, cmentarzy i religijnych praktyk został bowiem w duszach nacjonalistów ukraińskich zrujnowany.

[The Roman Catholic Church suffered huge losses from the OUN-UPA; the natural respect among Christian believers for clergy, temples, cemeteries and religious practices was ruined in the souls of Ukrainian nationalists.] ^ Norman Davies , Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory Publisher: Pan Books, November 2007, 544 pp., ISBN 978-0-330-35212-3 ^ Mark Mazower, Hitler's Empire, pp. 506–507. Penguin Books 2008.

ISBN 978-0-14-311610-3 ^ Miletitch, Nicolas (3 June 2014).

"Ukraine crisis deepens rift between Orthodox Churches" .

Yahoo! News . AFP. Archived from the original on 20 June 2014 . Retrieved 3 June 2014 .

^ "Religious Buildings Seized in Eastern Regions of Ukraine" . Jw.org. 13 February 2015 . Retrieved 19 March 2015 .

^ "Secret Protestant Churches in Donetsk: Ukraine's Religious War" .

Vice News . 20 Mar 2015.

^ "Ukraine: Rebel Forces Detain, Torture Civilians" . 28 Aug 2014.

Detention and Torture of Religious Activists ^ "Bangladesh church bomb kills nine" .

BBC News . 3 June 2001 . Retrieved 24 September 2015 .

^ Bethlehem Feleke and Duarte Mendonca (12 May 2019).

"Attack on Catholic church in Burkina Faso leaves 6 dead" .

CNN . Retrieved 2019-05-15 .

^ Ouezen Louis Oulon and Bukola Adebayo, for (15 May 2019).

"Four killed in ambush on Catholic parade in Burkina Faso" .

CNN . Retrieved 2019-05-15 .

^ Robert Samuel Maclay (1861).

Life among the Chinese: with characteristic sketches and incidents of missionary operations and prospects in China . Carlton & Porter. p.

336 . Retrieved 2011-07-06 .

mohammedan slaves to beys.

^ Joseph Esherick, The Origins of the Boxer Uprising (1987), pp. 190–191; Paul Cohen, History in Three Keys (1997), p. 51.

^ East India (Tibet): Further Papers Relating to Tibet . London: H. M. Stationery Office. 1904. p. 17 . Retrieved 2011-06-28 .

^ AsiaNews.it.

"The Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association celebrates 50 years at a less than ideal moment" .

^ U.S Department of State, International Religious Freedom Report 2010: China , 17 Nov 2010.

^ "Pope invites Chinese bishops to Synod meeting" . CatholicCulture.org. 8 September 2005.

^ "Asia is 'new hotbed of Christian persecution' with situation in China worst since Cultural Revolution, report claims" .

South China Morning Post . 16 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2019 . Retrieved 17 January 2019 .

^ O'Keeffe and, Kate; Ferek, Katy Stech (14 November 2019).

"Stop Calling China's Xi Jinping 'President,' U.S. Panel Says" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2019 . Retrieved 16 November 2019 .

.

^ Group: Officials destroying crosses, burning bibles in China . Associated Press. 10 September 2018.

^ Lary, Diana (2005).

"Faith and War Eyewitnesses to the Japanese Invasion of China: Quebec's Jesuit Priests" .

Modern Asian Studies .

39 (4): 817– 43.

doi : 10.1017/S0026749X0500168X .

JSTOR 3876563 .

S2CID 145166823 .

^ Strong, David (2018).

A Call to Mission – A History of the Jesuits in China 1842–1954 . Vol. 2: The Wider European and American Adventure (illustrated ed.). ISD LLC. p. 178.

ISBN 978-1925643633 .

^ Lary, Diana (2015).

Rencontres et médiations entre la Chine, l'Occident et le Amérique . Presses de l'Université Laval. p. 375.

ISBN 978-2763717951 .

^ Nonato, Sheila Dabu (September 15, 2011).

"Setting the world 'on fire with the love of God' " .

The Catholic Register .

^ 李 (Li), 晓晨 (Xiaochen) (2012-10-01).

"抗日战争时期的河北天主教会" [The Catholic Church in Hebei during the Anti-Japanese War] (PDF) (in Chinese). 河北师范大学历史文化学. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2023-07-15 . Retrieved 2023-12-20 – via GlobeEthics.

^ 鞠, 志强 (2015-09-09).

"可歌可泣的河北天主教抗日救亡斗争" .

信德报 (33).

^ Kurata, Akiko (2012).

"Catholic Churches in Hong Kong under Japanese Occupation" . Translated by Jessie Lin. University of Tokyo.

^ Hului, Patricia (July 19, 2021).

"The influence of Catholicism on Flores island during WWII" .

Kajo Mag .

^ "Martyrs List" . Twenty-Six Martyrs Museum. Archived from the original on 2010-02-14 . Retrieved 2010-01-10 .

^ "S" .

Encyclopedia of Japan . Tokyo: Shogakukan. 2012.

OCLC 56431036 . Archived from the original on 2007-08-25 . Retrieved 2012-08-09 .

^ "隠れキリシタン" [Kakure Kirishitan].

Dijitaru Daijisen (in Japanese). Tokyo: Shogakukan. 2012.

OCLC 56431036 . Archived from the original on 2007-08-25 . Retrieved 2012-08-09 .

^ "Taliban attack Christians in Karachi" . Archived from the original on 8 July 2011.

^ "Christians, Hindus, Sikhs forced to flee Swat: Catholic Church SindhToday.net " .

Yahoo! News India . Indo Asian News Service. 2009-04-25. Archived from the original on 2009-05-02 . Retrieved 2023-12-20 .

^ "AsiaNews.it 11 October 2009" .

^ "UCANews 4 August 2009" . Archived from the original on 13 August 2009.

^ "Home" . Archived from the original on 12 May 2012.

^ "UCANews 6 January 2014" .

^ Jillani, Shahzeb (1 September 2015).

"New cross symbolic for Pakistan's Christians" .

BBC News . Retrieved 10 October 2018 .

^ W. L. A. Don Peter.

"Catholic Church in Sri Lanka – A History in Outline" .

^ Greaves, Marc (2015-01-02).

"Sri Lanka's not-so-tranquil Buddhists" .

Catholic Herald . Retrieved 2019-02-09 .

^ Weigel, George (21 June 2011).

"Maureen Dowd's Catholic Problem" .

National Review Online . Retrieved 4 July 2016 .

^ Arkes, Hadley (1 November 1996).

"Life Watch: Anti-Catholic Catholics" .

Crisis Magazine . Retrieved 4 July 2016 .

^ Lawler, Phil (13 July 2011).

"Anti-Catholic Catholics" .

Catholic Culture . Trinity Communications . Retrieved 4 July 2016 .

^ Nigel Aston (2002).

Christianity and Revolutionary Europe, 1750–1830 . Cambridge UP. p. 130.

ISBN 978-0-521-46592-2 .

^ Christine Vogel, The Suppression of the Society of Jesus, 1758–1773 , European History Online , Mainz: Institute of European History , 2011.

^ Nicholas Atkin and Frank Tallett, Priests, Prelates and People: A History of European Catholicism since 1750 (2003) p. 35.

^ Patrick R O'Malley (2006) Catholicism, sexual deviance, and Victorian Gothic culture . Cambridge University Press ^ "Anti-Catholicism is the Last Acceptable Bigotry" .

Catholic Answers . Retrieved 2025-02-05 .

^ Tielemans, Otto.

"Despite media distortion, not all priests are pedophiles" .

The Foothill Dragon Press . Retrieved 2025-02-05 .

Sources [ edit ] Franklin, James (2006), "Freemasonry in Europe" , Catholic Values and Australian Realities , Connor Court Publishing Pty Ltd, pp.

7– 10, ISBN 978-0-9758015-4-3 Hoare, Marko Attila (2006).

Genocide and Resistance in Hitler's Bosnia: The Partisans and the Chetniks .

Oxford : Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-726380-8 .

Ramet, Sabrina P. (2006).

The Three Yugoslavias: State-Building and Legitimation, 1918–2005 .

Bloomington, Indiana : Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-34656-8 .

Sobolevski, Mihael (2004).

"Pljačka i teror Dinarske četničke divizije na području općine Krivi put 28. i 29. prosinca 1944" [Robbery and Terror of Dinara Chetnik Division in the Krivi Put Region on 28th and 29th December 1944].

The Anthology of Senj: Contributions to Geography, Ethnology, Economy, History and Culture (in Croatian).

31 (1). Zagreb, Croatia: Croatian Institute of History: 271– 289.

Tomasevich, Jozo (1975).

War and Revolution in Yugoslavia, 1941–1945: The Chetniks .

Stanford, California : Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-0857-9 .

Further reading [ edit ] United States, Canada and Mexico [ edit ] Anbinder, Tyler.

Nativism and Slavery: The Northern Know Nothings and the Politics of the 1850s (1992) Anderson, Kevin P.

Not Quite Us: Anti-Catholic Thought in English Canada Since 1900 (McGill-Queen's Studies, 2019).

Bennett, David H.

The Party of Fear: From Nativist Movements to the New Right in American History University of North Carolina Press, 1988 Billington, Ray Allen.

The Protestant Crusade, 1800-1860: A Study of the Origins of American Nativism (1938) online Blanshard, Paul.

American Freedom and Catholic Power (Beacon Press, 1949); famous attack on Catholicism.

online Brown, Thomas M. "The Image of the Beast: Anti-Papal Rhetoric in Colonial America", in Richard O. Curry and Thomas M. Brown, eds., Conspiracy: The Fear of Subversion in American History (1972), 1–20.

Cogliano, Francis D.

No King, No Popery: Anti-Catholicism in Revolutionary New England (Greenwood Press, 1995) Corrigan, John, and Lynn S. Neal, eds. "Anti-Catholicism." In Religious Intolerance in America: A Documentary History (2nd ed, U of North Carolina Press, 2010), pp 49–72; other targets also get chapters.

online Cruz, Joel Morales.

The Mexican Reformation: Catholic Pluralism, Enlightenment Religion, and the Iglesia de Jesus Movement in Benito Juarez's Mexico (1859–72) (Wipf and Stock Publishers, 2011).

Davis, David Brion (1960). "Some Themes of Counter-subversion: An Analysis of Anti-Masonic, Anti-Catholic and Anti-Mormon Literature".

Mississippi Valley Historical Review .

47 (2): 205– 224.

doi : 10.2307/1891707 .

JSTOR 1891707 .

Drury, Marjule Anne (2001). "Anti-Catholicism in Germany, Britain, and the United States: A review and critique of recent scholarship".

Church History .

70 (1): 98– 131.

doi : 10.2307/3654412 .

JSTOR 3654412 .

S2CID 146522059 .

Farrelly,  Maura Jane.

Anti-Catholicism in America, 1620–1860 (Cambridge Essential Histories, 2017) Greeley, Andrew M.

An Ugly Little Secret: Anti-Catholicism in North America (1977).

Henry, David. "Senator John F. Kennedy Encounters the Religious Question: I Am Not the Catholic Candidate for President." in Contemporary American Public Discourse Ed. H. R. Ryan. (Waveland Press, Inc., 1992) pp. 177–193.

Higham; John.

Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism, 1860–1925 (1955) Hinckley, Ted C. (1962). "American Anti-Catholicism During the Mexican War".

Pacific Historical Review .

31 (2): 121– 137.

doi : 10.2307/3636570 .

JSTOR 3636570 .

S2CID 161327008 .

Hostetler; Michael J. "Gov. Al Smith Confronts the Catholic Question: The Rhetorical Legacy of the 1928 Campaign," Communication Quarterly (1998) 46#1 pp 12+.

Jensen, Richard.

The Winning of the Midwest: Social and Political Conflict, 1888–1896 (1971) Keating, Karl.

Catholicism and Fundamentalism – The Attack on "Romanism" by "Bible Christians" (Ignatius Press, 1988).

ISBN 978-0-89870-177-7 McGreevy, John T (1997). "Thinking on One's Own: Catholicism in the American Intellectual Imagination, 1928–1960".

The Journal of American History .

84 (1): 97– 131.

doi : 10.2307/2952736 .

JSTOR 2952736 .

Menendez, Albert J.

The Religious Factor in the 1960 Presidential election: an analysis of the Kennedy victory over anti-Catholic prejudice (McFarland, 2014).

online Miller, James R. "Anti-catholic thought in Victorian Canada." Canadian Historical Review 66.4 (1985): 474–494.

Moore; Leonard J.

Citizen Klansmen: The Ku Klux Klan in Indiana, 1921–1928 (University of North Carolina Press, 1991) Paddison, Joshua. "Anti-Catholicism and Race in Post-Civil War San Francisco." Pacific Historical Review 78.4 (2009): 505–544.

online Pagliarini, Marie Anne. "The pure American woman and the wicked Catholic priest: An analysis of anti-Catholic literature in antebellum America." Religion and American Culture 9.1 (1999): 97–128.

Pinheiro, John C. "'Extending the light and blessings of our purer faith': Anti-Catholic sentiment among American soldiers in the US-Mexican war." Journal of popular culture 35.2 (2001): 129+.

Ryan, James Emmett. "The House of Harper: Melville's Anti-Catholic Publisher." Book History 23.1 (2020): 76–98.

online Stark, Rodney (2016).

Bearing False Witness: Debunking Centuries of Anti-Catholic History . Templeton Press.

ISBN 978-1-59947-499-1 .

Thiemann, Ronald F.

Religion in Public Life Georgetown University Press, 1996.

Verhoeven, Timothy.

Transatlantic Anti-Catholicism: France and the United States in the Nineteenth Century (Palgrave Macmillan, 2010).

Watt, James T. "Anti-Catholic nativism in Canada: The Protestant Protective Association." Canadian Historical Review 48.1 (1967): 45–58.

Wolffe, John (2013). "North Atlantic Anti-Catholicism in the Nineteenth Century: A Comparative Overview".

European Studies: A Journal of European Culture, History and Politics .

31 (1): 25– 41.

Europe [ edit ] Aston, Nigel (2002).

Christianity and Revolutionary Europe, 1750–1830 . Cambridge UP.

ISBN 978-0-521-46592-2 .

Bruce, Steve.

No Pope of Rome: Anti-Catholicism in Modern Scotland (Edinburgh, 1985).

Clifton, Robin (1971). "Popular Fear of Catholics during the English Revolution".

Past and Present (52): 23– 55.

doi : 10.1093/past/52.1.23 .

JSTOR 650394 .

Drury, Marjule Anne (2001). "Anti-Catholicism in Germany, Britain, and the United States: A review and critique of recent scholarship".

Church History .

70 (1): 98– 131.

doi : 10.2307/3654412 .

JSTOR 3654412 .

S2CID 146522059 .

Gheeraert-Graffeuille, Claire, and Geraldine Vaughan, eds.

Anti-Catholicism in Britain and Ireland, 1600–2000: Practices, Representations and Ideas (Springer Nature, 2020).

links to chapters Gross, Michael B.

The war against Catholicism: liberalism and the anti-Catholic imagination in nineteenth-century Germany (U of Michigan Press, 2004).

Joskowicz, Ari.

The Modernity of Others: Jewish Anti-Catholicism in Germany and France (Stanford University Press; 2013) 376 pages; how Jewish intellectuals defined themselves as modern against the anti-modern positions of the Catholic Church Latourette, Kenneth Scott.

Christianity in a Revolutionary Age (5 vol 1969), covers 1790s to 1960; comprehensive global history Lehner, Ulrich and Michael Printy, eds.

A Companion to the Catholic Enlightenment in Europe (2010) Mourret, Fernand.

History Of The Catholic Church (8 vol, 1931) comprehensive history to 1878. country by country.

online free ; by French Catholic priest; see vols. 6-7-8.

Palko, Olena. "Between Moscow, Warsaw and the Holy See: The Case of Father Andrzej Fedukowicz Amidst the Early Soviet Anti-Catholic Campaign." Revolutionary Russia 35.2 (2022): 225–246.

Paz, D. G. (1979). "Popular Anti-Catholicism in England, 1850–1851".

Albion .

11 (4): 331– 359.

doi : 10.2307/4048544 .

JSTOR 4048544 .

Stark, Rodney (2016).

Bearing False Witness: Debunking Centuries of Anti-Catholic History . Templeton Press.

ISBN 978-1-59947-499-1 .

Verhoeven, Timothy.

Transatlantic Anti-Catholicism: France and the United States in the Nineteenth Century (Palgrave Macmillan, 2010).

Wiener, Carol Z. (1971). "The Beleaguered Isle. A Study of Elizabethan and Early Jacobean Anti-Catholicism".

Past and Present (51): 27– 62.

doi : 10.1093/past/51.1.27 .

Wolffe, John (2013). "North Atlantic Anti-Catholicism in the Nineteenth Century: A Comparative Overview".

European Studies: A Journal of European Culture, History and Politics .

31 (1): 25– 41.

Wolffe, John, ed., Protestant-Catholic Conflict from the Reformation to the Twenty-first Century (Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2013).

Table of contents Wolffe, John. "A Comparative Historical Categorisation of Anti-Catholicism." Journal of Religious History 39.2 (2015): 182–202.

online free Wolffe, John. "Anti-catholicism and the British empire, 1815–1914." in Empires of religion (Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2008) pp. 43–63.

Asia and Pacific [ edit ] An, Hengshi. "The Impact of the Finalization of the China-Holy See Deal in 2018 to the Catholic Community in China." 6th International Conference on Humanities and Social Science Research (ICHSSR 2020). (Atlantis Press, 2020).

online Baker, Don, and Franklin Rausch.

Catholics and Anti-Catholicism in Chosŏn Korea (University of Hawaii Press, 2017) online .

Fleming, Peter, and Ismael Zuloaga. "The Catholic Church in China: A New Chapter." Religion in Communist Lands 14.2 (1986): 124–133.

Fowler, Colin. "Anti-Catholic polemic at the origins of Australia's first Catholic newspaper." Journal of the Australian Catholic Historical Society 37.2 (2016): 147–160.

online McCarthy, Scott Denis. "Popery, Politics, and Prejudice: Anti-Catholic Sentiment during Australia’s Great War Conscription Debates." Australian Historical Studies (2022): 1–21.

O’Connor, P. S. "Sectarian Conflict in New Zealand, 1911-1920." Political Science 19.1 (1967): 3–16.

doi : 10.1177/003231876701900101 Reinders, Eric. "The Unbowed Foreigner: Postural Identities of Buddhists and Christians in China." Journal of Ritual Studies (2005): 55–65.

Strate, Shane. "An uncivil state of affairs: Fascism and anti-Catholicism in Thailand, 1940–1944." Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 42.1 (2011): 59–87.

online Xuliang, Sun. "Espionage, Adultery, and Witchcraft: Rumor and Imagination Transplant in the Anti-Catholic Persecution of Late Ming China." SAGE Open 11.4 (2021): 21582440211058724.

open External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Anti-Catholicism .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anti-Catholicism .

Observatory on Intolerance and Discrimination Against Christians in Europe v t e Persecution of Christians Anti-Christian sentiment By incident Early Christianity New Testament Roman Empire Great Fire of Rome Persecution in Lyon Decian persecution Diocletianic Persecution Middle Ages Homs revolts (854–855) Massacre of the Latins Martyrs of Córdoba Bashmurian revolts Destruction of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre Kisrawan campaigns (1292–1305) Early modern French Revolution Revolt in the Vendée Martyrs of Japan Shimabara Rebellion Kakure Kirishitan Captivity of Mangalorean Catholics at Seringapatam Modern First Serbian Uprising Constantinople massacre of 1821 1843 and 1846 massacres in Hakkari 1850 Aleppo 1876 Bulgaria 1860 Lebanon conflict Tianjin Massacre Kucheng massacre Tự Đức's Catholic persecution Hamidian massacres Diyarbekir Candia massacre Boxer Rebellion Adana massacre Great Famine of Mount Lebanon Armenian genocide Assyrian genocide Greek genocide İzmit massacres Murder of the Romanov family Cristero War Shusha massacre Red Terror (Spain) Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses in Nazi Germany Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia Bersiap Istanbul pogrom Turkish invasion of Cyprus Black Thursday East Timor genocide Chouf massacres Damour massacre Mountain War (Lebanon) Beer Hall Putsch Eastern Bloc Persecution of Christians in the post–Cold War era Sumgait pogrom 1990 Dushanbe riots Maluku sectarian conflict Nag Hammadi massacre Kosheh massacres Boko Haram insurgency Maspero demonstrations 1998 attacks on Christians in southeastern Gujarat 1998 attacks on Christians in Dangs district 1998 Ramgiri-Udaygiri violence 1999 Ranalai violence 2004 unrest in Kosovo 2007 Christmas violence in Kandhamal 2008 Kandhamal violence 2008 Kandhamal nun gang rape case 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka 2010 Baghdad church siege 2010 Manila hostage crisis 2016 Lahore bombing 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings 2021 anti-Christian violence in Karnataka Owo church attack 2023 Hamburg shooting Kasindi church bombing Attack on Saint Menas church Mar Elias Church attack By persecutor Early Christianity Agrippa I Roman Empire Nero Domitian Septimius Severus Maximinus Thrax Decius Valerian Late Antiquity Diocletian Maximian Galerius Shapur II Athanaric Middle Ages Al-Mutawakkil Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah Hulagu Khan Timur Mehmed II Early modern Toyotomi Hideyoshi Tokugawa Ieyasu Kangxi Tipu Sultan Minh Mạng Tự Đức Queen Jeongsun Modern Ranavalona I Mwanga II of Buganda Plutarco Elías Calles Tomás Garrido Canabal Bai Chongxi Enver Hoxha Three Pashas Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Plutarco Elías Calles Cristero War Adolf Hitler Mao Zedong Ante Pavelić Islamic State Nicolae Ceaușescu Pol Pot Suharto Saddam Hussein Daniel Ortega Mullah Omar Kim Il-sung Abubakar Shekau Xi Jinping Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Kim Jong Un By country Afghanistan Algeria Azerbaijan Burma Cambodia China Egypt France German Empire Nazi Germany India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Laos Lebanon Madagascar Malaysia Mexico Nigeria North Korea Ottoman Empire Pakistan Palestine Saudi Arabia Somalia Soviet Union Spain Sudan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen By persecuted group Anabaptists Catholics Eastern Orthodox Mormons Violence against Mormons Oriental Orthodox Armenians Copts Protestants Martyrs ( list ) Massacre of the Innocents Saint Stephen Carthusian Martyrs Chinese Martyrs Saint Martyrs of Jasenovac Drina Martyrs Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Korean Martyrs Martyrs of Japan Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War New Martyrs North American Martyrs Saints of the Cristero War Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs 233 Spanish Martyrs 498 Spanish Martyrs 522 Spanish Martyrs Martyrs of Turon Martyrs of Daimiel Eastern Catholics in the USSR 21 Martyrs of Libya Category Commons Portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Spain Poland Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Catholicism&oldid=1305210638 " Categories : Anti-Catholicism Anti-Catholic organizations Anti-clericalism Criticism of the Catholic Church Persecution of Catholics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2022 Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1: long volume value CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 18:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Catholicism 28 languages Add topic

