Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 England and Wales 2 United States 3 See also 4 Footnotes Toggle the table of contents Bona fide purchaser 8 languages Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Русский Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Common law term in property law The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e Equitable doctrines Doctrines Equitable conversion Estoppel Hotchpot Knowing receipt Laches Marshalling Unconscionability Undue influence Subrogation Defences Bona fide purchaser Clean hands Equitable remedies Account of profits Constructive trust Declaratory relief Injunction Rectification Rescission Specific performance Related Court of Chancery Equitable interest History of equity Maxims of equity Tracing Trust law v t e A bona fide purchaser ( BFP ) – referred to more completely as a bona fide purchaser for value without notice –  is a term used predominantly in common law jurisdictions in the law of real property and personal property to refer to an innocent party who purchases property without notice of any other party's claim to the title of that property. A BFP must purchase for value, meaning that they must pay for the property rather than simply be the beneficiary of a gift. Even when a party fraudulently conveys property to a BFP (for example, by selling to the BFP property that has already been conveyed to someone else), that BFP will, depending on the laws of the relevant jurisdiction , take good (valid) title to the property despite the competing claims of the other party. As such, an owner publicly recording their own interests (which in some types of property must be on a court-recognised Register) protects themselves from losing those to an indirect buyer, such as a qualifying buyer from a thief, who qualifies as a BFP. Moreover, so-called "race-notice" jurisdictions require the BFP to record (depending on the type of property by public notice or applying for registration) to enforce their rights. In any case, parties with a claim to ownership of the property will retain a cause of action (a right to sue) against the party who made the fraudulent conveyance.

England and Wales [ edit ] In England and Wales and other jurisdictions following the 20th century oft-repeated precedent , the BFP will not be bound by equitable interests of which they do not have actual, constructive, or imputed notice, as long as they have made "such inspections as ought reasonably to have been made".

[ 1 ] BFPs are also sometimes referred to as " equity 's darling". However, jurist Hackney explains that the portrayal is inaccurate. In cases where legal title is passed to a bona fide purchaser for value without notice, equity does not show the purchaser any great affection in accepting the transfer. Rather, it recognises that it has no jurisdiction over the question of legal title, which belongs to the common law.

[ 2 ] The relationship between the courts of equity and the BFP is at root characterised as, geared toward the BFP, with benign neglect of the old owner(s).

[ 2 ] However, equity allows a proven BFP to claim for a full legal conveyance from former legal owner, failing which the court itself will convey title.

United States [ edit ] In the United States, the patent law codifies the bona fide purchaser rule, 35 U.S.C.

§ 261 . Unlike the common law , the statute cuts off both equitable and legal claims to the title.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Market overt Nemo dat quod non habet Title insurance in the United States Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Kingsnorth Finance Trust Co Ltd v Tizard [1986] 1 WLR 783.

^ a b Hackney, Jeffrey (1987).

Understanding Equity and Trusts . Fontana Press.

ISBN 0-00-686072-9 .

^ Filmtec Corp. v. Allied-Signal Inc.

, 939 F.2d 1568, 1573 (Fed. Cir. 1991) Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bona_fide_purchaser&oldid=1280590217 " Categories : Property law Property law legal terminology Common law legal terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2010 This page was last edited on 15 March 2025, at 11:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bona fide purchaser 8 languages Add topic

