Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History and etymology 3 Action Toggle Action subsection 3.1 Single-shot 3.2 Revolver 3.3 Semi-automatic 3.4 Machine pistol 3.5 Multi-barreled 3.6 Harmonica pistol 3.7 Lever-action 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Pistol 88 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego Хальмг 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ ತುಳು Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of handgun where the firing chamber is integral to the barrel For other uses, see Pistol (disambiguation) .

"Pistolet" redirects here. For the bread, see Pistolet (bread) .

A government-issue M1911 pistol manufactured in 1914 Soviet TT pistol manufactured in 1937 A pistol is a type of handgun , characterised by a barrel with an integral chamber . The word "pistol" derives from the Middle French pistolet ( c.

1550 ), meaning a small gun or knife, and first appeared in the English language c.

1570 when early handguns were produced in Europe. In colloquial usage, the word "pistol" is often used as a generic term to describe any type of handgun, inclusive of revolvers (which have a single barrel and a separate cylinder housing multiple chambers) and the pocket-sized derringers (which are often multi-barrelled ).

The most common type of pistol used in the contemporary era is the semi-automatic pistol .

[ 1 ] The older single-shot and lever-action pistols are now rarely seen and used primarily for nostalgic hunting and historical reenactment . Fully-automatic machine pistols are uncommon in civilian usage because of their generally poor recoil -controllability (due to the lack of a buttstock ) and strict laws and regulations governing their manufacture and sale (where they are regarded as submachine gun equivalents).

Terminology [ edit ] Technically speaking, the term "pistol" is a hypernym [ citation needed ] generally referring to a handgun and predates the existence of the type of guns to which it is now applied as a specific term; that is, in colloquial usage it is used specifically to describe a handgun with a single integral chamber within its barrel .

[ 2 ] Webster's Dictionary defines it as "a handgun whose chamber is integral with the barrel".

[ 3 ] This makes it distinct from the other types of handgun, such as the revolver , which has multiple chambers within a rotating cylinder that is separately aligned with a single barrel; [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and the derringer , which is a short pocket gun often with multiple single-shot barrels and no reciprocating action .

[ 6 ] The 18 U.S. Code § 921 legally defines the term "pistol" as "a weapon originally designed, made, and intended to fire a projectile ( bullet ) from one or more barrels when held in one hand, and having: a chamber(s) as an integral part(s) of, or permanently aligned with, the bore(s) ; and a short stock designed to be gripped by one hand at an angle to and extending below the line of the bore(s) ", [ 7 ] which includes derringers but excludes revolvers.

Commonwealth usage, for instance, does not usually make distinction, particularly when the terms are used by the military. For example, the official designation of the Webley Mk VI revolver was "Pistol, Revolver, Webley, No. 1 Mk VI".

[ 8 ] In contrast to the Merriam-Webster definition, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] the Oxford English Dictionary (a descriptive dictionary) describes "pistol" as "a small firearm designed to be held in one hand", [ 9 ] which is similar to the Webster definition for "handgun"; [ 10 ] and "revolver" as "a pistol with revolving chambers enabling several shots to be fired without reloading", [ 11 ] giving its original form as "revolving pistol".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] History and etymology [ edit ] Further information: Firearm and Handgun European hand cannon (Germany, about 1475) The pistol originates in the 16th century, when early handguns were produced in Europe. The English word was introduced in c.

1570 from the Middle French pistolet ( c.

1550 ). The etymology of the French word pistolet is disputed. It may be from a Czech word for early hand cannons , píšťala ("whistle" or "pipe"), used in the Hussite Wars during the 1420s. The Czech word was adopted in German as pitschale , pitschole , petsole , and variants.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Alternatively the word originated from Italian pistolese , after Pistoia , a city renowned for Renaissance-era gunsmithing, where hand-held guns (designed to be fired from horseback) were first produced in the 1540s.

[ 15 ] However, the use of the word as a designation of a gun is not documented before 1605 in Italy, long after it was used in French and German.

[ citation needed ] Action [ edit ] Single-shot [ edit ] French Navy pistol model 1837 Single-shot handguns were mainly used during the era of flintlock and musket weaponry where the pistol was loaded with a lead ball and fired by a flint striker, and then later a percussion cap . The handgun required a reload every time it was shot. However, as technology improved, so did the single-shot pistol. New operating mechanisms were created, and some are still made today. They are the oldest type of pistol [ 16 ] and are often used to hunt wild game . Additionally, their compact size compared to most other types of handgun makes them more concealable .

Revolver [ edit ] Colt Model 1873 single-action "New Model Army Metallic Cartridge Revolving Pistol" With the development of the revolver , short for revolving pistol, in the 19th century, gunsmiths had finally achieved the goal of a practical capability for delivering multiple loads to one handgun barrel in quick succession. Revolvers feed ammunition via the rotation of a cartridge-filled cylinder , in which each cartridge is contained within its own ignition chamber and is sequentially brought into alignment with the weapon's barrel by an indexing mechanism linked to the weapon's trigger ( double-action ) or its hammer ( single-action ). These nominally cylindrical chambers, usually numbering between five and eight depending on the size of the revolver and the size of the cartridge being fired, are bored through the cylinder so that their axes are parallel to the cylinder's axis of rotation; thus, as the cylinder rotates, the chambers revolve about the cylinder's axis.

Semi-automatic [ edit ] Semi-automatic pistol Grand Power K100 Target, produced in Slovakia After the revolver, the semi-automatic pistol was the next step in the development of the pistol. By avoiding multiple chambers—which need to be individually reloaded—semi-automatic pistols delivered faster rates of fire and required only a few seconds to reload, by pushing a button or flipping a switch, and the magazine slides out to be replaced by a fully loaded one. In blowback -type semi-automatics, the recoil force is used to push the slide back and eject the shell (if any) so that the magazine spring can push another round up; then as the slide returns, it chambers the round. An example of a modern blowback action semi-automatic pistol is the Walther PPK . Blowback pistols are some of the more simply designed handguns. Many semi-automatic pistols today operate using short recoil. This design is often coupled with the Browning type tilting barrel.

Machine pistol [ edit ] A Glock 18, a machine pistol derived from the semi-automatic Glock 17.

A machine pistol is a pistol that is capable of burst-fire or fully automatic fire . The first machine pistol was produced by Austria-Hungary in 1916, as the Steyr Repetierpistole M1912/P16 , and the term is derived from the German word maschinenpistolen . Though it is often used interchangeably with submachine gun , a machine pistol is generally used to describe a weapon that is more compact than a typical submachine gun.

A COP .357 Derringer , which contains four barrels.

Multi-barreled [ edit ] Multi-barreled pistols, such as the pepper-box , were common during the same time as single shot pistols. As designers looked for ways to increase fire rates, multiple barrels were added to pistols. One example of a multi-barreled pistol is the COP .357 Derringer .

Harmonica pistol [ edit ] Around 1850, pistols such as the Jarre harmonica gun were produced that had a sliding magazine. The sliding magazine contained pinfire cartridges or speedloaders. The magazine needed to be moved manually in many designs, hence distinguishing them from semi-automatic pistols.

Lever-action [ edit ] Lever action pistols are very rare, the most notable of which is the Volcanic pistol and Pistola Herval .

Gallery [ edit ] Manner of Jean-François De le Motte (1625–1685). Still Life in Trompe-l'oeil Style With Pistols and a Henri Iv Medaillon [17th Century] Cornelis Norbertus Gijsbrechts , 1672, Trompe l'oeil med pistoler "Trompe l´oeil 1737" by Carl Hofverberg 17th century pistols at Läckö Castle .

Pair of Miquelet Pistols, in the Peninsular Spanish style, made in colonial Mexico , dated 1757, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art [ 17 ] "The Faithful Colt" 1890 by William Michael Harnett The M1911 , an early semi-automatic pistol The CZ-75 , one of the most successful Wonder Nines An MP5K machine pistol Photo depicting a Volcanic Pistol See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pistols .

Glossary of firearms terms List of pistols Pistol grip References [ edit ] ^ George Nonte's COMBAT HANDGUNS, edited by Edward Ezell. Stackpole Books, 1980, 2nd printing 1981. ISBN-10 0811704092 ^ "British Dictionary definitions for pistol" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 19 January 2015 .

^ "Pistol – Definition" . Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 19 January 2015 .

^ a b "Revolver – Definition" . Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 19 January 2015 .

^ a b "Revolver – Define Revolver" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 19 January 2015 .

^ "Derringer – Definition" . Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 28 October 2020 .

^ "Firearms - Guides - Importation & Verification of Firearms - Gun Control Act Definition - Pistol" . www.atf.gov . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

^ D., Skennerton, Ian (1997).

.455 pistol, revolver no. 1 mk VI : parts identification, exploded drawings, service armourers' notes, accessories & fittings . Ian D. Skennerton.

ISBN 0-949749-30-3 .

OCLC 223845608 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Home : Oxford English Dictionary" .

Oed.com . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

^ "Handgun – Definition" . Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 27 October 2020 .

^ a b "Home : Oxford English Dictionary" .

Oed.com . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

^ "revolver: definition of revolver" . Oxford Dictionaries. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012 . Retrieved 19 January 2015 .

^ Karel Titz (1922).

Ohlasy husitského válečnictví v Evropě .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ "Naše řeč – Ohlasy husitského válečnictví v Evropě" .

Nase-rec.ujc.cas.cz . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

^ The War Office (1929).

Textbook of Small Arms . H.M. Stationery Office. p. 86.

^ Hampton, Mark (10 March 2017).

"Single Shot Savvy" .

American Handgunner . Retrieved 15 March 2021 .

^ "Pair of Miquelet Pistols" .

Metropolitan Museum of Art website .

v t e Firearms ( list , glossary , and topics ) Firearm lists Gun History Safety War Weapon Types of firearms Breechloader versus muzzleloader Combination weapons Combination Elephant Flare gun Line thrower Long gun Carbine Musket Takedown Multiple-barrel ( list ) Needler Net gun Pen gun Riot gun Rotary Single-shot Sleeve gun Smoothbore Spring-gun Underwater firearm Handguns Cane gun Derringer Duelling Pistol list Machine Pepper-box Pocket Revolver list Semi-automatic pistol list Pistol caliber Personal defence weapon Submachine gun Starting Wallet gun Rifles ( list ) Anti-materiel Anti-tank Assault list Automatic Battle list Carbine list Double Hunting Buffalo Elephant Express Punt Varmint Marksman Rifling Polygonal Repeating Sniper list Machine guns General purpose Light Medium Heavy SAW Shotguns ( list ) Automatic shotgun Coach gun Combat shotgun Double-barreled Pump action Riot Sawed-off Boomstick Ammunition 20-gauge shotgun Breaching round Dragon's breath Shotgun shell .410 bore Shot Slug Historic or famous AK-47 AR-15 M16 M4 Antique firearms Barrett M82 Gatling gun Winchester rifle Browning machine gun M1 Garand Mauser rifles TEC-9 Tommy Gun MP 40 MAC-10 Uzi Colt Peacemaker Calico M1911 Glock Mechanics and components Components Barrel Feed ramp Slug Threads Trunnion Bayonet Belt Blank-firing adapter Breechblock Breechface Bolt Rotating Telescoping Flapper Roller Tilting Bump stock Chamber Cocking handle Cylinder Extractor Firing pin Flash suppressor Fluting Forward assist Freebore Forearm Foregrip Hammer Half-cock Linear Striker Lock Flintlock Wheellock Magazine Bottom metal Clip Drum High-capacity Speedloader Stripper clip Muzzle brake Muzzle shroud Pistol grip Pistol slide Rail system Receiver Recoil pad Rim Safety Sear Auto sear Shroud Silencer Squeeze bore Choke Stock Synchronization gear Tapering Trigger guard Sights Diopter Finderscope Globe Holographic Iron Laser Reticle Reflex Red dot Magnifier Scope mount Tang Telescopic Night vision Thermal Zeroing Actions Blowback Blow-forward Bolt Boxlock Breechloading Break Open bolt Closed bolt Electronic Gas-operated Lever Muzzleloading Out-of-battery Pump Push/Controlled feed Recoil-operated Repeating Revolver Self-loading Single-shot Slamfire Physics Ballistics Ballistic coefficient External Terminal Transitional Physics of firearms Rangefinding/keeping Mathematics Stadiametric Metrics Accurizing Bore axis Caliber Circular error probable Effective range Gauge Gun chronograph Gun harmonisation Headspace Length of pull Lock time Match grade Mean time between failures Minute of Angle (MOA) Muzzle Energy Rise Velocity Penetration Power factor Precision-guided Rate of fire Recoil Group Stock measurements Stopping power Handgun effectiveness Twist rate Shooting and ammunition Gunshot Dry fire Firing (Shooting) Gunshot Firefight Maintenance Field strip Fouling Malfunction Cooking off Hang fire Squib load Ricochet Ignition Fire forming Obturation Primer Gunpowder Percussion cap Rimfire Tubes and Primers Propellant Ball propellant Cordite Improved Military Rifle Ramrod Smokeless powder Ammunition Cannelure Dummy round Snap cap Flechette Gas check Overpressure ammunition PCA Sabot Wadding Bullets Armour piercing Cast Expanding Full metal jacket Frangible Green Incendiary High explosive HEIAP Projectile Raufoss Round shot SLAP Soft point Supercavitating Total metal jacket Tracer Hollow base Hollow point Minié Meplat Plastic tipped ABCBC Snake shot Spitzer VLD Cartridges Blank Caseless Centrefire Handloading Rifle cartridge Fully powered Intermediate list Paper Pinfire Wildcat Society , safety , industry , and laws Society Celebratory gunfire Civilian gun ownership Household ownership rates Exhibition shooting Gun cultures United States Gun shows State firearms Hunting Jungle style Pistol duelling Politics Shooting sports Civilian Marksmanship Program Gun violence and safety in the United States Assassinations Deaths Forensics Gunfighter Gun safety Firearm industry 3D printed firearm list Firearm brands Firearms by country Gun shops list Gunsmith Improvised firearm Most-produced Privately made Small arms trade Arms control Arms and Gun control Disarmament Campaign Against Arms Trade Featureless rifles Gun laws Air travel Assault weapons Concealed carry in the U.S.

License High-capacity magazine ban Right to bear arms Small Arms & Light Weapons (SALW) United States Gun Laws ( by U.S. state ) Legislation Politics Federal Assault Weapons Ban v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wfcnd
Cached time: 20250817155141
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.618 seconds
Real time usage: 0.777 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2697/1000000
Revision size: 14267/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 190537/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3053/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 88809/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.357/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7160204/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  596.291      1 -total
 28.05%  167.246      1 Template:Reflist
 25.42%  151.595     10 Template:Military_navigation
 24.18%  144.207      1 Template:Firearms
 21.15%  126.086     13 Template:Cite_web
 11.18%   66.677      1 Template:Short_description
  8.08%   48.201      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.78%   46.411      1 Template:Sister_project
  7.53%   44.891      1 Template:Side_box
  6.61%   39.393      2 Template:Cn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9959000:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817155141 and revision id 1297832783. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pistol&oldid=1297832783 " Categories : Handguns Pistols 16th-century introductions Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 20:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pistol 88 languages Add topic

