Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Objectives 2 Scientific payload 3 Timeline Toggle Timeline subsection 3.1 Launch and trajectory 3.2 Approach and targeting phase 3.3 Science phase 3.4 Downlink of data, flyby of Saturn and end of mission 4 Mission Proposal 5 References Toggle the table of contents Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe 4 languages 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Proposed NASA mission to Saturn Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe Mission type Atmospheric probe Operator NASA Start of mission Launch date August 30, 2027 (proposed) Flyby of Earth Closest approach July 16, 2030 (proposed) Distance 300 km (190 mi) Saturn atmospheric probe Spacecraft component Atmospheric probe Atmospheric entry June 22, 2034 (proposed) Flyby of Saturn Spacecraft component Carrier-relay spacecraft Closest approach June 22, 2034 (proposed) Distance ≈ 100 000 km New Frontiers program ← OSIRIS-REx Dragonfly → For comparison, artwork for Galileo Probe which penetrated Jupiter's atmosphere in the 1990s The Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe is a mission concept study for a robotic spacecraft to deliver a single probe into Saturn to study its atmosphere. The concept study was done to support the NASA 2010 Planetary Science Decadal Survey [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Due to the orbits and relative positions of Saturn and Earth, launch was proposed for 30 August 2027 for a 22 June 2034 arrival.

[ 3 ] The mission was studied for the NASA Planetary Science Decadal Survey [ 2 ] [ 4 ] as a possible NASA New Frontiers -class mission.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] Composite image roughly comparing the sizes of Saturn and Earth To unveil the processes of outer planet formation and Solar System evolution, detailed studies of the composition, structure, and dynamics of giant planet interiors and atmospheres would be necessary. To constrain the internal structure of gas giants , a combination of both in-situ entry-probe missions and remote-sensing studies of the giant planets would be needed.

[ 3 ] The Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe mission would consist of a carrier-relay spacecraft and a probe. The carrier-relay spacecraft would release the probe into Saturn, a gas giant, and provide data relay from the probe to Earth. The probe would determine the structure of the atmosphere as well as noble gas abundances and isotopic ratios of hydrogen , carbon , nitrogen , and oxygen .

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] Objectives [ edit ] determine the noble gas abundances and isotopic ratios of hydrogen , carbon , nitrogen , oxygen , and argon in Saturn's atmosphere.

determine the atmospheric structure at the probe descent location.

Tier 2 objectives include: [ 5 ] determine the vertical profile of zonal winds as a function of depth at the probe entry location; determine the location, density, and composition of clouds as a function of depth in the atmosphere; determine variability of atmospheric structure and the presence of clouds at the location; determine the vertical water abundance profile at the probe descent location; make precision isotope measurements for light elements (e.g. S, N, O) in atmospheric constituents.

Scientific payload [ edit ] In order to complete its objectives, the probe must carry at least these two instruments: [ 3 ] a mass spectrometer (MS); it would determine the noble gas abundances and isotopic ratios of H, C, N, O, and Ar in Saturn's atmosphere.

an atmospheric structure instrument (ASI); based on the Galileo probe design, it would consist of three sensors for measuring temperature, pressure, and density.

Timeline [ edit ] Launch and trajectory [ edit ] Launch is proposed for 30 August 2027. After launch, the spacecraft would enter heliocentric orbit and be placed on a trajectory to fly by the Earth, which is proposed to take place on 16 July 2030 at a distance of 300 km. After that, the spacecraft would spend 4 years traveling to Saturn.

[ 3 ] Approach and targeting phase [ edit ] This phase would begin 8 months before arrival. The probe would separate from carrier–relay spacecraft and free-fall into Saturn's atmosphere.

[ 3 ] Science phase [ edit ] Hours before the probe's entry, the science phase would begin. An event timer on the probe would initiate activities, while the carrier–relay spacecraft would power up its radio receiver and turn to point its probe-relay antenna to the entry site. The probe would enter Saturn's atmosphere at a velocity of approximately 27 km/s, which is less than the Galileo Probe 's velocity of 47.4 km/s. After the entry heating and deceleration phase, the probe would deploy a drogue parachute and then the main parachute when it reached an atmospheric pressure of 0.1 bar. At 1 bar of pressure, the parachute would be released and the descent module would continue free-falling through the atmosphere (possibly with stabilization from another drogue parachute) to the nominal end of mission, 55 minutes after entry and 250 km deep. The probe would be designed to endure at least 10 bars of pressure.

[ 3 ] Downlink of data, flyby of Saturn and end of mission [ edit ] Shortly after data relay ends, downlink of data would begin. The data set measured by the probe would be about approximately 2 Mb , so 20 minutes would be need to complete the data downlink. The carrier–relay spacecraft would fly by Saturn at a distance of approximately 100 Mm and it would continue on a solar escape trajectory.

[ 3 ] Mission Proposal [ edit ] Main article: SPRITE (spacecraft) Following the concept study done to support the NASA Decadal Survey, the Saturn Atmospheric Entry probe concept was further developed into a mission concept, which was proposed under the name SPRITE ("Saturn PRobe Interior and aTmospheric Explorer") to the NASA New Frontiers program solicitation in 2016.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Beebe, Reta (September 2010).

"Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe Trade Study" . Retrieved 2 August 2013 .

(Archived from the original).

^ a b c Squyres, Steve.

"Vision and Voyages For Planetary Science in the Decade 2013-2022" (PDF) . National Research Council. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-11-14.

^ a b c d e f g h i Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe mission study (PDF) . Planetary Science Decadal Survey (2010). NASA and Planetary Science Decadal Survey. April 2010.

^ NRC Space Studies Board Planetary Decadal Survey: " Vision & Voyages for Planetary Science in the Decade 2013-2022 ," (PDF). National Academies Press, March 7, 2011.

^ Scientific Value of a Saturn Atmospheric Probe Mission . (PDF) D. H. Atkinson. NASA, 2012.

v t e NASA Planetary Missions Program Office Discovery program Missions Main NEAR Shoemaker Mars Pathfinder Lunar Prospector Stardust Genesis CONTOUR † MESSENGER Deep Impact Dawn Kepler GRAIL InSight Lucy Psyche DAVINCI VERITAS Opportunity ASPERA-3 EPOXI NExT Moon Mineralogy Mapper Strofio MEGANE Proposals Finalists Mission 12 Comet Hopper Titan Mare Explorer Mission 13 and 14 NEOCam Mission 15 and 16 Io Volcano Observer Trident Candidates Enceladus Life Finder Icebreaker Life ISOCHRON JET LIFE MANTIS Mars Geyser Hopper Moon Diver PADME Phobos Surveyor Whipple New Frontiers program Missions New Horizons Juno OSIRIS-REx Dragonfly Proposals Finalists Mission 2 MoonRise Mission 3 MoonRise SAGE Mission 4 CAESAR Candidates CONDOR CORSAIR ELF ELSAH Oceanus SPRITE VICI VISAGE VOX Solar System Exploration program Missions DART JUICE instruments Europa Clipper Underline indicates active current missions Italics indicate missions yet to launch Symbol † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned v t e Spacecraft missions to Saturn Past Flybys Pioneer 11 Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Orbiters Cassini–Huygens timeline retirement Landers Huygens (on Titan) Planned Dragonfly (to Titan, 2028) Proposed Saturn , rings Kronos Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe SPRITE Titan Saturn System Mission Enceladus Enceladus Orbilander Breakthrough Enceladus mission Enceladus Life Finder Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Explorer Life Investigation For Enceladus Titan AVIATR Oceanus TALISE Titan Mare Explorer Titan Submarine Several moons Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Journey to Enceladus and Titan There are no ongoing missions to Saturn v t e NASA Policy and history History ( creation ) NACA (1915) National Aeronautics and Space Act (1958) Space Task Group (1958) Paine (1986) Rogers (1986) Ride (1987) Space Exploration Initiative (1989) Augustine (1990) U.S. National Space Policy (1996) CFUSAI (2002) CAIB (2003) Vision for Space Exploration (2004) Aldridge (2004) Augustine (2009) General Space Race Administrator and Deputy Administrator Chief Scientist Astronaut Corps Ranks and positions Chief Budget NASA research spinoff technologies NASA+ NASA TV NASA Social Launch Services Program Mercury Control Center Manned Space Flight Network Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building Launch Complex 39 Launch Complex 48 Launch Control Center Operations and Checkout Building Johnson Space Center Mission Control Lunar Sample Laboratory Science Mission Directorate Human spaceflight programs Past X-15 ( suborbital ) Mercury Gemini Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz (with the Soviet space program ) Space Shuttle Shuttle– Mir (with Roscosmos ) Constellation Current International Space Station Commercial Orbital Transportation Services Commercial Crew Orion Artemis Lunar Gateway Robotic programs Past Hitchhiker Mariner Mariner Mark II MESUR Mars Surveyor '98 New Millennium Lunar Orbiter Pioneer Planetary Observer Ranger Surveyor Viking Project Prometheus Mars Exploration Mars Exploration Rover Current Living With a Star Lunar Precursor Robotic Program Earth Observing System Great Observatories program Explorers Voyager Discovery New Frontiers Solar Terrestrial Probes Commercial Lunar Payload Services SIMPLEx Individual featured missions (human and robotic) Past Apollo 11 COBE Mercury 3 Mercury-Atlas 6 Magellan Pioneer 10 Pioneer 11 Galileo timeline GALEX GRAIL WMAP Space Shuttle Spitzer Space Telescope Sojourner rover Spirit rover LADEE MESSENGER Aquarius Cassini Dawn Kepler space telescope Opportunity rover timeline observed RHESSI InSight Ingenuity helicopter flights Currently operating Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter 2001 Mars Odyssey New Horizons International Space Station Hubble Space Telescope Chandra X-ray Observatory Swift THEMIS Mars Exploration Rover Curiosity rover timeline GOES 14 Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter GOES 15 SDO Juno Mars Science Laboratory timeline NuSTAR Voyager 1 Voyager 2 MAVEN MMS OSIRIS-APEX TESS Mars 2020 Perseverance rover timeline James Webb Space Telescope timeline PACE Europa Clipper Future NISAR Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope DAVINCI VERITAS Communications and navigation Near Earth Network Space Network Deep Space Network ( Goldstone Madrid Canberra Space Flight Operations Facility ) Deep Space Atomic Clock NASA lists Astronauts by name by year Gemini astronauts Apollo astronauts Space Shuttle crews NASA aircraft NASA missions uncrewed missions Apollo missions Space Shuttle missions United States rockets NASA cancellations NASA cameras on spacecraft NASA images and artwork Earthrise The Blue Marble Family Portrait Pale Blue Dot Pillars of Creation Mystic Mountain Solar System Family Portrait The Day the Earth Smiled Fallen Astronaut Deep fields Lunar plaques Pioneer plaques Voyager Golden Record Apollo 11 goodwill messages NASA insignia Gemini and Apollo medallions Mission patches Astronomy Picture of the Day Hubble Space Telescope anniversary images Related " We choose to go to the Moon " Apollo 8 Genesis reading Apollo 15 postal covers incident Apollo Lunar Module Space Mirror Memorial The Astronaut Monument Lunar sample displays Moon rocks stolen or missing U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame Space program on U.S. stamps Apollo 17 Moon mice Moon tree Other primates in space NASA International Space Apps Challenge Astronauts Day National Astronaut Day Nikon NASA F4 Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saturn_Atmospheric_Entry_Probe&oldid=1211236128 " Categories : Missions to Saturn Extraterrestrial atmosphere entry New Frontiers program proposals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 March 2024, at 14:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe 4 languages Add topic

