Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The ideal of peace 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Peace and Truce of God 2.2 Peace churches 2.3 18th century 2.4 19th century 2.5 Mahatma Gandhi and nonviolent resistance 2.6 World War I 2.6.1 Henry Ford 2.7 Interwar period 2.7.1 Organizations 2.7.2 Novels and films 2.7.3 Spanish Civil War 2.8 World War II 2.9 Anti-nuclear movement 2.10 Vietnam War protests 2.11 Europe in 1980s 3 Peace movements by country Toggle Peace movements by country subsection 3.1 Australia 3.2 Canada 3.3 Germany 3.4 India 3.5 Israel 3.6 New Zealand 3.7 United Kingdom 3.8 United States 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 6.1 National studies 6.2 Primary sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Peace movement 26 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social movement against a particular war or wars For a movement to end a specific conflict, see Anti-war movement .

This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( June 2023 ) Cover of Die Friedens-Warte , a German journal of the peace movement, issue #11, 1913 Sweden: Stockholm 's May 2015 Peace and Love Rally through the south side of the city drew hundreds of marchers and celebrants.

A peace movement is a social movement which seeks to achieve ideals such as the ending of a particular war (or wars) or minimizing inter-human violence in a particular place or situation. They are often linked to the goal of achieving world peace . Some of the methods used to achieve these goals include advocacy of pacifism , nonviolent resistance , diplomacy , boycotts , peace camps , ethical consumerism , supporting anti-war political candidates, supporting legislation to remove profits from government contracts to the military–industrial complex , banning guns , creating tools for open government and transparency , direct democracy , supporting whistleblowers who expose war crimes or conspiracies to create wars , demonstrations , and political lobbying . The political cooperative is an example of an organization which seeks to merge all peace-movement and green organizations; they may have diverse goals, but have the common ideal of peace and humane sustainability. A concern of some peace activists is the challenge of attaining peace when those against peace often use violence as their means of communication and empowerment.

A global affiliation of activists and political interests viewed as having a shared purpose and constituting a single movement has been called " the peace movement", or an all-encompassing "anti-war movement". Seen from this perspective, they are often indistinguishable and constitute a loose, responsive, event-driven collaboration between groups motivated by humanism , environmentalism , veganism , anti-racism , feminism , decentralization , hospitality , ideology , theology , and faith .

The ideal of peace [ edit ] See also: Human shield action to Iraq Ideas differ about what "peace" is (or should be), which results in a number of movements seeking different ideals of peace. Although "anti-war" movements often have short-term goals, peace movements advocate an ongoing lifestyle and a proactive government policy.

[ 1 ] It is often unclear whether a movement, or a particular protest, is against war in general or against one's government's participation in a war. This lack of clarity (or long-term continuity) has been part of the strategy of those seeking to end a war, such as the Vietnam War .

Global protests against the U.S. invasion of Iraq in early 2003 are an example of a specific, short-term, loosely affiliated single-issue "movement" consisting of relatively-scattered ideological priorities ranging from pacifism to Islamism and Anti-Americanism . Those involved in multiple, similar short-term movements develop trust relationships with other participants, and tend to join more-global, long-term movements.

Elements of the global peace movement seek to guarantee health security by ending war and ensure what they view as basic human rights , including the right of all people to have access to clean air, water, food, shelter and health care . Activists seek social justice in the form of equal protection and equal opportunity under the law for groups which had been disenfranchised.

The peace movement is characterized by the belief that humans should not wage war or engage in ethnic cleansing about language, race, or natural resources , or engage in ethical conflict over religion or ideology . Long-term opponents of war are characterized by the belief that military power does not equal justice .

The peace movement opposes the proliferation of dangerous technology and weapons of mass destruction , particularly nuclear weapons and biological warfare . Many adherents object to the export of weapons (including hand-held machine guns and grenades ) by leading economic nations to developing countries. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute has voiced a concern that artificial intelligence , molecular engineering , genetics and proteomics have destructive potential. The peace movement intersects with Neo-Luddism and primitivism , and with mainstream critics such as Green parties , Greenpeace and the environmental movement .

These movements led to the formation of Green parties in a number of democratic countries in the late 20th century. The peace movement has influenced these parties in countries such as Germany .

History [ edit ] Peace and Truce of God [ edit ] Main article: Peace and Truce of God The first mass peace movements were the Peace of God ( Latin : Pax Dei , proclaimed in AD 989 at the Council of Charroux ) and the Truce of God, which was proclaimed in 1027. The Peace of God was spearheaded by bishops as a response to increasing violence against monasteries after the fall of the Carolingian dynasty . The movement was promoted at a number of subsequent church councils, including Charroux (989 and c. 1028), Narbonne (990 [ citation needed ] ), Limoges (994 and 1031), Poitiers (c. 1000), and Bourges (1038). The Truce of God sought to restrain violence by limiting the number of days of the week and times of the year when the nobility was able to employ violence. These peace movements "set the foundations for modern European peace movements." [ 2 ] Peace churches [ edit ] Penn's Treaty (1847), by Edward Hicks The Reformation gave rise to a number of Protestant sects beginning in the 16th century, including the peace churches . Foremost among these churches were the Religious Society of Friends ( Quakers ), Amish , Mennonites , and the Church of the Brethren . The Quakers were prominent advocates of pacifism, who had repudiated all forms of violence and adopted a pacifist interpretation of Christianity as early as 1660.

[ 3 ] Throughout the 18th-century wars in which Britain participated, the Quakers maintained a principled commitment not to serve in an army or militia and not pay the alternative £10 fine.

18th century [ edit ] The major 18th-century peace movements were products of two schools of thought which coalesced at the end of the century. One, rooted in the secular Age of Enlightenment , promoted peace as the rational antidote to the world's ills; the other was part of the evangelical religious revival which had played an important role in the campaign for the abolition of slavery . Representatives of the former included Jean-Jacques Rousseau , in Extrait du Projet de Paix Perpetuelle de Monsieur l'Abbe Saint-Pierre (1756); [ 4 ] Immanuel Kant in Thoughts on Perpetual Peace , [ 5 ] and Jeremy Bentham , who proposed the formation of a peace association in 1789. One representative of the latter was William Wilberforce ; Wilberforce thought that by following the Christian ideals of peace and brotherhood, strict limits should be imposed on British involvement in the French Revolutionary Wars .

[ 6 ] 19th century [ edit ] 1880 caricature of Henry Richard , a prominent advocate of pacifism During the Napoleonic Wars (1793–1814), no formal peace movement was established in Britain until hostilities ended. A significant grassroots peace movement, animated by universalist ideals, emerged from the perception that Britain fought in a reactionary role and the increasingly visible impact of the war on the nation's welfare in the form of higher taxes and casualties. Sixteen peace petitions to Parliament were signed by members of the public; anti-war and anti- Pitt demonstrations were held, and peace literature was widely disseminated.

[ 7 ] The first formal peace movements appeared in 1815 and 1816. The first movement in the United States was the New York Peace Society , founded in 1815 by theologian David Low Dodge , followed by the Massachusetts Peace Society . The groups merged into the American Peace Society , which held weekly meetings and produced literature that was spread as far as Gibraltar and Malta describing the horrors of war and advocating pacifism on Christian grounds.

[ 8 ] The London Peace Society , also known as the Society for the Promotion of Permanent and Universal Peace, was formed by philanthropist William Allen in 1816 to promote permanent, universal peace. During the 1840s, British women formed 15-to-20 person "Olive Leaf Circles" to discuss and promote pacifist ideas.

[ 9 ] The London Peace Society's influence began to grow during the mid-nineteenth century. Under Elihu Burritt and Henry Richard , the society convened the first International Peace Congress in London in 1843.

[ 10 ] The congress decided on two goals: to achieve the ideal of peaceable arbitration of the affairs of nations, and to create an international institution to achieve it. Richard became the society's full-time secretary in 1850; he held the position for the next 40 years, and became known as the "Apostle of Peace". He helped secure one of the peace movement's earliest victories by securing a commitment for arbitration from the Great Powers in the Treaty of Paris (1856) at the end of the Crimean War . Wracked by social upheaval , the first peace congress on the European continent was held in Brussels in 1848; a second was held in Paris a year later.

[ 11 ] By the 1850s, these movements were becoming well organized in the major countries of Europe and North America, reaching middle-class activists beyond the range of the earlier religious connections.

[ 12 ] Support decreased during the resurgence of militarism during the American Civil War and the Crimean War , the movement began to spread across Europe and infiltrate fledgling working-class socialist movements. In 1870, Randal Cremer formed the Workman's Peace Association in London. Cremer and the French economist Frédéric Passy were the founding fathers of the Inter-Parliamentary Union , the first international organization for the arbitration of conflicts, in 1889. The National Peace Council was founded after the 17th Universal Peace Congress in London in July and August 1908.

[ 13 ] In the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the novelist Baroness Bertha von Suttner (1843–1914) after 1889  became a leading figure in the peace movement with the publication of her pacifist novel, Die Waffen nieder!

( Lay Down Your Arms!

). The book was published in 37 editions and translated into 12 languages. She helped organize the German Peace Society and became known internationally as the editor of the international pacifist journal Die Waffen nieder!

In 1905 she became the first woman to win a Nobel Peace Prize.

[ 14 ] Mahatma Gandhi and nonviolent resistance [ edit ] Mahatma Gandhi , leader of the Indian independence movement and advocate of nonviolent resistance Mahatma Gandhi (1869–1948) was one of the 20th century's most influential spokesmen for peace and non-violence, and Gandhism is his body of ideas and principles Gandhi promoted. One of its most important concepts is nonviolent resistance. According to M. M. Sankhdher, Gandhism is not a systematic position in metaphysics or political philosophy but a political creed, an economic doctrine, a religious outlook, a moral precept, and a humanitarian worldview. An effort not to systematize wisdom but to transform society, it is based on faith in the goodness of human nature.

[ 15 ] Gandhi was strongly influenced by the pacifism of Leo Tolstoy . Tolstoy wrote A Letter to a Hindu in 1908, which said that  the Indian people could overthrow colonial rule only through passive resistance . In 1909, Gandhi and Tolstoy began a correspondence about the practical and theological applications of nonviolence .

[ 16 ] Gandhi saw himself as a disciple of Tolstoy because they agreed on the issues of opposition to state authority and colonialism, loathed violence, and preached non-resistance. However, they differed on political strategy. Gandhi called for political involvement; a nationalist, he was prepared to use nonviolent force but was also willing to compromise.

[ 17 ] Gandhi was the first person to apply the principle of nonviolence on a large scale.

[ 18 ] The concepts of nonviolence ( ahimsa ) and nonresistance have a long history in Indian religious and philosophical thought, and have had a number of revivals in Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, Jewish and Christian contexts. Gandhi explained his philosophy and way of life in his autobiography, The Story of My Experiments with Truth . Some of his remarks were widely quoted, such as "There are many causes that I am prepared to die for, but no causes that I am prepared to kill for." [ 19 ] Gandhi later realized that a high level of nonviolence required great faith and courage, which not everyone possessed. He advised that everyone need not strictly adhere to nonviolence, especially if it was a cover for cowardice: "Where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, I would advise violence." [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Gandhi came under political fire for his criticism of those who attempted to achieve independence through violence. He responded, "There was a time when people listened to me because I showed them how to give fight to the British without arms when they had no arms ... but today I am told that my non-violence can be of no avail against the Hindu–Moslem riots; therefore, people should arm themselves for self-defense." [ 22 ] Gandhi's views were criticized in Britain during the Battle of Britain . He told the British people in 1940, "I would like you to lay down the arms you have as being useless for saving you or humanity. You will invite Herr Hitler and Signor Mussolini to take what they want of the countries you call your possessions ... If these gentlemen choose to occupy your homes, you will vacate them. If they do not give you free passage out, you will allow yourselves man, woman, and child to be slaughtered, but you will refuse to owe allegiance to them." [ 23 ] World War I [ edit ] See also: Opposition to World War I The Deserter (1916), by Boardman Robinson A World War I–era peace protester Although the onset of the First World War was generally greeted with enthusiastic patriotism across Europe, peace groups were active in condemning the war. Many socialist groups and movements were antimilitarist . They argued that by its nature, war was a type of governmental coercion of the working class for the benefit of capitalist elites.

In 1915, the League of Nations Society was formed by British liberal leaders to promote a strong international organization which could enforce peaceful conflict resolution. Later that year, the League to Enforce Peace was established in the United States to promote similar goals.

Hamilton Holt published "The Way to Disarm: A Practical Proposal", an editorial in the Independent (his New York City weekly magazine) on September 28, 1914. The editorial called for an international organization to agree on the arbitration of disputes and guarantee the territorial integrity of its members by maintaining military forces sufficient to defeat those of any non-member. The ensuing debate among prominent internationalists modified Holt's plan to align it more closely with proposals in Great Britain put forth by Viscount James Bryce , a former ambassador from the U.K. to the U.S.

[ 24 ] These and other initiatives were pivotal to the attitude changes which gave rise to the League of Nations after the war.

[ 25 ] In addition to the peace churches, groups which protested against the war included the Woman's Peace Party (organized in 1915 and led by Jane Addams ), the International Committee of Women for Permanent Peace (ICWPP) (also organized in 1915), [ 26 ] the American Union Against Militarism , the Fellowship of Reconciliation , and the American Friends Service Committee .

[ 27 ] Jeannette Rankin (the first woman elected to Congress) was another advocate of pacifism, and the only person to vote "no" on the U.S. entrance into both world wars.

Henry Ford [ edit ] Peace promotion was a major activity of American automaker and philanthropist Henry Ford (1863–1947).  He set up a $1 million fund to promote peace, and published numerous antiwar articles and ads in hundreds of newspapers.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] According to biographer Steven Watts, Ford's status as a leading industrialist gave him a worldview that warfare was wasteful folly that retarded long-term economic growth. The losing side in the war typically suffered heavy damage. Small business were especially hurt, for it takes years to recuperate. He argued in many newspaper articles that capitalism would discourage warfare because, "If every man who manufactures an article would make the very best he can in the very best way at the very lowest possible price the world would be kept out of war, for commercialists would not have to search for outside markets which the other fellow covets."  Ford admitted that munitions makers enjoyed wars, but he argued the typical capitalist wanted to avoid wars to concentrate on manufacturing and selling what people wanted, hiring good workers, and generating steady long-term profits.

[ 31 ] In late 1915, Ford sponsored and funded a Peace Ship to Europe, to help end the raging World War. He brought 170 peace activists; Jane Addams was a key supporter who became too ill to join him. Ford talked to President Woodrow Wilson about the mission but had no government support. His group met with peace activists in neutral Sweden and the Netherlands. A target of much ridicule, Ford left the ship as soon as it reached Sweden.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Interwar period [ edit ] Refugees from the Spanish Civil War at the War Resisters' International children's refuge in the French Pyrenees Organizations [ edit ] Main articles: Merchants of death , Nye Committee , and Neutrality Acts of the 1930s A popular slogan was " merchants of death " alleging the promotion of war by armaments makers, based on a widely read nonfiction exposé Merchants of Death (1934), by H. C. Engelbrecht and F. C. Hanighen .

[ 34 ] The immense loss of life during the First World War for what became known as futile reasons caused a sea-change in public attitudes to militarism. Organizations formed at this time included War Resisters' International , [ 35 ] the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom , the No More War Movement , and the Peace Pledge Union (PPU). The League of Nations convened several disarmament conferences, such as the Geneva Conference . They achieved very little. However the Washington conference of 1921–1922 did successfully limit naval armaments of the major powers during the 1920s.

[ 36 ] The Women's International League for Peace and Freedom helped convince the U.S. Senate to launch an influential investigation by the Nye Committee to the effect that the munitions industry and Wall Street financiers had promoted American entry into World War I to cover their financial investments. The immediate result was a series of laws imposing neutrality on American business if other countries went to war.

[ 37 ] Novels and films [ edit ] Pacifism and revulsion to war were popular sentiments in 1920s Britain. A number of novels and poems about the futility of war and the slaughter of youth by old fools were published, including Death of a Hero by Richard Aldington , Erich Maria Remarque 's All Quiet on the Western Front and Beverley Nichols ' Cry Havoc!

A 1933 University of Oxford debate on the proposed motion that "one must fight for King and country" reflected the changed mood when the motion was defeated.

Dick Sheppard established the Peace Pledge Union in 1934, renouncing war and aggression. The idea of collective security was also popular; instead of outright pacifism, the public generally exhibited a determination to stand up to aggression with economic sanctions and multilateral negotiations.

[ 38 ] Spanish Civil War [ edit ] The Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) was a major test of international pacifism, pacifist organizations (such as War Resisters' International and the Fellowship of Reconciliation ), and individuals such as José Brocca and Amparo Poch . Activists on the left often put their pacifism on pause in order to help the war effort of the Spanish government.  Shortly after the war ended, Simone Weil (despite volunteering for service on the Republican side) published The Iliad or the Poem of Force , which has been described as a pacifist manifesto.

[ 39 ] In response to the threat of fascism, pacifist thinkers such as Richard B. Gregg devised plans for a campaign of nonviolent resistance in the event of a fascist invasion or takeover.

[ 40 ] World War II [ edit ] Main article: Opposition to World War II An April 1940 peace strike at the University of California , Berkeley At the beginning of World War II , pacifist and anti-war sentiment declined in nations affected by the war. The communist-controlled American Peace Mobilization reversed its anti-war activism, however, when Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941. Although mainstream isolationist groups such as the America First Committee declined after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , a number of small religious and socialist groups continued their opposition to the war.

Bertrand Russell said that the necessity of defeating Adolf Hitler and the Nazis was a unique circumstance in which war was not the worst possible evil, and called his position "relative pacifism".

Albert Einstein wrote, "I loathe all armies and any kind of violence, yet I'm firmly convinced that at present these hateful weapons offer the only effective protection." [ 41 ] French pacifists André and Magda Trocmé helped to conceal hundreds of Jews fleeing the Nazis in the village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] After the war, the Trocmés were declared Righteous Among the Nations .

[ 42 ] Pacifists in Nazi Germany were treated harshly. German pacifist Carl von Ossietzky [ 44 ] and Norwegian pacifist Olaf Kullmann [ 45 ] (who remained active during the German occupation) died in concentration camps. Austrian farmer Franz Jägerstätter was executed in 1943 for refusing to serve in the Wehrmacht .

[ 46 ] Conscientious objectors and war tax resisters existed in both world wars, and the United States government allowed sincere objectors to serve in non-combat military roles. However, draft resisters who refused any cooperation with the war effort often spent much of each war in federal prisons. During World War II, pacifist leaders such as Dorothy Day and Ammon Hennacy of the Catholic Worker Movement urged young Americans not to enlist in the military. Peace movements have become widespread throughout the world since World War II, and their previously-radical beliefs are now a part of mainstream political discourse.

Anti-nuclear movement [ edit ] See also: History of the anti-nuclear movement and Anti-nuclear movement A nuclear fireball during a United States nuclear weapons test Peace movements emerged in Japan, combining in 1954 to form the Japanese Council Against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs. Japanese opposition to the Pacific nuclear-weapons tests was widespread, and an "estimated 35 million signatures were collected on petitions calling for bans on nuclear weapons".

[ 47 ] In the United Kingdom, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) held an inaugural public meeting at Central Hall Westminster on 17 February 1958 which was attended by five thousand people. After the meeting, several hundred demonstrated at Downing Street .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] The CND advocated the unconditional renunciation of the use, production, or dependence upon nuclear weapons by Britain, and the creation of a general disarmament convention. Although the country was progressing towards de-nuclearization, the CND declared that Britain should halt the flight of nuclear-armed planes, end nuclear testing, stop using missile bases, and not provide nuclear weapons to any other country.

The first Aldermaston March , organized by the CND, was held on Easter 1958. Several thousand people marched for four days from Trafalgar Square in London to the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment , near Aldermaston in Berkshire , to demonstrate their opposition to nuclear weapons.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] The Aldermaston marches continued into the late 1960s, when tens of thousands of people participated in the four-day marches.

[ 47 ] The CND tapped into the widespread popular fear of, and opposition to, nuclear weapons after the development of the first hydrogen bomb . During the late 1950s and early 1960s, anti-nuclear marches attracted large numbers of people.

1980 anti-nuclear protest march in Oxford Popular opposition to nuclear weapons produced a Labour Party resolution for unilateral nuclear disarmament at the 1960 party conference, [ 52 ] but the resolution was overturned the following year [ 53 ] and did not appear on later agendas. The experience disillusioned many anti-nuclear protesters who had previously put their hopes in the Labour Party.

Two years after the CND's formation, president Bertrand Russell resigned to form the Committee of 100 ; the committee planned to conduct sit-down demonstrations in central London and at nuclear bases around the UK. Russell said that the demonstrations were necessary because the press had become indifferent to the CND and large-scale, direct action could force the government to change its policy.

[ 54 ] One hundred prominent people, many in the arts, attached their names to the organization. Large numbers of demonstrators were essential to their strategy but police violence, the arrest and imprisonment of demonstrators, and preemptive arrests for conspiracy diminished support. Although several prominent people took part in sit-down demonstrations (including Russell, whose imprisonment at age 89 was widely reported), many of the 100 signatories were inactive.

[ 55 ] Members of Women Strike for Peace during the Cuban Missile Crisis Since the Committee of 100 had a non-hierarchical structure and no formal membership, many local groups assumed the name. Although this helped civil disobedience to spread, it produced policy confusion; as the 1960s progressed, a number of Committee of 100 groups protested against social issues not directly related to war and peace.

In 1961, at the height of the Cold War , about 50,000 women brought together by Women Strike for Peace marched in 60 cities in the United States to demonstrate against nuclear weapons. It was the century's largest national women's peace protest .

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] In 1958, Linus Pauling and his wife presented the United Nations with a petition signed by more than 11,000 scientists calling for an end to nuclear weapons testing . The 1961 Baby Tooth Survey , co-founded by Dr.

Louise Reiss , indicated that above-ground nuclear testing posed significant public health risks in the form of radioactive fallout spread primarily via milk from cows which ate contaminated grass.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Public pressure and the research results then led to a moratorium on above ground nuclear weapons testing, followed by the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty signed in 1963 by John F. Kennedy , Nikita Khrushchev , and Harold Macmillan .

[ 61 ] On the day that the treaty went into force, the Nobel Prize Committee awarded Pauling the Nobel Peace Prize : "Linus Carl Pauling, who ever since 1946 has campaigned ceaselessly, not only against nuclear weapons tests, not only against the spread of these armaments, not only against their very use but against all warfare as a means of solving international conflicts." [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Pauling founded the International League of Humanists in 1974; he was president of the scientific advisory board of the World Union for Protection of Life , and a signatory of the Dubrovnik-Philadelphia Statement .

1981 protest in Amsterdam against the deployment of Pershing II missiles in Europe On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in New York City's Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the Cold War arms race . It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] International Day of Nuclear-disarmament protests were held on June 20, 1983, at 50 locations across the United States.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In 1986, hundreds of people walked from Los Angeles to Washington, D.C.

in the Great Peace March for Global Nuclear Disarmament .

[ 68 ] Many Nevada Desert Experience protests and peace camps were held at the Nevada Test Site during the 1980s and 1990s.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Forty thousand anti-nuclear and anti-war protesters marched past the United Nations in New York on May 1, 2005, 60 years after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki .

[ 71 ] The protest was the largest anti-nuclear rally in the U.S. for several decades.

[ 72 ] In Britain, there were many protests against the government's proposal to replace the aging Trident weapons system with newer missiles. The largest of the protests had 100,000 participants and, according to polls, 59 percent of the public opposed the move.

[ 72 ] The International Conference on Nuclear Disarmament , held in Oslo in February 2008, was organized by the government of Norway , the Nuclear Threat Initiative , and the Hoover Institute . The conference, entitled "Achieving the Vision of a World Free of Nuclear Weapons", was intended to build consensus between states with and without nuclear weapons in the context of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons .

[ 73 ] In May 2010, 25,000 people (including members of peace organizations and 1945 atomic-bomb survivors) marched for about two kilometers from lower Manhattan to United Nations headquarters calling for the elimination of nuclear weapons.

[ 74 ] Vietnam War protests [ edit ] Main article: Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War Protesters against the Vietnam War prepare to march on the Pentagon on October 21, 1967.

The anti-Vietnam War peace movement began during the 1960s in the United States, opposing U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . Some within the movement advocated a unilateral withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam .

Opposition to the Vietnam War aimed to unite groups opposed to U.S. anti-communism, imperialism , capitalism and colonialism , such as New Left groups and the Catholic Worker Movement . Others, such as Stephen Spiro , opposed the war based on the just war theory .

In 1965, the movement began to gain national prominence. Provocative actions by police and protesters turned anti-war demonstrations in Chicago at the 1968 Democratic National Convention into a riot. News reports of American military abuses such as the 1968 My Lai massacre brought attention (and support) to the anti-war movement, which continued to expand for the duration of the conflict.

High-profile opposition to the Vietnam war turned to street protests in an effort to turn U.S. political opinion against the war. The protests gained momentum from the civil rights movement , which had organized to oppose segregation laws. They were fueled by a growing network of underground newspapers and large rock festivals, such as Woodstock . Opposition to the war moved from college campuses to middle-class suburbs, government institutions, and labor unions .

Europe in 1980s [ edit ] A very large peace movement emerged in East and West Europe in the 1980s, primarily in opposition to American plans to fight the Cold War by stationing nuclear missiles in Europe.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] Moscow supported the movement behind the scenes, but did not control it.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] However, communist-sponsored peace movements in Eastern Europe metamorphosed into genuine peace movements calling not only for détente, but for democracy. According to Hania Fedorowicz, they played an important role in East Germany and other countries in resurrecting civil society, and helped instigate the successful 1989 peaceful revolutions in Eastern Europe.

[ 80 ] Peace movements by country [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Further information: Anti-nuclear movement in Australia and Peace movements in Australia The first significant peace organisations emerged in 1899 after Australia sent troops to help the United Kingdom fight the Boer War in South Africa. The Melbourne Peace and Humanity Society (PHS) was founded in 1900, followed by the Anti-War League (AWL) in New South Wales in 1902.   The Melbourne Peace Society (MPS) was established in 1905, with similar groups forming in other cities. Women played important roles, though mostly in organisational rather than leadership capacities. Notable early female leaders included Rose Scott and Marian Harwood.

[ 81 ] With the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the Australian Peace Alliance (APA) was formed in 1914, initially with 13 affiliated groups, growing to 54 by 1918. The APA included pacifists, socialists, liberal Christians, trade unions, and women’s groups such as the Sisterhood of International Peace (SIP) and the Women’s Peace Army (WPA).  The anti-conscription movement was a major focus during WWI, with groups like the No-Conscription Fellowship supporting conscientious objectors  The peace movement diversified, with Christian pacifists and secular organisations like the League of Nations Union (LNU) and the Victorian Council Against War and Fascism (VCAWF) working together.

[ 82 ] The rise of fascism and the approach of WWII caused divisions within the movement, particularly between absolute pacifists and those who supported collective security against aggression. Women’s groups, especially the Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF), played a prominent role in international disarmament campaigns, including a major petition in 1931.

[ 83 ] The peace movement was revitalised in the 1960s, primarily in opposition to the Vietnam War and conscription. The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) was founded in 1960, later merging into the broader anti-Vietnam War movement.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Canada [ edit ] Canadian pacifist Agnes Macphail was the first woman elected to the House of Commons . Macphail objected to the Royal Military College of Canada in 1931 on pacifist grounds.

[ 86 ] Macphail was also the first female Canadian delegate to the League of Nations , where she worked with the World Disarmament Committee. Despite her pacifism, she voted for Canada to enter World War II. The Canadian Peace Congress (1949–1990) was a leading organizer of the Canadian peace movement, particularly under the leadership of James Gareth Endicott (its president until 1971).

[ 87 ] For over a century Canada has had a diverse peace movement, with coalitions and networks in many cities, towns, and regions. The largest national umbrella organization is the Canadian Peace Alliance , whose 140 member groups include large city-based coalitions, small grassroots groups, national and local unions and faith, environmental and student groups for a combined membership of over four million. The alliance and its member groups have led opposition to the war on terror . The CPA opposed Canada's participation in the war in Afghanistan and Canadian complicity in what it views as misguided and destructive United States foreign policy.

[ 88 ] Canada has also been home to a growing movement of Palestinian solidarity, marked by an increasing number of grassroots Jewish groups opposed to Israeli policies.

[ 89 ] Germany [ edit ] 1981 protest in Bonn against the nuclear arms race between NATO and the Soviet Union Germany developed a strong pacifist movement in the late 19th century; it was suppressed during the Nazi era. After 1945 in East Germany it was controlled by the communist government.

[ 90 ] During the Cold War (1947–1989), the West German peace movement concentrated on the abolition of nuclear technology (particularly nuclear weapons) from West Germany and Europe. Most activists criticized both the United States and the Soviet Union. According to conservative critics, the movement had been infiltrated by Stasi agents.

[ 91 ] After 1989, the ideal of peace was espoused by Green parties across Europe. Peace sometimes played a significant role in policy-making; in 2002, the German Greens convinced Chancellor Gerhard Schröder to oppose German involvement in Iraq. The Greens controlled the German Foreign Ministry under Joschka Fischer (a Green, and Germany's most popular politician at the time), who sought to limit German involvement in the war on terror. He joined French President Jacques Chirac , whose opposition was decisive in the UN Security Council resolution to limit support for the 2003 invasion of Iraq .

India [ edit ] The world's longest peaceful movement was the Bijolia movement , which continued for 44 years.

Israel [ edit ] Main article: Arab–Israeli peace projects This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( May 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Israeli–Palestinian and Arab–Israeli conflicts have existed since the dawn of Zionism , particularly since the 1948 formation of the state of Israel and the 1967 Six-Day War . The mainstream peace movement in Israel is Peace Now ( Shalom Akhshav ), which tends to support the Labour Party or Meretz . After the Second intifada and Palestinian rejections of peace proposals, Tamar Hermann, director of the Guttman Center for Public Opinion and Policy Research at the Israel Democracy Institute said that Israelis began to lose faith in the feasibility of peace although Israelis support the idea of peace.

[ 92 ] Peace Now was founded in the aftermath of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat 's visit to Jerusalem, when it was felt that an opportunity for peace could be missed. Prime Minister Menachem Begin acknowledged that on the eve of his departure for the Camp David summit with Sadat and US President Jimmy Carter , Peace Now rallies in Tel Aviv (which drew a crowd of 100,000, the largest peace rally in Israel to date) played a major role in his decision to withdraw from the Sinai Peninsula and dismantle Israeli settlements there. Peace Now supported Begin for a time and hailed him as a peacemaker, but turned against him when the  Sinai withdrawal was accompanied by an accelerated campaign of land confiscation and settlement-building on the West Bank .

Peace Now advocates a negotiated peace with the Palestinians . This was originally worded vaguely, with no definition of "the Palestinians" and who represents them. Peace Now was slow to join the dialogue with the PLO begun by groups such as the Israeli Council for Israeli-Palestinian Peace and the Hadash coalition; only in 1988 did the group accept that the PLO is the body regarded by the Palestinians as their representative.

During the First Intifada , Peace Now held a number of rallies to protest the Israeli army and call for a negotiated withdrawal from the Palestinian territories ; the group attacked Defence Minister Yitzhak Rabin for his hard-line stance. After Rabin became prime minister, signed the Oslo Agreement and shook Yasser Arafat 's hand on the White House lawn, however, Peace Now mobilized strong public support for him. Since Rabin's November 1995 assassination, rallies on the anniversary of his death (organized by the Rabin Family Foundation) have become the Israeli peace movement's main event. Peace Now is currently known for its struggle against the expansion of settlement outposts on the West Bank.

Gush Shalom (the Peace Bloc) is a left-wing group which developed from the Jewish-Arab Committee Against Deportations, which protested the deportation without trial of 415 Palestinian activists to Lebanon in December 1992 and put up a protest tent in front of the prime minister's office in Jerusalem for two months until the government allowed the deportees to return. The committee then decided to continue as a general peace movement opposing the occupation and advocating the creation of an independent Palestine side-by-side with Israel in its pre-1967 borders , with an undivided Jerusalem the capital of both states. Gush Shalom is also descended from the Israeli Council for Israeli-Palestinian Peace (ICIPP), founded in 1975. Its founders included a group of dissidents which included Major-General Mattityahu Peled , a member of the IDF General Staff during the 1967 Six-Day War; economist Ya'akov Arnon , who headed the Zionist Federation in the Netherlands before coming to Israel in 1948 and the former director-general of the Israeli Ministry of Finance and board chair of the Israeli Electricity Company; and Aryeh Eliav , Labour Party secretary-general until he broke with the Prime Minister Golda Meir over Palestinian issues. The ICIPP's founders joined a group of young, grassroots peace activists who had been active against Israeli occupation since 1967. The bridge between them was journalist and former Knesset member Uri Avnery . Its main achievement was the opening of dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). Gush Shalom activists are currently involved in the daily struggle in Palestinian villages which have had their land confiscated by the West Bank barrier . They and members of other Israeli movements such as Ta'ayush and Anarchists Against the Wall joining Palestinian villagers in Bil'in in weekly marches to protest the village's land confiscation.

After the 2014 Gaza War , a group of Israeli women founded Women Wage Peace with the goal of reaching a "bilaterally acceptable" peace agreement between Israel and Palestine.

[ 93 ] The movement has worked to build connections with Palestinians, reaching out to women and men from a variety of religions and political backgrounds.

[ 94 ] Its activities have included a collective hunger strike outside Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 's residence [ 95 ] and a protest march from Northern Israel to Jerusalem.

[ 94 ] In May 2017, Women Wage Peace had over 20,000 members and supporters.

[ 96 ] New Zealand [ edit ] Notable peace activists include Sonya Davies , Kate Dewes , Elsie Locke , Maire Leadbeater , Bunny McDairmid , Laurie Salas , and Jools and Lynda Topp .

This small Pacific nation has a strong aspiration for global peace, rooted in the Māori principle of Rongomaraeroa (the Long Pathway to Peace).

[ 97 ] New Zealand women who were part of the suffrage movement played a significant role in establishing the World Court, a permanent arbitration court for peaceful resolution of international disputes.

[ 98 ] Stories of the horrors recounted by soldiers and nurses returning from both world wars, along with the impact of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , deeply ingrained the nation's commitment to peace. Military involvement in subsequent conflicts has primarily focused on peacekeeping, non-combat training, logistical support, medical assistance, and post-war reconstruction teams.

[ 99 ] In response to these events, a peace movement emerged, starting from grassroots groups like CORSO across the country, with Christchurch being a prominent hub. Christchurch was the first city in New Zealand to be declared nuclear-free and became the nation's inaugural peace city in 2002.

[ 97 ] The city's botanical gardens are home to a world peace bell and a peace train.

[ 100 ] During the 1980s, the Sumner Peace Group, Rangiora Peace Group, and Lyttelton Peace Group were active advocates for peace, supporting various causes such as Citizens for Demilitarisation of Harewood, Campaign Against Foreign Control of Aotearoa, and Anti-Bases Campaign.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] In 1973, the 'Battle of Harewood' saw individuals from peace movements protesting at two Operation Deep Freeze air defence bases at Harewood Airport and the nearby Weedons Stores Depot.

[ 103 ] Twenty-three individuals were arrested during the clashes. This event could be seen as a precursor to the protests at Waihopai Station spy-base and the unrest during the 1981 Springbok Tour .

[ 104 ] The Cuban missile crisis and sinking of the Rainbow Warrior by France strengthened the country's nuclear-free stance and garnered bipartisan support.

[ 105 ] This depth of sentiment remains robust today.

[ 106 ] As recently as 2024, Foreign Minister Winston Peters emphasized the importance of seeking peaceful solutions, highlighting the lesson learned from the Second World War that dialogue is preferable to conflict.

[ 107 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Protesters against the Iraq War in London From 1934 the Peace Pledge Union gained many adherents to its pledge "I renounce war and will never support or sanction another." Its support diminished considerably with the outbreak of war in 1939, but it remained the focus of pacifism in the post-war years.

After World War II, peace efforts in the United Kingdom were initially focused on the dissolution of the British Empire and the rejection of imperialism by the United States and the Soviet Union. The anti-nuclear movement sought to opt out of the Cold War, rejecting "Britain's Little Independent Nuclear Deterrent" (BLIND) on the grounds that it contradicted mutual assured destruction .

Although the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign , (VSC, led by Tariq Ali ) led several large demonstrations against the Vietnam War in 1967 and 1968, the first anti-Vietnam demonstration was at the American Embassy in London in 1965.

[ 108 ] In 1976, the Lucas Plan (led by Mike Cooley ) sought to transform production at Lucas Aerospace from arms to socially-useful production.

The peace movement was later associated with peace camps , as the Labour Party moved to the center under Prime Minister Tony Blair . By early 2003, the peace and anti-war movements (grouped as the Stop the War Coalition ) were powerful enough to cause several of Blair's cabinet to resign and hundreds of Labour MPs to vote against their government. Blair's motion to support the U.S. plan to invade Iraq continued due to support from the Conservative Party .

Protests against the Iraq War were particularly vocal in Britain. Polls suggested that without UN Security Council approval, the UK public was opposed to involvement. Over two million people protested in Hyde Park; the previous largest demonstration in the UK had about 600,000 participants.

The primary function of the National Peace Council was to provide opportunities for consultation and joint activities by its affiliated members, to help inform public opinion on the issues of the day, and to convey to the government the views of its members. The NPC disbanded in 2000 and was replaced the following year by the "Network for Peace", set up to continue the NPC's networking role.

[ 109 ] United States [ edit ] See also: Pacifism in the United States and Opposition to military action against Iran Anti-war march in St. Paul, Minnesota , March 19, 2011 Near the end of the Cold War, U.S. peace activists focused on slowing the nuclear arms race in the hope of reducing the possibility of nuclear war between the U.S. and the USSR. As the Reagan administration accelerated military spending and adopted a tough stance toward Russia, the Nuclear Freeze campaign and Beyond War movement sought to educate the public on the inherent risk and cost of Reagan's policy. Outreach to individual citizens in the Soviet Union and mass meetings using satellite-link technology were major parts of peacemaking activity during the 1980s. In 1981, the activist Thomas began the longest uninterrupted peace vigil in U.S. history.

[ 110 ] He was later joined at Lafayette Square in Washington, D.C. by anti-nuclear activists Concepción Picciotto and Ellen Thomas .

[ 111 ] In response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, President George H. W. Bush began preparing for war in the region. Peace activists were starting to gain traction with popular rallies, especially on the West Coast, just before the Gulf War began in February 1991. The ground war ended in less than a week with a lopsided Allied victory, and a media-incited wave of patriotic sentiment washed over the nascent protest movement.

During the 1990s, peacemaker priorities included seeking a solution to the Israeli–Palestinian impasse , belated efforts at humanitarian assistance to war-torn regions such as Bosnia and Rwanda, and aid to post-war Iraq. American peace activists brought medicine into Iraq in defiance of U.S. law, resulting in heavy fines and imprisonment for some. The principal groups involved included Voices in the Wilderness and the Fellowship of Reconciliation .

Before and after the Iraq War began in 2003, a concerted protest effort was formed in the United States. A series of protests across the globe was held on February 15, 2003 , with events in about 800 cities. The following month, just before the American- and British-led invasion of Iraq, "The World Says No to War" protest attracted as many as 500,000 protestors to cities across the U.S. After the war ended, many protest organizations persisted because of the American military and corporate presence in Iraq.

Protesters against the Iraq War in Washington, D.C., in 2007 American activist groups, including United for Peace and Justice , Code Pink (Women Say No To War), Iraq Veterans Against the War , Military Families Speak Out (MFSO), Not in Our Name , A.N.S.W.E.R.

, Veterans for Peace , and The World Can't Wait continued to protest against the Iraq War. Protest methods included rallies and marches, impeachment petitions, the staging of a war-crimes tribunal in New York to investigate crimes and alleged abuses of power by the Bush administration , bringing Iraqi women to the U.S. to tell their side of the story, independent filmmaking, high-profile appearances by anti-war activists such as Scott Ritter , Janis Karpinski , and Dahr Jamail , resisting military recruiting on college campuses, withholding taxes, mass letter-writing to legislators and newspapers, blogging, music, and guerrilla theatre . Independent media producers continued to broadcast, podcast, and web-host programs about the anti-war movement.

The Campaign Against Sanctions and Military Intervention in Iran was founded in late 2005. By August 2007, fears of an imminent United States or Israeli attack on Iran had increased to such a level that Nobel Prize winners Shirin Ebadi (2003 Peace Prize), Mairead Corrigan-Maguire and Betty Williams (joint 1976 Peace Prize), Harold Pinter (Literature 2005), Jody Williams (1997 Peace Prize) and anti-war groups including the Israeli Committee for a Middle East Free from Atomic, Biological and Chemical Weapons, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, CASMII and Code Pink warned about what they considered the threat of a "war of an unprecedented scale, this time against Iran", Expressing concern that an attack on Iran with nuclear weapons had "not been ruled out", they called for "the dispute about Iran's nuclear program , to be resolved through peaceful means" and for Israel, "as the only Middle Eastern state suspected of possession of nuclear weapons ", to join the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty .

[ 112 ] Although President Barack Obama continued the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, attendance at peace marches "declined precipitously".

[ 113 ] Social scientists Michael T. Heaney and Fabio Rojas noted that from 2007 to 2009, "the largest antiwar rallies shrank from hundreds of thousands of people to thousands, and then to only hundreds." [ 114 ] See also [ edit ] Peace portal American Friends Service Committee Appeasement Capitalist peace Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Global peace system Imagine Piano Peace Project International Fellowship of Reconciliation Service Civil International International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons International security List of anti-war organizations List of peace activists Make love, not war Opposition to World War I Opposition to World War II Opposition to the Iraq War Opposition to the War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) Pacifism Pacifism in the United States Pacifism in Germany Peace and conflict studies Peace Organisation of Australia Peace Pledge Union , in UK Peace symbols Peace flag Peace Ship Peaceworker List of peace activists Right of conquest Soviet influence on the peace movement Women's International League for Peace and Freedom World peace References [ edit ] ^ Michael Howard, The Invention of Peace: Reflections on War and International Order (2001) pp1-6.

^ Daniel Francis Callahan.

"Peace of God" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Eric Roberts.

"Quaker Traditions of Pacifism and Nonviolence" . Stanford University. Archived from the original on 2013-12-03 . Retrieved 2013-12-02 .

^ Hinsley, F. H.

Power and the Pursuit of Peace: Theory and Practice in the History of Relations between States (1967) pp. 46–61.

^ Hinsley,
pp.62-80.

^ F. H. Hinsley, Power and the Pursuit of Peace: Theory and Practice in the History of Relations between States (1967) pp 13–80.

^ Ceadel, Martin (1996).

The Origins of War Prevention: The British Peace Movement and International Relations, 1730–1854 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198226741 . Retrieved 2013-02-07 .

^ Pacifism to 1914: an overview by Peter Brock. Toronto, Thistle Printing, 1994. (pp. 38–9).

^ The Long Road to Greenham: Feminism and Anti-Militarism in Britain since 1820 , by Jill Liddington . London, Virago, 1989 ISBN 0-86068-688-4 (pp. 14–5).

^ Cortright, David (2008).

Peace: A History of Movements and Ideas . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781139471855 . Retrieved 2013-02-07 .

^ André Durand (October 31, 1996).

"Gustave Moynier and the peace societies" .

International Review of the Red Cross (314).

International Committee of the Red Cross . Archived from the original on 2016-03-08 . Retrieved 2013-12-02 .

^ Gavin B. Henderson, "The Pacifists of the Fifties".

Journal of Modern History 9.3 (1937): 314–341.

JSTOR 1898869 .

^ Eric W. Sager,  "The Social Origins of Victorian Pacifism".

Victorian Studies 23#2 (1980), pp. 211–36, JSTOR 3827086 .

^ Richard R. Laurence, "Bertha von Suttner and the peace movement in Austria to World War I".

Austrian History Yearbook 23 (1992): 181–201.

^ M. M. Sankhdher, "Gandhism: A Political Interpretation", Gandhi Marg (1972) pp. 68–74 ^ Murthy, B. Srinivasa, ed. (1987).

Mahatma Gandhi and Leo Tolstoy: Letters (PDF) . Long Beach, California: Long Beach Publications.

ISBN 0-941910-03-2 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

^ Green, Martin Burgess (1986).

The origins of nonviolence: Tolstoy and Gandhi in their historical settings . Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 978-0-271-00414-3 . Retrieved 17 January 2012 .

^ Asirvatham, Eddy (1995).

Political Theory . S.chand.

ISBN 81-219-0346-7 .

^ James Geary, Geary's Guide to the World's Great Aphorists (2007) p. 87 ^ William Borman (1986).

Gandhi and non-violence . SUNY Press. p. 253.

ISBN 9780887063312 .

^ Faisal Devji, The Impossible Indian: Gandhi and the Temptation of Violence (Harvard University Press; 2012) ^ reprinted in Louis Fischer, ed.

The Essential Gandhi: An Anthology of His Writings on His Life, Work, and Ideas 2002 (reprint edition) p. 311.

^ Stanley Wolpert (2002).

Gandhi's passion: the life and legacy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press. p. 197.

ISBN 9780199728725 .

^ Herman, 56–7 ^ F. H. Hinsley, Power and the Pursuit of Peace: Theory and Practice in the History of Relations between States (1967) pp 269–308.

^ "Pacifism vs. Patriotism in Women's Organizations in the 1920s" .

www.binghamton.edu .

Archived 2002-11-08 at archive.today .

^ Chatfield, Charles, "Encyclopedia of American Foreign Policy" 2002 Archived 2007-10-14 at the Wayback Machine .

^ David Lanier Lewis, The public image of Henry Ford: An American folk hero and his company (Wayne State University Press, 1976) p. 78–92.

^ Allan Nevins and Frank Ernest Hill, Ford: Expansion and Challenge, 1915–1933 (Charles Scribner's Sons, 1957)  pp 26–54.

^ "Examining the American peace movement prior to World War I" .

www.americamagazine.org . April 6, 2017.

^ Steven Watts, The people's tycoon: Henry Ford and the American century (Vintage, 2009), pp 236–237.

^ Watts, The people's tycoon: Henry Ford and the American century (2005) pp 226–40.

^ Burnet Hershey, The Odyssey of Henry Ford and the Great Peace Ship (Taplinger, 1967), ISBN 1299115713 ^ Engelbrecht, H.C.; Hanighen, F.C. (1934).

Merchants of Death .

Mises Institute .

(free to download as pdf or epub) ^ Radical Pacifism: The War Resisters League and Gandhian Nonviolence in America, 1915–1963 by Scott H. Bennett. New York, Syracuse  University Press, 2003, ISBN 0-8156-3028-X , p.18.

^ Neil Earle, "Public Opinion for Peace: Tactics of Peace Activists at the Washington Conference on Naval Armament (1921-1922)." Journal of Church and State 40#1 (1998), pp. 149–69, online .

^ John Edward Wiltz, "The Nye Committee Revisited." Historian 23.2 (1961): 211–233 online .

^ "Pacifism" .

University of Wellington .

^ "War and the Iliad" . The New York Review of books . Retrieved 29 September 2009 .

^ Lynd, Staughton.

Nonviolence in America: a documentary history , Bobbs-Merrill, 1966, (PPS. 271–296).

^ Quoted on Albert Einstein Archived 2007-10-09 at the Wayback Machine at Peace Pledge Union, and but also discussed in detail in articles in Einstein, Albert (1954), Ideas and Opinions , New York: Random House, ISBN 0-517-00393-7 ^ a b Lest Innocent Blood Be Shed: The Story of Le Chambon and How Goodness Happened There Philip P. Hallie, (1979)  New York: Harper & Row, ISBN 0-06-011701-X ^ Brock and Young, p. 220.

^ Brock and Young, p.99.

^ Brock and Socknat, pp. 402–3.

^ In Solitary Witness: The Life and Death of Franz Jägerstätter by Gordon Zahn . Springfield, Illinois: Templegate Publishers.

ISBN 0-87243-141-X .

^ a b Jim Falk (1982).

Global Fission: The Battle Over Nuclear Power , Oxford University Press, pp. 96–97.

^ John Minnion and Philip Bolsover (eds.) The CND Story , Allison and Busby , 1983, ISBN 0-85031-487-9 ^ "Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND)" . Spartacus-Educational.com.

Archived from the original on 2011-05-14 . Retrieved 2019-02-27 .

^ "The history of CND" .

cnduk.org .

^ "Early defections in march to Aldermaston" .

Guardian Unlimited . 1958-04-05.

^ April Carter, Direct Action and Liberal Democracy , London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973, p. 64.

^ Robert McKenzie, "Power in the Labour Party: The Issue of 'Intra-Party Democracy'", in Dennis Kavanagh, The Politics of the Labour Party , Routledge, 2013.

^ , Bertrand Russell, "Civil Disobedience", New Statesman , 17 February 1961 ^ Frank E. Myers, "Civil Disobedience and Organizational Change: The British Committee of 100", Political Science Quarterly , Vol. 86, No. 1. (Mar., 1971), pp. 92–112 ^ Woo, Elaine (January 30, 2011).

"Dagmar Wilson dies at 94; organizer of women's disarmament protesters" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Hevesi, Dennis (January 23, 2011).

"Dagmar Wilson, Anti-Nuclear Leader, Dies at 94" .

The New York Times .

^ Louise Zibold Reiss (November 24, 1961).

"Strontium-90 Absorption by Deciduous Teeth: Analysis of teeth provides a practicable method of monitoring strontium-90 uptake by human populations" (PDF) .

Science .

134 (3491): 1669– 1673.

doi : 10.1126/science.134.3491.1669 .

PMID 14491339 . Retrieved October 13, 2009 .

^ Thomas Hager (November 29, 2007).

"Strontium-90" . Oregon State University Libraries Special Collections . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ Thomas Hager (November 29, 2007).

"The Right to Petition" . Oregon State University Libraries Special Collections . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ Jim Falk (1982).

Global Fission: The Battle Over Nuclear Power , Oxford University Press, p. 98.

^ Linus Pauling (October 10, 1963).

"Notes by Linus Pauling. October 10, 1963" . Oregon State University Libraries Special Collections . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ Jerry Brown and Rinaldo Brutoco (1997).

Profiles in Power: The Anti-nuclear Movement and the Dawn of the Solar Age , Twayne Publishers, pp. 191–192.

^ Jonathan Schell.

The Spirit of June 12 Archived 2019-05-12 at the Wayback Machine The Nation , July 2, 2007.

^ "1982 - a million people march in New York City" . Archived from the original on June 16, 2010.

^ Harvey Klehr.

Far Left of Center: The American Radical Left Today Transaction Publishers, 1988, p. 150.

^ 1,400 Anti-nuclear protesters arrested Miami Herald , June 21, 1983.

^ Hundreds of Marchers Hit Washington in Finale of Nationwaide Peace March Gainesville Sun , November 16, 1986.

^ Robert Lindsey.

438 "Protesters are Arrested at Nevada Nuclear Test Site" , The New York Times , February 6, 1987.

^ "493 Arrested at Nevada Nuclear Test Site" , The New York Times , April 20, 1992.

^ Anti-Nuke Protests in New York Fox News , May 2, 2005.

^ a b Lawrence S. Wittner .

A rebirth of the anti-nuclear weapons movement? Portents of an anti-nuclear upsurge Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , 7 December 2007 Archived 2010-06-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ "International Conference on Nuclear Disarmament" .

disarmament.nrpa.no . February 2008. Archived from the original on 2011-01-04.

^ A-bomb survivors join 25,000-strong anti-nuclear march through New York Archived 2013-05-12 at the Wayback Machine Mainichi Daily News , May 4, 2010.

^ Martin Baumeister, and Benjamin Ziemann, "Introduction: Peace Movements in Southern Europe during the 1970s and 1980s." Journal of Contemporary History 56.3 (2021): 563–578.

^ Thomas Rochon, Mobilizing for Peace: The Antinuclear Movements in Western Europe (Princeton UP 1988.

^ Belinda Davis ,  "Europe Is a Peaceful Woman, America Is a War-Mongering Man? The 1980s Peace Movement in NATO-Allied Europe." European History–Gender History,” Themenportal Europäische Geschichte (2009) online .

^ Cyril E. Black, et al.

A History of Europe since World War II (2nd ed. 2000) pp 159–161.

^ David Cortright, "Assessing peace movement effectiveness in the 1980s." Peace & Change 16.1 (1991): 46–63.

^ Hania Fedorowicz, "East-West Dialogue: Detente from Below" Peace Research Reviews (1991) 11#6 pp 1–80.

^ Judith Smart,  "Anti-War and Peace Movements"   in eMelbourne (2008) online ^ Kate Laing, Sisters in Peace: The Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom in Australia, 1915–2015 (ANU Press, 2023) ^ Carolyn Anne Rasmussen,  " Defending the bad against the worse: The peace movement in Australia in the 1930s-- its origins, structure and development." (PhD Dissertation, University of Melbourne; ProQuest Dissertations & Theses,  1984. 8429820).

^ Ralph V. Summy, "Militancy and the Australian Peace Movement, 1960–67" Politics 5#2  (1970): 148–62.  doi.org/10.1080/00323267008401209 ^ Hillary Summy, "
Peace Movements 1900 to 1960" The Encyclopedia of Women & Leadership in Twentieth-Century Australia (2014) online ^ Preston, Canada's RMC: A History of the Royal Military College (University of Toronto Press, 1969) ^ Victor Huard, "The Canadian Peace Congress and the Challenge to Postwar Consensus, 1948–1953." Peace & Change 19.1 (1994): 25–49.

^ Joanne Dufay and Sheena Lambert, "Women in the Canadian Peace Alliance." Canadian Woman Studies 9.1 (1988).

^ Gary Moffatt, A history of the peace movement in Canada (Grape Vine Press, 1982).

^ Benjamin Ziemann, "German Pacifism in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries." Neue Politische Literatur 2015.3 (2015): 415–437.

online ^ Wilfried von Bredow, "The Peace Movement in the Federal Republic of Germany", Armed Forces & Society (1982) 9#1 pp 33–48 ^ "The Second Intifada: A defining event that reshaped the nation" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 2020-09-17 . Retrieved 2024-05-15 .

^ "Mission Statement | Women Wage Peace" .

Women Wage Peace . Retrieved 2017-07-16 .

^ a b "These Israeli women marched from the Lebanese border to Jerusalem. Here's why" .

Washington Post . Retrieved 2017-07-16 .

^ "Operation Protective Fast: Striving for peace between Israelis and Palestinians" .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . Retrieved 2017-07-16 .

^ "A women's movement that is trying to bring peace to Israel | Latest News & Updates at Daily News & Analysis" .

dna . 2017-05-11 . Retrieved 2017-07-16 .

^ a b "Christchurch: A Peace City" .

Christchurch City Council . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ "Road to Peace: Timeline" (PDF) .

Christchurch City Council . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ "New Zealand to extend NZDF deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan and 3 peacekeeping missions" .

The official website of the New Zealand Government . 17 September 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ Reid, Joy (4 September 2022).

"Yusuf Islam, Cat Stevens, donates actual peace train to Christchurch" .

1 News . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ Persson, Linda (2003).

"Sumner Peace Group History" (PDF) .

Disarmament & Security Centre . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ King, Chris (June 1997).

"The nuclear -freeing of Rangiora" (PDF) .

Disarmament & Security Centre . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ McCarthy, Peter (2007).

"Police Response to Antarctica" (PDF) .

University of Canterbury . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ "1973 – key events: other 1973 events" .

Ministry for Culture and Heritage . 9 May 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ "Protest and dissent" . Ministry for Culture and Heritage. 28 July 2014 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ "Last decade" .

Ministry for Culture and Heritage . 17 May 2017 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ "We must reject and resist those that seek to conquer and control' Peters says at Gallipoli" .

Stuff . 25 April 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ Comment Magazine . (Communist) "The University of Alabama-Bounds Law Library" . Archived from the original on 2012-08-28 . Retrieved 2012-09-05 .

^ "About us" . Network for Peace.

^ Colman McCarthy (February 8, 2009).

"From Lafayette Square Lookout, He Made His War Protest Permanent" .

The Washington Post .

^ "The Oracles of Pennsylvania Avenue - Al Jazeera World - Al Jazeera English" . Archived from the original on 2012-07-10.

^ "For a Middle East free of all Weapons of Mass Destruction" .

Campaign Against Sanctions and Military Intervention in Iran . 2007-08-06 . Retrieved 2007-11-03 .

^ Brad Plumer (August 29, 2013).

"How Obama demobilized the antiwar movement" .

The Washington Post .

^ Gene Healy (December 14, 2015).

"How Partisanship Killed the Anti-War Movement" . Cato Institute.

Further reading [ edit ] Bajaj, Monisha, ed.

Encyclopedia of peace education (IAP, 2008).

Bussey, Gertrude, and Margaret Tims.

Pioneers for Peace: Women's International League for Peace and Freedom 1915-1965 (Oxford: Alden Press, 1980).

Carter, April.

Peace movements: International protest and world politics since 1945 (Routledge, 2014).

Cortright, David.

Peace: A history of movements and ideas (Cambridge University Press, 2008).

Costin, Lela B. "Feminism, pacifism, internationalism and the 1915 International Congress of Women." Women's Studies International Forum 5#3-4 (1982).

Durand, André. " Gustave Moynier and the peace societies ". In: International Review of the Red Cross (1996), no. 314, p. 532–550 Giugni, Marco.

Social protest and policy change: Ecology, antinuclear, and peace movements in comparative perspective (Rowman & Littlefield, 2004).

Hinsley, F. H.

Power and the Pursuit of Peace: Theory and Practice in the History of Relations between States (Cambridge UP, 1967) online .

Howard, Michael.

The Invention of Peace: Reflections on War and International Order (2001) excerpt Jakopovich, Daniel.

Revolutionary Peacemaking: Writings for a Culture of Peace and Nonviolence (Democratic Thought, 2019).

ISBN 978-953-55134-2-1 Kulnazarova, Aigul, and Vesselin Popovski, eds.

The Palgrave handbook of global approaches to peace (Palgrave Macmillan, 2019).

Kurtz, Lester R., and Jennifer Turpin, eds.

Encyclopedia of violence, peace, and conflict (Academic Press, 1999).

Marullo, Sam, and John Lofland , editors, Peace Action in the Eighties: Social Science Perspectives (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1990).

ISBN 0-8135-1561-0 Moorehead, Caroline.

Troublesome People: The Warriors of Pacifism (Bethesda, MD: Adler & Adler, 1987).

Schlabach, Gerald W. "Christian Peace Theology and Nonviolence toward the Truth: Internal Critique amid Interfaith Dialogue." Journal of Ecumenical Studies 53.4 (2018): 541–568.

online Vellacott, Jo. "A place for pacifism and transnationalism in feminist theory: the early work of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom." Women History Review 2.1 (1993): 23–56.

online Weitz, Eric.

A World Divided: The Global Struggle for Human Rights in the Age of Nation States (Princeton University Press, 2019).

online reviews National studies [ edit ] Further information: Pacifism in the United States and Pacifism in Germany Bennett, Scott H.

Radical Pacifism: The War Resisters League and Gandhian Nonviolence in America, 1915–45 (Syracuse UP, 2003).

Brown, Heloise.

'The truest form of patriotism': Pacifist feminism in Britain, 1870-1902 (Manchester University Press, 2003).

Ceadel, Martin.

The origins of war prevention: the British peace movement and international relations, 1730-1854 (Oxford University Press, 1996).

Ceadel, Martin.

Semi-detached idealists: the British peace movement and international relations, 1854-1945 (Oxford University Press, 2000) online .

Ceadel, Martin. "The First British Referendum: The Peace Ballot, 1934-5." English Historical Review 95.377 (1980): 810–839.

online Chatfield, Charles, ed.

Peace Movements in America (New York: Schocken Books, 1973).

ISBN 0-8052-0386-9 Chatfield, Charles.  with Robert Kleidman.

The American Peace Movement: Ideals and Activism (New York: Twayne Publishers, 1992).

ISBN 0-8057-3852-5 Chickering, Roger.

Imperial Germany and a World Without War: The Peace Movement and German Society, 1892-1914 (Princeton University Press, 2015).

Clinton, Michael. "Coming to Terms with 'Pacifism': The French Case, 1901–1918." Peace & Change 26.1 (2001): 1–30.

Cooper, Sandi E. "Pacifism in France, 1889-1914: international peace as a human right." French historical studies (1991): 359–386.

online Davis, Richard. "The British Peace Movement in the Interwar Years." Revue Française de Civilisation Britannique. French Journal of British Studies 22.XXII-3 (2017).

online Davy, Jennifer Anne. "Pacifist thought and gender ideology in the political biographies of women peace activists in Germany, 1899-1970: introduction." Journal of Women's History 13.3 (2001): 34–45.

Eastman, Carolyn, "Fight Like a Man: Gender and Rhetoric in the Early Nineteenth-Century American Peace Movement", American Nineteenth Century History 10 (Sept. 2009), 247–71.

Fontanel, Jacques. "An underdeveloped peace movement: The case of France." Journal of Peace Research 23.2 (1986): 175–182.

Hall, Mitchell K., ed.

Opposition to War: An Encyclopedia of US Peace and Antiwar Movements (2 vol. ABC-CLIO, 2018).

Howlett, Charles F., and Glen Zeitzer.

The American Peace Movement: History and Historiography (American Historical Association, 1985).

Kimball, Jeffrey.  "The Influence of Ideology on Interpretive Disagreement: A Report on a Survey of Diplomatic, Military and Peace Historians on the Causes of 20th Century U. S. Wars", History Teacher 17#3 (1984) pp. 355–384 DOI: 10.2307/493146 online Laity, Paul.

The British Peace Movement 1870-1914 (Clarendon Press, 2002).

Locke, Elsie.

Peace People: A History of Peace Activities in New Zealand (Christchurch, NZ: Hazard Press, 1992).

ISBN 0-908790-20-1 Lukowitz, David C. "British pacifists and appeasement: the Peace Pledge Union." Journal of Contemporary History 9.1 (1974): 115–127.

Oppenheimer, Andrew. "West German Pacifism and the Ambivalence of Human Solidarity, 1945–1968." Peace & Change 29.3‐4 (2004): 353–389.

online Peace III, Roger C.

A Just and Lasting Peace: The U.S. Peace Movement from the Cold War to Desert Storm (Chicago: The Noble Press, 1991).

ISBN 0-9622683-8-0 Pugh, Michael. "Pacifism and politics in Britain, 1931–1935." Historical Journal 23.3 (1980): 641–656.

online Puri, Rashmi-Sudha.

Gandhi on War & Peace (1986); focus on India.

Ritchie, J. M. "Germany–a peace-loving nation? A Pacifist Tradition in German Literature." Oxford German Studies 11.1 (1980): 76–102.

Saunders, Malcolm. "The origins and early years of the Melbourne Peace Society 1899/1914." Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society 79.1-2 (1993): 96–114.

Socknat, Thomas P. "Canada's Liberal Pacifists and the Great War." Journal of Canadian Studies 18.4 (1984): 30–44.

Steger, Manfred B.

Gandhi's dilemma: Nonviolent principles and nationalist power (St. Martin's Press, 2000) online review .

Strong-Boag, Veronica. "Peace-making women: Canada 1919–1939." in Women and Peace (Routledge, 2019) pp. 170–191.

Talini, Giulio. "Saint-Pierre, British pacifism and the quest for perpetual peace (1693–1748)." History of European Ideas 46.8 (2020): 1165–1182.

Vaïsse, Maurice. "A certain idea of peace in France from 1945 to the present day." French History 18.3 (2004): 331–337.

Wittner, Lawrence S.

Rebels Against War: The American Peace Movement, 1933–1983 (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1984).

ISBN 0-87722-342-4 Ziemann, Benjamin. "German Pacifism in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries." Neue Politische Literatur 2015.3 (2015): 415–437 online .

Primary sources [ edit ] Lynd, Staughton, and Alice Lynd, eds.

Nonviolence in America: A documentary history (3rd ed. Orbis Books, 2018).

Stellato, Jesse, ed.

Not in Our Name: American Antiwar Speeches, 1846 to the Present (Pennsylvania State University Press, 2012). 287 pp External links [ edit ] Nonviolent Action Network – Nonviolent Action Network Database of 300 nonviolent methods v t e Anti-war and peace movement Peace advocates Anti-nuclear organizations Anti-war movement Anti-war organizations Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions Coalition of Women for Peace Code Pink Conscientious objectors Counterculture Culture of Peace ECOPEACE Party Greenham Common Women's Peace Camp Iraq War resisters in Canada List of pacifist organisations List of peace activists New Socialist Party of Japan Pacifist Socialist Party Peace and conflict studies Peace camp Peace churches Peace commission Peace conference Peace congress Peace education Peace movement Peace psychology Peace treaty Peaceworker React, Include, Recycle Social Democratic Party (Japan) Unity The Women's Peace Crusade War resisters Women's International League for Peace and Freedom Ideologies Ahimsa Anarchism Anarcho-pacifism Anarcho-punks Christian anarchism Anti-imperialism Anti-nuclear movement Antimilitarism Appeasement Christian pacifism Deterrence theory Direct action Finvenkismo Green politics Hippie Isolationism Modern-war pacifism Non-interventionism Nonkilling Nonviolence Pacificism Pacifism Peace Satyagraha Soviet influence on the peace movement Testimony of peace World peace Media and cultural Art Books Concert Yutel for Peace Dances of Universal Peace Festival for Peace Films Imagine Piano Peace Project International Day of Non-Violence International Day of Peace Dialogue Among Civilizations List of peace prizes List of places named Peace Monuments and memorials Mother's Day Proclamation Nobel Peace Prize Concert Museums Peace & Love (festival) Peace journalism Peace News Promoting Enduring Peace Peace One Day Plays Promoting Enduring Peace Show of Peace Concert Songs Symbols The Non-Violence Project University for Peace World Peace Bell Association Japanese Peace Bell Women in Black World March for Peace and Nonviolence Slogans and tactics Bed-in Central Park be-ins Civil disobedience Conflict resolution Counter-recruitment De-escalation Demilitarisation Department of Peace Desertion Draft evasion Die-in Economic sanctions Flower power Global Day of Action on Military Spending Human Be-In Lesson of Munich " Make love, not war " Non-aggression principle Nonviolent resistance Non Violent Resistance (psychological intervention) Peace walk Peacebuilding Refusal to serve in the Israel Defense Forces " Soldiers are murderers " Swords to ploughshares Teach-in " The whole world is watching " Third Party Non-violent Intervention " Turn the other cheek " " Violence begets violence " War tax resisters Opposition to specific wars or their aspects War of 1812 ( UK ; US ) American Civil War Second Boer War World War I World War II Vietnam War list of protests War on Terror Iraq War Criticism Protests Afghanistan War Military action in Iran Sri Lankan Civil War 2011 intervention in Libya Anti-war protests in Russia (2014) 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine in Russia in Russian Far East Gaza War in the U.S.

Calls for a ceasefire Landmines Military taxation Nuclear disarmament International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons Nuclear weapons convention Countries Canada Costa Rica Germany Israel Japan Netherlands Spain Sudan Switzerland United Kingdom United States Peacebuilding in Jammu and Kashmir Category v t e Peace Concepts Anti-war movement (category) Cost of conflict Pacifism Pax Atomica Peace and conflict studies Peacebuilding Peace congress Peace enforcement Peacekeeping Peacemaking Peace movement Peace process Peace symbols Religion and peacebuilding Separate peace War termination World peace Theories Capitalist peace Complex system approach Conflict continuum Democratic peace theory Deterrence theory Environmental peacebuilding Infrastructure for Peace Peace through strength Territorial peace theory Provisions Amnesty Arms control Arms embargo Ceasefire Confidence-building measures Humanitarian corridor Prisoner exchange Transitional justice Truth commission Research/teaching Institutions University of Bradford EIP SIPRI USIP University for Peace WPF Peacekeeping Kofi Annan (KAIPTC) Pearson Centre (1994–2011) Journals Int. Peacekeep.

J. Confl. Resolut.

J. Peace Res.

J. Peace Justice Stud.

Peace Rev.

Acorn Regional peacebuilding Alexandria Process (Israel–Palestine) Arab–Israeli Cyprus Israel–Palestine Jammu and Kashmir Kurdish/Turkish Middle East Northern Ireland Syria Ukraine Yemen List of periods of regional peace Post-WWII Europe Helsinki Accords (1975) human rights Vienna + Moscow Mechanisms (1989/1991) military Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) (1990) Vienna Document (1990) Treaty on Open Skies (1992) Institutions League of Nations (1920–1946) United Nations (1945–present) DPO DPPA UNESCO People Peaceworker List of peace activists List of Nobel Peace Prize laureates List of peace prizes Peace treaties Category Index by country Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐x7tz5
Cached time: 20250814223707
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.004 seconds
Real time usage: 1.194 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5048/1000000
Revision size: 90411/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 159240/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2992/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 263074/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.597/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16065084/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  932.622      1 -total
 43.47%  405.437      1 Template:Reflist
 25.29%  235.846     31 Template:Cite_web
 10.74%  100.128      1 Template:Langx
  9.76%   90.985      4 Template:Navbox
  8.20%   76.513      1 Template:Anti-war
  7.03%   65.600      1 Template:Short_description
  6.36%   59.287      9 Template:Main_other
  5.12%   47.778      1 Template:Update
  5.02%   46.813      8 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15706527:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814223707 and revision id 1299101918. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peace_movement&oldid=1299101918 " Categories : Peace movements Anti-war movement Counterculture of the 1960s History of social movements Peace Hidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2023 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles needing additional references from May 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 15:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peace movement 26 languages Add topic

