Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Typical experiments Toggle Typical experiments subsection 1.1 Single neuron experiments 2 Receptive field estimation Toggle Receptive field estimation subsection 2.1 Natural stimuli 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Sensory neuroscience 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of neuroscience relating to the senses This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sensory neuroscience" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sensory neuroscience is a subfield of neuroscience which explores the anatomy and physiology of neurons that are part of sensory systems such as vision, hearing, and olfaction. Neurons in sensory regions of the brain respond to stimuli by firing one or more nerve impulses ( action potentials ) following stimulus presentation. How is information about the outside world encoded by the rate, timing, and pattern of action potentials? This so-called neural code is currently poorly understood and sensory neuroscience plays an important role in the attempt to decipher it. Looking at early sensory processing is advantageous since brain regions that are "higher up" (e.g. those involved in memory or emotion) contain neurons which encode more abstract representations. However, the hope is that there are unifying principles which govern how the brain encodes and processes information. Studying sensory systems is an important stepping stone in our understanding of brain function in general.

Typical experiments [ edit ] A typical experiment in sensory neuroscience involves the presentation of a series of relevant stimuli to an experimental subject while the subject's brain is being monitored.  This monitoring can be accomplished by noninvasive means such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) or electroencephalography (EEG), or by more invasive means such as electrophysiology , the use of electrodes to record the electrical activity of single neurons or groups of neurons. fMRI measures changes in blood flow which related to the level of neural activity and provides low spatial and temporal resolution, but does provide data from the whole brain. In contrast,
Electrophysiology provides very high temporal resolution (the shapes of single spikes can be resolved) and data can be obtained from single cells. This is important since computations are performed within the dendrites of individual neurons.

Single neuron experiments [ edit ] In most of the central nervous system , neurons communicate exclusively by sending each other action potentials , colloquially known as "spikes".  It is therefore thought that all of the information a sensory neuron encodes about the outside world can be inferred by the pattern of its spikes.  Current experimental techniques cannot measure individual spikes noninvasively. Such encoding includes the Dual Process Theory and how we think in a conscious and unconscious manner.

[ 1 ] A typical single neuron experiment will consist of isolating a neuron (that is, navigating the neuron until the experimenter finds a neuron which spikes in response to the type of stimulus to be presented, and (optionally) determining that all of the spikes observed indeed come from a single neuron), then presenting a stimulus protocol.  Because neural responses are inherently variable (that is, their spiking pattern may depend on more than just the stimulus which is presented, although not all of this variability may be true noise, since factors other than the presented stimulus may affect the sensory neuron under study), often the same stimulus protocol is repeated many times to get a feel for the variability a neuron may have.  One common analysis technique is to study the neuron's average time-varying firing rate, called its post stimulus time histogram or PSTH.

[ 2 ] Receptive field estimation [ edit ] One major goal of sensory neuroscience is to try to estimate the neuron's receptive field ; that is, to try to determine which stimuli cause the neuron to fire in what ways.  One common way to find the receptive field is to use linear regression to find which stimulus characteristics typically caused neurons to become excited or depressed.  Since the receptive field of a sensory neuron can vary in time (i.e. latency between the stimulus and the effect it has on the neuron) and in some spatial dimension (literally space for vision and somatosensory cells, but other "spatial" dimensions such as the frequency of a sound for auditory neurons), the term spatio temporal receptive field or STRF is often used to describe these receptive fields.

[ 3 ] Natural stimuli [ edit ] One recent trend in sensory neuroscience has been the adoption of natural stimuli for the characterization of sensory neurons.  There is good reason to believe that there has been evolutionary pressure on sensory systems to be able to represent natural stimuli well, so sensory systems may exhibit the most relevant behaviour in response to natural stimuli.  The adoption of natural stimuli in sensory neuroscience has been slowed by the fact that the mathematical descriptions of natural stimuli tend to be more complex than of simplified artificial stimuli such as simple tones or clicks in audition or line patterns in vision.  Free software is now available to help neuroscientists interested in estimating receptive fields cope with the difficulty of using natural stimuli.

Sensory neuroscience is also used as a bottom-up approach to studying consciousness.  For example, visual sense and representation has been studied by Crick and Koch (1998), [ 4 ] and experiments have been suggested in order to test various hypotheses in this research stream.

See also [ edit ] Efficient coding hypothesis Multisensory integration References [ edit ] ^ Samuels, Richard (2009).

"Magical Number Two, plus or Minus: Dual-Process Theory as a Theory of Cognitive Kinds . Oxford Scholarship.” Oxford Scholarship Online: Oxford University Press. pp. Chapter 6.

^ Budai, D. (Mar 1994). "A computer-controlled system for post-stimulus time histogram and wind-up studies".

J Neurosci Methods .

51 (2): 205– 11.

doi : 10.1016/0165-0270(94)90012-4 .

PMID 8051951 .

S2CID 3790772 .

^ Theunissen, FE.; David, SV.; Singh, NC.; Hsu, A.; Vinje, WE.; Gallant, JL. (Aug 2001).

"Estimating spatio-temporal receptive fields of auditory and visual neurons from their responses to natural stimuli" (PDF) .

Network .

12 (3): 289– 316.

doi : 10.1080/net.12.3.289.316 .

PMID 11563531 .

S2CID 199667772 .

^ Crick, F.

; Koch, C. (Mar 1998).

"Consciousness and neuroscience" .

Cereb Cortex .

8 (2): 97– 107.

doi : 10.1093/cercor/8.2.97 .

PMID 9542889 .

v t e Sensation and perception Processes and concepts Sensation Stimulus Sensory receptor Transduction (physiology) Sensory processing Active sensory system Perception Multimodal integration Awareness Consciousness Cognition Feeling Motion perception Qualia Human External Sensory organs Eyes Ears Inner ear Nose Mouth Skin Sensory systems Visual system (sense of vision) Auditory system (sense of hearing) Vestibular system (sense of balance) Olfactory system (sense of smell) Gustatory system (sense of taste) Somatosensory system (sense of touch) Sensory cranial and spinal nerves Optic (II) Vestibulocochlear (VIII) Olfactory (I) Facial (VII) Glossopharyngeal (IX) Trigeminal (V) Spinal Cerebral cortices Visual cortex Auditory cortex Vestibular cortex Olfactory cortex Gustatory cortex Somatosensory cortex Perceptions Visual perception (vision) Color Auditory perception (hearing) Equilibrioception (balance) Olfaction (smell) Gustation (taste or flavor) Touch mechanoreception nociception (pain) thermoception Internal Proprioception Hunger Thirst Suffocation Nausea Visceral pain Nonhuman Animal Electroreception Magnetoreception Echolocation Infrared sensing in vampire bats Infrared sensing in snakes Surface wave detection Frog hearing Toad vision Plant Photomorphogenesis Gravitropism Artificial Robotic sensing Computer vision Machine hearing Types of sensory receptors Mechanoreceptor Baroreceptor Mechanotransduction Lamellar corpuscle Tactile corpuscle Merkel nerve ending Bulbous corpuscle Campaniform sensilla Slit sensilla Stretch receptor Photoreceptor Photoreceptor cell Cone cell Rod cell ipRGC Photopigment Aureochrome Chemoreceptor Taste receptor Olfactory receptor Osmoreceptor Thermoreceptor Cilium TRP channels Nociceptor Nociceptin receptor Juxtacapillary receptor Disorders Visual Visual impairment Alice in Wonderland syndrome Amaurosis Anopsia Color blindness Diplopia Hemeralopia and Nyctalopia Optic neuropathy Oscillopsia Palinopsia Papilledema Photophobia Photopsia Polyopia Scotoma Stereoblindness Visual snow Auditory Amblyaudia Auditory agnosia Auditory hallucination Auditory verbal agnosia Cortical deafness Hearing loss Microwave auditory effect Music-specific disorders Palinopsia Spatial hearing loss Tinnitus Vestibular Vertigo BPPV Labyrinthine fistula Labyrinthitis Ménière's disease Olfactory Anosmia Dysosmia Hyperosmia Hyposmia Olfactory reference syndrome Parosmia Phantosmia Gustatory Ageusia Hypergeusia Hypogeusia Parageusia Tactile Astereognosis CMT disease Formication Hyperesthesia Hypoesthesia Paresthesia Tactile hallucination Nociception (pain) Hyperalgesia Hypoalgesia Pain dissociation Phantom pain Proprioception Asomatognosia Phantom limb syndrome Somatoparaphrenia Supernumerary phantom limb Multimodal Aura Agnosia Allochiria Derealization Hallucination HSAN Sensory processing disorder Synesthesia Biases and errors Illusion · Pareidolia Category v t e Neuroscience Outline History Basic science Behavioral epigenetics Behavioral genetics Brain mapping Brain-reading Cellular neuroscience Computational neuroscience Connectomics Imaging genetics Integrative neuroscience Molecular neuroscience Neural decoding Neural engineering Neuroanatomy Neurobiology Neurochemistry Neuroendocrinology Neurogenetics Neuroinformatics Neurometrics Neuromorphology Neurophysics Neurophysiology Systems neuroscience Clinical neuroscience Behavioral neurology Clinical neurophysiology Epileptology Neurocardiology Neuroepidemiology Neurogastroenterology Neuroimmunology Neurointensive care Neurology Neuro-oncology Neuro-ophthalmology Neuropathology Neuropharmacology Neuroprosthetics Neuropsychiatry Neuroradiology Neurorehabilitation Neurosurgery Neurotology Neurovirology Nutritional neuroscience Psychiatry Cognitive neuroscience Affective neuroscience Behavioral neuroscience Chronobiology Molecular cellular cognition Motor control Neurolinguistics Neuropsychology Sensory neuroscience Social cognitive neuroscience Interdisciplinary fields Consumer neuroscience Cultural neuroscience Educational neuroscience Evolutionary neuroscience Global neurosurgery Neuroanthropology Neural engineering Neurobiotics Neurocinema Neurocriminology Neuroeconomics Neuroepistemology Neuroesthetics Neuroethics Neuroethology Neurohistory Neurolaw Neuromarketing Neuromorphic engineering Neuroscience of music Neurophenomenology Neurophilosophy Neuropolitics Neurorobotics Neurotheology Paleoneurobiology Social neuroscience Concepts Brain–computer interface Development of the nervous system Neural network (artificial) Neural network (biological) Detection theory Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring Neurochip Neurodegenerative disease Neurodevelopmental disorder Neurodiversity Neurogenesis Neuroimaging Neuroimmune system Neuromanagement Neuromodulation Neuroplasticity Neurotechnology Neurotoxin Self-awareness Category Commons Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sensory_neuroscience&oldid=1292496706 " Categories : Cognitive neuroscience Neurophysiology Neural coding Perception Sensory systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2008 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 07:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sensory neuroscience 1 language Add topic

