Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 1500 BC–40 AD 2.2 335 BC–80 AD 2.3 European Renaissance 2.4 16th–17th century 2.5 Modern era 3 Modern publications 4 Organizations 5 Notable ichthyologists Toggle Notable ichthyologists subsection 5.1 Paleoichthyologists 5.2 Non-academic ichthyologists 6 See also 7 References 8 Additional references 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ichthyology 79 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of zoology devoted to the study of fish This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ichthyology covers a diverse range of body forms and sizes.

top: whale shark and Paedocypris progenetica bottom: European river lamprey Ichthyology is the branch of zoology devoted to the study of fish , including bony fish ( Osteichthyes ), cartilaginous fish ( Chondrichthyes ), and jawless fish ( Agnatha ). According to FishBase , 35,800 species of fish had been described as of March 2025, with approximately 250 new species described each year.

[ 1 ] [ citation needed ] Etymology [ edit ] The word is derived from the Ancient Greek words ἰχθύς , ikhthus , meaning "fish"; and λόγος , logos , meaning "study".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] Fish represent approximately 8% of all figurative depictions on Mimbres pottery .

The study of fish dates from the Upper Paleolithic Revolution (with the advent of "high culture"). The science of ichthyology was developed in several interconnecting epochs, each with various significant advancements.

The study of fish receives its origins from the human desire to feed, clothe, and equip themselves with useful implements. According to Michael Barton , a prominent ichthyologist and professor at Centre College , "the earliest ichthyologists were hunters and gatherers who had learned how to obtain the most useful fish, where to obtain them in abundance, and at what times they might be the most available". Early cultures expressed these insights through abstract yet recognizable forms of artistic expression.

1500 BC–40 AD [ edit ] Informal, scientific descriptions of fish are represented within the Judeo-Christian tradition. The Old Testament laws of kashrut forbade the consumption of fish without scales or appendages.

[ citation needed ] Theologians and ichthyologists believe that the apostle Peter and his contemporaries harvested the fish that are today sold in modern industry along the Sea of Galilee , presently known as Lake Kinneret . These fish include cyprinids of the genera Barbus and Mirogrex , cichlids of the genus Sarotherodon , and Mugil cephalus of the family Mugilidae .

335 BC–80 AD [ edit ] Aristotle incorporated ichthyology into formal scientific study. Between 333 and 322 BC, he provided the earliest taxonomic classification of fish, accurately describing 117 species of Mediterranean fish.

[ 4 ] Furthermore, Aristotle documented anatomical and behavioral differences between fish and marine mammals . After his death, some of his pupils continued his ichthyological research.

Theophrastus , for example, composed a treatise on amphibious fish. The Romans, although less devoted to science, wrote extensively about fish.

Pliny the Elder , a notable Roman naturalist , compiled the ichthyological works of indigenous Greeks , including verifiable and ambiguous peculiarities such as the sawfish and mermaid , respectively. Pliny's documentation was the last significant contribution to ichthyology until the European Renaissance .

European Renaissance [ edit ] The writings of three 16th-century scholars, Hippolito Salviani , Pierre Belon , and Guillaume Rondelet , signify the conception of modern ichthyology. The investigations of these individuals were based upon actual research in comparison to ancient recitations. This property popularized and emphasized these discoveries. Despite their prominence, Rondelet's De Piscibus Marinis is regarded as the most influential, identifying 244 species of fish.

16th–17th century [ edit ] The incremental alterations in navigation and shipbuilding throughout the Renaissance marked the commencement of a new epoch in ichthyology. The Renaissance culminated with the era of exploration and colonization, and upon the cosmopolitan interest in navigation came the specialization in naturalism.

Georg Marcgrave of Saxony composed the Naturalis Brasilae in 1648. This document contained a description of 100 species of fish indigenous to the Brazilian coastline. In 1686, John Ray and Francis Willughby collaboratively published Historia Piscium , a scientific manuscript containing 420 species of fish, 178 of these newly discovered. The fish contained within this informative literature were arranged in a provisional system of classification.

Frontispiece from Ichthyologia, sive Opera Omnia de Piscibus by Peter Artedi The classification used within the Historia Piscium was further developed by Carl Linnaeus , the "father of modern taxonomy". His taxonomic approach became the systematic approach to the study of organisms, including fish. Linnaeus was a professor at the University of Uppsala and an eminent botanist ; however, one of his colleagues, Peter Artedi , earned the title "father of ichthyology" through his indispensable advancements. Artedi contributed to Linnaeus's refinement of the principles of taxonomy. Furthermore, he recognized five additional orders of fish: Malacopterygii, Acanthopterygii, Branchiostegi, Chondropterygii, and Plagiuri . Artedi developed standard methods for making counts and measurements of anatomical features that are modernly exploited. Another associate of Linnaeus, Albertus Seba , was a prosperous pharmacist from Amsterdam . Seba assembled a cabinet, or collection, of fish. He invited Artedi to use this assortment of fish; in 1735, Artedi fell into an Amsterdam canal and drowned at the age of 30.

Linnaeus posthumously published Artedi's manuscripts as Ichthyologia, sive Opera Omnia de Piscibus (1738). His refinement of taxonomy culminated in the development of the binomial nomenclature , which is in use by contemporary ichthyologists. Furthermore, he revised the orders introduced by Artedi, placing significance on pelvic fins . Fish lacking this appendage were placed within the order Apodes; fish having abdominal, thoracic, or jugular pelvic fins were termed Abdominales, Thoracici, and Jugulares, respectively. However, these alterations were not grounded within evolutionary theory. Therefore, over a century was needed for Charles Darwin to provide the intellectual foundation needed to perceive that the degree of similarity in taxonomic features was a consequence of phylogenetic relationships.

Modern era [ edit ] Close to the dawn of the 19th century, Marcus Elieser Bloch of Berlin and Georges Cuvier of Paris made attempts to consolidate the knowledge of ichthyology. Cuvier summarized all of the available information in his monumental Histoire Naturelle des Poissons . This manuscript was published between 1828 and 1849 in a 22-volume series. This document describes 4,514 species of fish, 2,311 of these new to science. It remains one of the most ambitious treatises of the modern world. Scientific exploration of the Americas advanced knowledge of the remarkable diversity of fish .

Charles Alexandre Lesueur was a student of Cuvier. He made a cabinet of fish dwelling within the Great Lakes and Saint Lawrence River regions.

Adventurous individuals such as John James Audubon and Constantine Samuel Rafinesque figure in the faunal documentation of North America. They often traveled with one another. Rafinesque wrote Ichthyologic Ohiensis in 1820. In addition, Louis Agassiz of Switzerland established his reputation through the study of freshwater fish and the first comprehensive treatment of palaeoichthyology, Poisson Fossil's . In the 1840s, Agassiz moved to the United States, where he taught at Harvard University until his death in 1873.

Albert Günther published his Catalogue of the Fish of the British Museum between 1859 and 1870, describing over 6,800 species and mentioning another 1,700. Generally considered one of the most influential ichthyologists, David Starr Jordan wrote 650 articles and books on the subject and served as president of Indiana University and Stanford University .

Modern publications [ edit ] Publication Frequency Date of publication Publisher Ichthyology & Herpetology Quarterly 27 December 1913 American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists Journal of Applied Ichthyology Bi-monthly 1985 Blackwell Publishing Ichthyological Bulletin Irregular January 1956 Rhodes University Organizations [ edit ] List of Organizations American Elasmobranch Society American Fisheries Society American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists Association of Systematics Collections Ichthyological Society of Hong Kong ( Chinese : 香港魚類學會 ) Native Fish Conservancy Neotropical Ichthyological Association North American Native Fish Association Panhellenic Society of Ichthyologists [ 5 ] Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology Society for Northwestern Vertebrate Biology Society for the Preservation of Natural History Collections Southeastern Fish Council Southwestern Association of Naturalists The World Conservation Union Notable ichthyologists [ edit ] See also: Notable fisheries scientists and List of marine biologists Members of this list meet one or more of the following criteria: 1) Author of 50 or more fish taxon names, 2) Author of major reference work in ichthyology, 3) Founder of major journal or museum, 4) Person most notable for other reasons who has also worked in ichthyology.

Alexander Emanuel Agassiz Louis Agassiz Emperor Akihito of Japan Gerald R. Allen Peter Artedi Herbert R. Axelrod William O. Ayres , California Spencer Fullerton Baird Tarleton Hoffman Bean Lev Berg , Russia Henry Bryant Bigelow Pieter Bleeker , East Indies Marcus Elieser Bloch George Albert Boulenger Francis Buchanan-Hamilton , Scottish Jean Cadenat Pierre Carbonnier Eugenie Clark Leonard Compagno Edward Drinker Cope Georges Cuvier Francis Day , India Carl H. Eigenmann Rosa Smith Eigenmann William N. Eschmeyer Barton Warren Evermann Henry Weed Fowler Joseph Paul Gaimard Samuel Garman Charles Henry Gilbert Theodore Nicholas Gill Charles Frédéric Girard George Brown Goode Albert Günther Albert William Herre Carl L. Hubbs David Starr Jordan Maurice Kottelat , Swiss Bernard Germain de Lacépède Carl Linnaeus Seth Eugene Meek George S. Myers Joseph S. Nelson , Fishes of the World John Treadwell Nichols , China , founder of Copeia John Roxborough Norman Peter Simon Pallas Wilhelm Peters Felipe Poey Jean René Constant Quoy Constantine Samuel Rafinesque John Ernest Randall Charles Tate Regan John Richardson Raúl Adolfo Ringuelet Eduard Rüppell Johann Gottlob Schneider H.M. Smith J.L.B. Smith Edwin Chapin Starks Franz Steindachner Royal D. Suttkus Frank Talbot Shigeho Tanaka Ethelwynn Trewavas , English Achille Valenciennes Johann Julius Walbaum Gilbert Percy Whitley Francis Willughby Stan Wood William Yarrell Paleoichthyologists [ edit ] Hans C. Bjerring Erik Jarvik Erik Stensiö Non-academic ichthyologists [ edit ] Sakana-kun See also [ edit ] Ichthyology terms Ichthyology and GIS Meristics References [ edit ] ^ FishBase : October 2016 Update.

Retrieved 7 October 2016.

^ ἰχθύς .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; An Intermediate Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project ^ λόγος .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; An Intermediate Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project ^ Gudger, E. W. (1934). "The Five Great Naturalists of the Sixteenth Century: Belon, Rondelet, Salviani, Gesner and Aldrovandi: A Chapter in the History of Ichthyology".

Isis .

22 (1): 21– 40.

doi : 10.1086/346870 .

JSTOR 225322 .

S2CID 143961902 .

^ "18th Panhellenic Ichthyologist Conference: Sponsored by HAPO" .

Additional references [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ichthyology .

Bond, Carl E (1996) Biology of Fish . Saunders.

ISBN 0-03-070342-5 .

Nelson, Joseph S (2006) Fish of the World.

Wiley.

ISBN 0-471-25031-7 .

Michael Barton (2007) Bond's Biology of Fish , Third Edition. Julet.

ISBN 0-12-079875-1 .

Pauly D , Froese R , Palomares ML and Stergiou KI (2014) Fish on line, Version 3 A guide to learning and teaching ichthyology using the FishBase Information System .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Ichthyology ".

Brian Coad's Dictionary of Ichthyology Ichthyology Web Resources (archived 13 July 2006) List of Ichthyologists .

Archived 2012-02-26 at the Wayback Machine .

v t e Fish About fish Diversity Ethnoichthyology Evolution Diseases and parasites Fishing Fisheries Environmental impact of fishing - as food Fear of - FishBase Fish kill Hypoxia in - Ichthyology Anatomy and physiology Age determination Anguilliformity Bone dermal intramembranous ossification Cleithrum Chromatophore Fins dorsal fin Gill branchial arch gill raker gill slit pharyngeal arch pharyngeal slit pseudobranch Glossohyal Jaw hyomandibula pharyngeal jaw Leydig's organ Mauthner cell Meristics Operculum papillare Papilla Photophore Root effect Shark cartilage Scales ganoine Spiral valve Suckermouth Swim bladder physoclisti physostome Teeth pharyngeal shark Teleost leptins Digital Library Sensory systems Ampullae of Lorenzini Barbel Hydrodynamic reception Electroreception and electrogenesis Jamming avoidance response Lateral line Otolith Capacity for pain Schreckstoff Surface wave detection Vision Weberian apparatus Reproduction Bubble nest Clasper Egg case Development Ichthyoplankton Juvenile Life history theory Milt Mouthbrooder Polyandry Pregnancy Roe Sequential hermaphroditism Spawning triggers Locomotion Fin and flipper locomotion Amphibious Walking Flying Undulatory locomotion Tradeoffs for locomotion in air and water RoboTuna Other behaviour Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Bait ball Bottom feeders Cleaner fish Corallivory Diel vertical migration Electric fish Filter feeders Forage fish Migratory Paedophagy Predatory Salmon run Sardine run Scale eaters Schooling fish Sleep Venomous Intelligence By habitat Cave Coastal Coldwater Coral reef Deep-sea Demersal Euryhaline Freshwater Groundfish Pelagic Tropical Other types Bait Coarse Diversity Game Genetically modified Hallucinogenic Oily Poisonous Rough Whitefish Commerce Farming Carp Catfish Octopus Salmonids Tilapia Wild fisheries Predatory billfish mackerel salmon tuna Forage anchovy herring sardine sprats Demersal cod flatfish pollock Major groups Jawless Hagfish Lampreys Cartilaginous Chimaeras Sharks Rays Bony Ray-finned Fleshy-finned Lists Aquarium life Blind Fish common names Fish families Glossary of ichthyology Largest Smallest Threatened rays sharks Prehistoric more lists...

Category WikiProject v t e Zoology Outline Branches Anthrozoology Arthropodology ( Arachnology ( Acarology ) Carcinology Entomology ( Coleopterology Lepidopterology Melittology Myrmecology Orthopterology ) Myriapodology ) Biological anthropology Bryozoology Cnidariology Ethnozoology Ethology Helminthology Herpetology ( Batrachology Ophiology Testudinology ) Ichthyology Malacology ( Conchology Teuthology ) Mammalogy ( Cetology Cynology Felinology Hippology Primatology ) Nematology Neuroethology Ornithology Parasitology Paleozoology Planktology Zooarchaeology Animal groups Porifera Ctenophora Placozoa Cnidaria Xenacoelomorpha Ambulacraria Chordata Aschelminthes Arthropoda Platyhelminthes Mollusca Annelida Animal anatomy Animal morphology Histology Tissues Epithelial tissue Muscular tissue Nervous tissue Connective tissues Mineralized tissues Molecular anatomy Anatomy and morphology Mammalian anatomy and morphology Human Dog Elephant Cat Bird anatomy Fish anatomy Shark anatomy Spider anatomy Insect morphology Animal physiology General physiology Respiration Respiratory system Breathing Gas exchange Respiratory pigment Cellular respiration Vascular system Blood Lymph Blood vessels Arteries Veins Capillaries Heart Water vascular system By species Insect physiology Fish physiology Zoologists Karl Ernst von Baer Georges Cuvier Charles Darwin Jean-Henri Fabre William Kirby Carl Linnaeus Konrad Lorenz Thomas Say Jakob von Uexküll Alfred Russel Wallace History Pre-Darwin Post-Darwin Timeline of zoology Category v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐cntm5
Cached time: 20250814215740
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.622 seconds
Real time usage: 0.802 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2448/1000000
Revision size: 14953/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 95120/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3356/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 54151/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.406/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19708640/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  656.204      1 -total
 34.16%  224.181      1 Template:Reflist
 19.66%  128.980      2 Template:LSJ
 18.97%  124.492      2 Template:Lang
 14.14%   92.756      4 Template:Navbox
 12.69%   83.273      1 Template:Diversity_of_fish
 11.61%   76.172      1 Template:Cite_journal
  9.85%   64.664      1 Template:Short_description
  9.47%   62.136      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.38%   61.548      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42405:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215740 and revision id 1303047949. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ichthyology&oldid=1303047949 " Categories : Ichthyology Subfields of zoology Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010 Articles containing Chinese-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 20:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ichthyology 79 languages Add topic

