Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Global potential 2 Forms of ocean energy Toggle Forms of ocean energy subsection 2.1 Marine current power 2.2 Osmotic power 2.3 Ocean thermal energy 2.4 Tidal power 2.5 Wave power 3 Environmental effects 4 Policies, Economics, and Government Initiatives 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Marine energy 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Energy available from oceans Part of a series on Sustainable energy Energy conservation Arcology Building insulation Cogeneration Compact fluorescent lamp Eco hotel Eco-cities Ecohouse Ecolabel Efficient energy use Energy audit Energy efficiency implementation Energy recovery Energy recycling Energy saving lamp Energy Star Energy storage Environmental planning Environmental technology Fossil fuel phase-out Glass in green buildings Green building and wood Green building Heat pump List of low-energy building techniques Low-energy house Microgeneration Passive house Passive solar building design Sustainable architecture Sustainable city Sustainable habitat Sustainable refurbishment Thermal energy storage Tropical green building Waste-to-energy Zero heating building Zero-energy building Renewable energy Biofuel Sustainable Biogas Biomass Carbon-neutral fuel Geothermal energy Geothermal power Geothermal heating Hydropower Hydroelectricity Micro hydro Pico hydro Run-of-the-river Small hydro Marine current power Marine energy Tidal power Tidal barrage Tidal farm Tidal stream generator Ocean thermal energy conversion Renewable energy transition Renewable heat Solar Wave Wind Community Farm Floating wind turbine Forecasting Industry Lens Outline Rights Turbine Windbelt Windpump Sustainable transport Green vehicle Electric vehicle Bicycle Solar vehicle Wind-powered vehicle Human-electric Twike Plug-in Human-powered transport Helicopter Hydrofoil Land vehicle Bicycle Cycle rickshaw Kick scooter Quadracycle Tricycle Velomobile Roller skating Skateboarding Walking Watercraft Personal transporter Rail transport Tram Rapid transit Personal rapid transit Category Renewable energy portal v t e Marine energy , also known as ocean energy , ocean power, or marine and hydrokinetic energy, refers to energy harnessed from waves, tides, salinity gradients, and temperature differences in the ocean. The movement of water in the world's oceans stores vast amounts of kinetic energy , which can be converted into electricity to power homes, transportation, and industries.

Marine energy includes wave power , which is derived from surface waves, and tidal power , which is obtained from the kinetic energy of moving water.

Offshore wind power , however, is not considered marine energy because it is generated from wind , even if the wind turbines are located over water.

The oceans have a tremendous amount of energy and are close to many if not most concentrated populations. Ocean energy has the potential of providing a substantial amount of new renewable energy around the world.

[ 1 ] While marine energy is a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels, its development can impact marine ecosystems, wildlife, and the physical environment. Potential effects include habitat disruption, noise pollution, and electromagnetic fields from subsea cables, which may require mitigation strategies such as fish-friendly turbine designs and environmental impact assessments.

[ 2 ] Government policies, economic incentives, and regulatory frameworks contribute significantly to advancing marine energy, with countries like the UK, Canada, and South Korea leading in tidal and wave energy projects.

[ 3 ] Global potential [ edit ] The global potential for marine energy is significant, with estimates suggesting that 20,000 to 80,000 terawatt-hours per year (TWh/y) of electricity could be generated from ocean temperature differences, salinity gradients, tides, currents, waves, and swells.

[ 4 ] Global potential Form Annual generation Tidal energy >300 TWh Marine current power >800 TWh Osmotic power Salinity gradient 2,000 TWh Ocean thermal energy Thermal gradient 10,000 TWh Wave energy 8,000–80,000 TWh Source: IEA-OES, Annual Report 2007 [ 5 ] Indonesia , as an archipelagic country that is three quarters ocean, has 49 GW recognized potential ocean energy and has 727 GW theoretical potential ocean energy.

[ 6 ] Forms of ocean energy [ edit ] Part of a series on Renewable energy Biofuel Biogas Biomass Carbon-neutral fuel Crosswind kite power Geothermal energy Geothermal heating Geothermal power Hydroelectricity Run-of-the-river Hydropower Micro hydro Pico hydro Small hydro Marine current power Marine energy Ocean thermal Osmotic power Solar energy Solar power Sustainable biofuel Tidal power Tidal stream generator Wave power Wind power Nuclear power proposed as renewable energy Topics by country and territory Marketing and policy trends v t e The oceans are a vast, largely untapped source of energy, including surface waves, fluid flow, salinity gradients , and thermal differences.

Marine and Hydrokinetic (MHK) or marine energy development in U.S. and international waters includes projects using the following devices: Wave power converters in open coastal areas with significant waves; Tidal turbines placed in coastal and estuarine areas; In-stream turbines in fast-moving rivers; Ocean current turbines in areas of strong marine currents; Ocean thermal energy converters in deep tropical waters.

Marine current power [ edit ] Main article: Marine current power Strong ocean currents are driven by temperature, wind, salinity, bathymetry , and the rotation of the Earth. The Sun acts as the primary driving force, causing winds and temperature differences. Because there are only small fluctuations in current speed and stream location with no changes in direction, ocean currents may be suitable locations for deploying energy extraction devices such as turbines.

Ocean currents are instrumental in determining the climate in many regions around the world. While little is known about the effects of removing ocean current energy, the impacts of removing current energy on the farfield environment may be a significant environmental concern. The typical turbine issues with blade strike, entanglement of marine organisms, and acoustic effects still exists; however, these may be magnified due to the presence of more diverse populations of marine organisms using ocean currents for migration purposes. Locations can be further offshore and therefore require longer power cables that could affect the marine environment with electromagnetic output.

[ 7 ] Osmotic power [ edit ] Main article: Osmotic power At the mouth of rivers where fresh water mixes with salt water, energy associated with the salinity gradient can be harnessed using pressure-retarded reverse osmosis process and associated conversion technologies. Another system is based on using freshwater upwelling through a turbine immersed in seawater, and one involving electrochemical reactions is also in development.

Significant research took place from 1975 to 1985 and gave various results regarding the economy of PRO and RED plants. Small-scale investigations into salinity power production take place in other countries like Japan, Israel, and the United States. In Europe the research is concentrated in Norway and the Netherlands, in both places small pilots are tested. Salinity gradient energy is the energy available from the difference in salt concentration between freshwater with saltwater. This energy source is not easy to understand, as it is not directly occurring in nature in the form of heat, waterfalls, wind, waves, or radiation.

[ 8 ] Ocean thermal energy [ edit ] Main article: Ocean thermal energy conversion Water typically varies in temperature from the surface warmed by direct sunlight to greater depths where sunlight cannot penetrate. This differential is greatest in tropical waters, making this technology most applicable in water locations. A fluid is often vaporized to drive a turbine that may generate electricity or produce desalinized water. Systems may be either open-cycle, closed-cycle, or hybrid.

[ 9 ] Tidal power [ edit ] Main article: Tidal power The energy from moving masses of water – a popular form of hydroelectric power generation. Tidal power generation comprises three main forms, namely tidal stream power , tidal barrage power , and dynamic tidal power .

Wave power [ edit ] Main article: Wave power Solar energy from the Sun creates temperature differentials that result in wind. The interaction between wind and the surface of water creates waves, which are larger when there is a greater distance for them to build up. Wave energy potential is greatest between 30° and 60° latitude in both hemispheres on the west coast because of the global direction of wind. When evaluating wave energy as a technology type, it is important to distinguish between the four most common approaches: point absorber buoys , surface attenuators, oscillating water columns , and overtopping devices.

[ 10 ] The wave energy sector is reaching a significant milestone in the development of the industry, with positive steps towards commercial viability being taken. The more advanced device developers are now progressing beyond single unit demonstration devices and are proceeding to array development and multi-megawatt projects.

[ 11 ] The backing of major utility companies is now manifesting itself through partnerships within the development process, unlocking further investment and, in some cases, international co-operation.

At a simplified level, wave energy technology can be located near-shore and offshore. Wave energy converters can also be designed for operation in specific water depth conditions: deep water, intermediate water or shallow water. The fundamental device design will be dependent on the location of the device and the intended resource characteristics.

Environmental effects [ edit ] Marine energy, harnessed from renewable sources such as waves, tides, and ocean currents, is widely regarded as a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels. However, similar to other energy technologies, marine energy may have environmental impacts that need to be carefully assessed. These effects can be broadly categorized into impacts on marine ecosystems, wildlife, and the physical environment.

[ 12 ] Impacts on Marine Ecosystems The deployment of marine energy infrastructure can alter local ecosystems by modifying water flow, sediment transport, and habitat structures. For instance, tidal barrages, which block the natural flow of water, can lead to changes in salinity levels and sediment deposition in estuaries. Such alterations can disrupt benthic habitats, affecting species that rely on these environments for survival.

[ 13 ] Research has shown that tidal energy projects can result in localized habitat loss, particularly for species sensitive to changes in sediment composition and water flow.

[ 13 ] Wave energy converters (WECs) can also influence marine ecosystems. While they may create artificial reefs that attract certain species, they can simultaneously displace others, leading to competition for resources. In some cases, these structures have been observed to enhance biodiversity, but the overall impact depends on the specific design and location of the devices. The ecological trade-offs associated with WECs highlight the importance of careful planning and monitoring to balance energy production with environmental conservation.

[ 14 ] Effects on Marine Wildlife Marine energy technologies pose risks to marine wildlife, particularly through collisions with underwater turbines, noise pollution, and electromagnetic fields (EMFs) generated by subsea cables. For example, tidal turbines, which operate in high-flow environments, can pose a threat to fish and marine mammals that may collide with rotating blades. While the risk of collision is generally considered low, it can be significant for slow-moving or migratory species, necessitating the development of fish-friendly turbine designs.

[ 15 ] Noise pollution is another concern associated with marine energy installations. The construction and operation of devices can generate underwater noise, which may disrupt marine life. Cetaceans, such as whales and dolphins, rely heavily on sound for communication, navigation, and foraging. Prolonged exposure to noise can lead to behavioral changes, increased stress levels, and even habitat abandonment. Mitigation measures, such as noise-reduction technologies and strategic placement of devices, are required to minimize these impacts.

[ 16 ] Electromagnetic fields (EMFs) from subsea power cables can also affect marine species, particularly those sensitive to electromagnetic stimuli, such as sharks and rays.

[ citation needed ] Physical and Chemical Changes The installation of marine energy infrastructure can lead to physical changes in the marine environment, such as altered wave patterns and coastal erosion. For example, large-scale wave energy farms can reduce the amount of wave energy reaching the shore, which may impact coastal processes like sediment transport. In some cases, this could exacerbate coastal erosion, particularly in areas already vulnerable to such changes.

[ 17 ] Chemical impacts, such as the release of antifouling agents or other pollutants from marine energy devices, are another potential concern. While these impacts are generally minor compared to those associated with fossil fuel extraction, they still require careful management to minimize harm to marine ecosystems. Regular maintenance and the use of environmentally friendly materials can help mitigate these risks.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Mitigation and Best Practices Governments and organizations have developed regulatory frameworks and best practices to address these environmental effects. Regulatory bodies typically require environmental impact assessments (EIAs) before deploying marine energy projects. These assessments help identify potential risks and guide mitigation strategies, such as the use of fish-friendly turbine designs, noise-reduction technologies, and strategic placement of devices to minimize ecological disruption.

[ 19 ] International organizations, such as the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), have published guidelines for sustainable marine energy development. These guidelines emphasize the importance of stakeholder engagement, adaptive management, and long-term monitoring to ensure that marine energy projects are environmentally responsible. By adhering to these principles, the marine energy industry can balance the need for renewable energy with the protection of marine ecosystems and wildlife.

[ 20 ] Policies, Economics, and Government Initiatives [ edit ] The development of marine energy is heavily influenced by government policies, economic incentives, and regulatory frameworks. These factors play a critical role in fostering innovation, attracting investment, and ensuring the sustainable deployment of marine energy technologies.

[ 21 ] Economic Considerations Marine energy is still in the early stages of commercialization, and its economic viability depends on reducing costs and improving efficiency. The high capital expenditure (CapEx) and operational expenditure (OpEx) associated with marine energy projects have historically been barriers to widespread adoption.

[ 22 ] However, technological advancements, economies of scale, and government support are helping to drive down costs. For example, the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) for tidal and wave energy has decreased significantly in recent years, though it remains higher than that of more established renewable energy sources like wind and solar.

[ 23 ] Government subsidies, grants, and tax incentives are often used to offset the high initial costs of marine energy projects. These financial mechanisms are designed to encourage private sector investment and accelerate the deployment of marine energy technologies.

[ 23 ] Government Policies and Regulatory Frameworks Government policies significantly influence the development of marine energy. Many countries have implemented renewable energy targets, feed-in tariffs, and renewable portfolio standards (RPS) to promote the development of marine energy. For instance, the European Union has set ambitious renewable energy targets as part of its Green Deal, with marine energy identified as a key component of its strategy to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050.

[ 24 ] In the United Kingdom, the Marine Energy Programme has been instrumental in supporting the development of tidal and wave energy.

[ 25 ] The program provides funding for research and development (R&D), as well as demonstration projects. The UK government has also established the Contracts for Difference (CfD) scheme, which guarantees a fixed price for electricity generated from marine energy, providing long-term revenue certainty for developers.

[ 26 ] United States has implemented policies to support marine energy through the Department of Energy’s Water Power Technologies Office (WPTO). The WPTO funds R&D initiatives and provides grants for pilot projects. The Marine Renewable Energy Act has also been proposed to create a regulatory framework for the development of marine energy resources in U.S. waters.

[ 27 ] Case Studies United Kingdom: The UK is a global leader in marine energy, particularly tidal energy. The MeyGen tidal energy project in Scotland is one of the largest tidal stream projects in the world. Supported by government funding and private investment, the project has demonstrated the potential for large-scale tidal energy generation. The UK’s supportive policy environment, including the CfD scheme, has played a key role in the project’s success.

[ 28 ] Canada: Canada has significant marine energy resources, particularly in the Bay of Fundy, which has some of the highest tidal ranges in the world. The Fundy Ocean Research Center for Energy (FORCE) in Nova Scotia serves as a test site for tidal energy technologies. The Canadian government has provided funding for FORCE and established regulatory frameworks to facilitate the deployment of marine energy projects.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] South Korea: South Korea has made substantial investments in marine energy as part of its renewable energy strategy. The Sihwa Lake Tidal Power Station is the world’s largest tidal power plant, with a capacity of 254 MW. The project was developed with significant government support and is a representative example of large-scale tidal energy deployment.

[ 31 ] France: France has a long history of tidal energy development, dating back to the Rance Tidal Power Station, which was commissioned in 1966 and remains one of the oldest and most successful tidal power plants in the world. The French government continues to support marine energy through R&D funding and policy initiatives aimed at expanding renewable energy capacity.

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Renewable Energy portal Oceans portal Energy harvesting Marine current power Tidal power Wave power Ocean thermal energy conversion Osmotic power Renewable energy Renewable energy commercialization References [ edit ] ^ Carbon Trust, Future Marine Energy. Results of the Marine Energy Challenge: Cost competitiveness and growth of wave and tidal stream energy , January 2006 ^ Shields, Mark A.; Woolf, David K.; Grist, Eric P. M.; Kerr, Sandy A.; Jackson, A. C.; Harris, Robert E.; Bell, Michael C.; Beharie, Robert; Want, Andrew; Osalusi, Emmanuel; Gibb, Stuart W.; Side, Jonathan (1 January 2011).

"Marine renewable energy: The ecological implications of altering the hydrodynamics of the marine environment" .

Ocean & Coastal Management .

54 (1): 2– 9.

Bibcode : 2011OCM....54....2S .

doi : 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2010.10.036 .

ISSN 0964-5691 .

^ Lange, Marcus; Page, Glenn; Cummins, Valerie (1 April 2018).

"Governance challenges of marine renewable energy developments in the U.S. – Creating the enabling conditions for successful project development" .

Marine Policy .

90 : 37– 46.

Bibcode : 2018MarPo..90...37L .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpol.2018.01.008 .

hdl : 10468/5928 .

ISSN 0308-597X .

^ "Ocean—potential" .

International Energy Agency (IEA) . Archived from the original on 22 May 2015 . Retrieved 8 August 2016 .

^ "Implementing Agreement on Ocean Energy Systems (IEA-OES), Annual Report 2007" (PDF) .

International Energy Agency, Jochen Bard ISET . 2007. p. 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 July 2015 . Retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ "Indonesian Ocean Energy" .

indopos.co.id . Archived from the original on 2 February 2014 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .

^ "Tethys" .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2017 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ "Ocean Energy Europe - Salinity Gradient" . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 .

^ "Tethys" .

Archived from the original on 21 June 2017 . Retrieved 26 September 2014 .

^ "Tethys" .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2014 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ "Ocean Energy Europe - the trade association for ocean renewables - Home" .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2014 . Retrieved 20 February 2014 .

^ Shields, Mark A.; Woolf, David K.; Grist, Eric P. M.; Kerr, Sandy A.; Jackson, A. C.; Harris, Robert E.; Bell, Michael C.; Beharie, Robert; Want, Andrew; Osalusi, Emmanuel; Gibb, Stuart W.; Side, Jonathan (1 January 2011).

"Marine renewable energy: The ecological implications of altering the hydrodynamics of the marine environment" .

Ocean & Coastal Management .

54 (1): 2– 9.

Bibcode : 2011OCM....54....2S .

doi : 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2010.10.036 .

ISSN 0964-5691 .

^ a b Xia, Junqiang; Falconer, Roger A.; Lin, Binliang (1 January 2010).

"Impact of different tidal renewable energy projects on the hydrodynamic processes in the Severn Estuary, UK" .

Ocean Modelling . The magic of modelling: A special volume commemorating the contributions of Peter D. Killworth - Part I.

32 (1): 86– 104.

Bibcode : 2010OcMod..32...86X .

doi : 10.1016/j.ocemod.2009.11.002 .

ISSN 1463-5003 .

^ Inger, Richard; Attrill, Martin J.; Bearhop, Stuart; Broderick, Annette C.; James Grecian, W.; Hodgson, David J.; Mills, Cheryl; Sheehan, Emma; Votier, Stephen C.; Witt, Matthew J.; Godley, Brendan J. (2009).

"Marine renewable energy: potential benefits to biodiversity? An urgent call for research" .

Journal of Applied Ecology .

46 (6): 1145– 1153.

Bibcode : 2009JApEc..46.1145I .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2664.2009.01697.x .

ISSN 1365-2664 .

^ "Collision Risks Between Marine Renewable Energy Devices and Mammals, Fish and Diving Birds | Tethys" .

tethys.pnnl.gov . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ "OES-Environmental 2020 State of the Science Report: Environmental Effects of Marine Renewable Energy Development Around the World | Tethys" .

tethys.pnnl.gov . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ a b Ozkan, Cigdem; Perez, Kelsey; Mayo, Talea (10 April 2020).

"The impacts of wave energy conversion on coastal morphodynamics" .

Science of the Total Environment .

712 : 136424.

Bibcode : 2020ScTEn.71236424O .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.136424 .

ISSN 0048-9697 .

PMID 31927445 .

^ "OES-Environmental 2024 State of the Science Report: Environmental Effects of Marine Renewable Energy Development Around the World | Tethys" .

tethys.pnnl.gov . Retrieved 20 March 2025 .

^ Ilya, Maclean; Richard, Inger; Benson, David (16 December 2014).

"Resolving issues with environmental impact assessment of marine renewable energy installations" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

1 : 75.

Bibcode : 2014FrMaS...1...75M .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2014.00075 .

hdl : 10023/10776 .

^ "Ocean Energy Technologies Patents Deployment Status and Outlook" .

www.irena.org . 1 August 2014 . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ Lange, Marcus; Page, Glenn; Cummins, Valerie (1 April 2018).

"Governance challenges of marine renewable energy developments in the U.S. – Creating the enabling conditions for successful project development" .

Marine Policy .

90 : 37– 46.

Bibcode : 2018MarPo..90...37L .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpol.2018.01.008 .

hdl : 10468/5928 .

ISSN 0308-597X .

^ "OES | Publications | Browse folders" .

www.ocean-energy-systems.org . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ a b "Innovation Outlook: Ocean Energy Technologies" .

www.irena.org . 1 December 2020 . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ "KNOWLEDGE4POLICY - A European Green Deal - Striving to be the first climate-neutral continent" .

ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ "Marine Energy Programme Board" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ "Contracts for Difference (CfD) Allocation Round 4: statutory notices" .

GOV.UK . 20 May 2022 . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ "Water Power Technologies Office" .

Energy.gov . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ "MeyGen Tidal Energy Project | Tethys" .

tethys.pnnl.gov . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ Government of Canada, Fisheries and Oceans Canada (28 February 2024).

Task Force on Sustainable Tidal Energy Development in the Bay of Fundy Final Report (Report). Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Public Affairs, Digital and Creative Services.

^ Canada, Natural Resources (25 June 2013).

"Tidal Energy Project in the Bay of Fundy" .

natural-resources.canada.ca . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ "Technology case study: Sihwa Lake tidal power station" .

www.hydropower.org . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

^ "France Tidal Power Market Size | Mordor Intelligence" .

www.mordorintelligence.com . Retrieved 17 February 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Omar Ellabban, Haitham Abu-Rub, Frede Blaabjerg : Renewable energy resources: Current status, future prospects and their enabling technology.

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 39, (2014), 748–764, doi : 10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.113 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marine energy .

The Ocean Energy Systems European Ocean Energy Association The European Marine Energy Centre (EMEC) Ocean Energy Council SuperGen UK Centre for Marine Energy Research Portal and Repository for Information on Marine Renewable Energy Marine Energy Projects Database Tethys - Environmental Effects of Wind and Marine Renewable Energy Tethys Engineering - Technical information on marine energy Marine and Hydrokinetic Data Repository v t e Energy History Index Outline Fundamental concepts Conservation of energy Energetics Energy Units Energy condition Energy level Energy system Energy transformation Energy transition Mass Negative mass Mass–energy equivalence Power Thermodynamics Enthalpy Entropic force Entropy Exergy Free entropy Heat capacity Heat transfer Irreversible process Isolated system Laws of thermodynamics Negentropy Quantum thermodynamics Thermal equilibrium Thermal reservoir Thermodynamic equilibrium Thermodynamic free energy Thermodynamic potential Thermodynamic state Thermodynamic system Thermodynamic temperature Volume (thermodynamics) Work Types Binding Nuclear Chemical Dark Elastic Electric potential energy Electrical Gravitational Binding Interatomic potential Internal Ionization Kinetic Magnetic Mechanical Negative Phantom Potential Quantum chromodynamics binding energy Quantum fluctuation Quantum potential Quintessence Radiant Rest Sound Surface Thermal Vacuum Zero-point Energy carriers Battery Capacitor Electricity Enthalpy Fuel Fossil Oil Heat Latent heat Hydrogen Hydrogen fuel Mechanical wave Radiation Sound wave Work Primary energy Bioenergy Fossil fuel Coal Natural gas Petroleum Geothermal Gravitational Hydropower Marine Nuclear fuel Natural uranium Radiant Solar Wind Energy system components Biomass Electric power Electricity delivery Energy engineering Fossil fuel power station Cogeneration Integrated gasification combined cycle Geothermal power Hydropower Hydroelectricity Tidal power Wave farm Nuclear power Nuclear power plant Radioisotope thermoelectric generator Oil refinery Solar power Concentrated solar power Photovoltaic system Solar thermal energy Solar furnace Solar power tower Wind power Airborne wind energy Wind farm Use and supply Efficient energy use Agriculture Computing Transport Energy conservation Energy consumption Energy policy Energy development Energy security Energy storage Renewable energy Sustainable energy World energy supply and consumption Africa Asia Australia Canada Europe Mexico South America United States Misc.

Energy in work Carbon footprint Energy democracy Energy recovery Energy recycling Jevons paradox Waste-to-energy Waste-to-energy plant Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Marine energy Wave power List of wave power stations List of wave power projects Australia New Zealand United States Scotland Tidal power List of tidal power stations Tidal barrage Tidal stream generator Development of tidal stream generators Other List of offshore wind farms Marine current power Ocean thermal energy conversion Offshore construction Osmotic power Energy portal Renewable energy portal Oceans portal Category v t e Electricity delivery Concepts Automatic generation control Backfeeding Base load Demand factor Droop speed control Electric power Electric power quality Electrical fault Energy demand management Energy return on investment Grid code Grid energy storage Grid strength Home energy storage Load-following Merit order Nameplate capacity Peak demand Power factor Power-flow study Power system reliability Repowering Utility frequency Variability Vehicle-to-grid Sources Non-renewable Fossil fuel power station Coal Natural gas Oil shale Petroleum Nuclear Renewable Biofuel Biogas Biomass Geothermal Hydro Marine Current Osmotic Thermal Tidal Wave Solar Sustainable biofuel Wind Generation AC power Cogeneration Combined cycle Cooling tower Dispatchable Energy storage Battery Induction generator Inertial response Inverter-based resource Micro CHP Microgeneration Rankine cycle Three-phase electric power Virtual power plant Transmission and distribution Ancillary services Balancing authority Contingency (electrical grid) Demand response Distributed generation Dynamic demand Electric power distribution Electric power system Electric power transmission Electrical busbar system Electrical grid Electricity retailing Grid balancing High-voltage direct current High-voltage shore connection Interconnector Load management Mains electricity by country Overhead power line Conductor gallop Power station Pumped hydro Single-wire earth return Smart grid Substation Super grid Transformer Transmission system operator (TSO) Transmission tower Utility pole Voltage control and reactive power management Failure modes Black start Brownout Cascading failure Islanding Power outage List Rolling blackout Protective devices Arc-fault circuit interrupter Circuit breaker Earth-leakage Sulfur hexafluoride Generator interlock kit Numerical relay Power system protection Protective relay Residual-current device (GFI) Economics and policies Availability factor Capacity factor Carbon offsets and credits Cost of electricity by source Energy subsidies Environmental tax Feed-in tariff Fossil fuel phase-out Load factor Net metering Pigouvian tax Renewable Energy Certificates Renewable energy commercialization Renewable Energy Payments Spark/Dark/Quark/Bark spread Statistics and production Electric energy consumption List of electricity sectors Category v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐vwvbc
Cached time: 20250812024102
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.619 seconds
Real time usage: 0.745 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3130/1000000
Revision size: 30233/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 178100/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2884/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 173670/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.363/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7507086/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  571.668      1 -total
 40.36%  230.718      1 Template:Reflist
 19.96%  114.115      8 Template:Cite_journal
 15.13%   86.494     22 Template:Cite_web
 14.71%   84.064      1 Template:Sustainable_energy
 14.48%   82.777      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.21%   52.661      5 Template:Navbox
  8.76%   50.078      1 Template:Short_description
  7.75%   44.319      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.54%   43.079      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23676013:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024102 and revision id 1291830119. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marine_energy&oldid=1291830119 " Categories : Marine energy Water power Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 17:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marine energy 22 languages Add topic

