Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Gaius Aurelius Cotta 16 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Հայերեն Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roman statesman and orator (124–73 BCE) Gaius Aurelius Cotta (124–74 BC) [ 1 ] was a Roman statesman, orator , priest , and Academic Skeptic ; he is not to be confused with Gaius Aurelius Cotta who was consul twice in the 3rd century BCE.

Life [ edit ] Born in 124 BC [ 2 ] as the son of Marcus Aurelius Cotta and Rutilia.

[ 3 ] He was a cousin of Julius Caesar 's mother, Aurelia . His younger brothers were Marcus Aurelius Cotta and Lucius Aurelius Cotta .

[ 4 ] In 92 BC he defended his uncle Publius Rutilius Rufus , who had been unjustly accused of extortion in Asia. He was on intimate terms with the tribune Marcus Livius Drusus , who was murdered in 91 BC, and in the same year was an unsuccessful candidate for the tribunate. Shortly afterwards he was prosecuted under the lex Varia , the law proposed by Quintus Varius Severus which was directed against all who had in any way supported the Italians against Rome, and, in order to avoid condemnation, went into voluntary exile.

[ 5 ] He did not return until 82 BC, during the dictatorship of Lucius Cornelius Sulla . Perhaps he fought in 80 BC as propraetor unsuccessfully against Quintus Sertorius .

[ 6 ] In 75 he was consul, and excited the hostility of the optimates by carrying a law that abolished the Sullan disqualification of the tribunes of the plebs from holding higher magistracies; another law de judiciis privatis , of which nothing is known, was abrogated by his brother Lucius Cotta . Cotta obtained the province of Gaul , and was granted a triumph for some victory of which we possess no details; but on the very day before its celebration an old wound broke out, and he died suddenly.

[ 5 ] According to Cicero , Publius Sulpicius Rufus and Cotta were the best speakers of the young men of their time. Physically incapable of rising to passionate heights of oratory, Cotta's successes were chiefly due to his searching investigation of facts; he kept strictly to the essentials of the case and avoided all irrelevant digressions. His style was pure and simple. He is introduced by Cicero as an interlocutor in the De Oratore and De Natura Deorum (iii.), as a supporter of the principles of the New Academy . The fragments of Sallust contain the substance of a speech delivered by Cotta in order to calm the popular anger at a deficient corn supply.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Aurelia gens Notes [ edit ] ^ Münzer, Friedrich, Ridley, T. (Tr.), Roman Aristocratic Parties and Families (1999), pg. 298 ^ Sumner , p. 110.

^ Münzer, Friedrich, Ridley, T. (Tr.), Roman Aristocratic Parties and Families (1999), pg. 298 ^ Münzer, Friedrich, Ridley, T. (Tr.), Roman Aristocratic Parties and Families (1999), pg. 298 ^ a b Chisholm 1911 , p. 251.

^ Plutarch , Sertorius 12:3; but it could also have been his brother Marcus .

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 251–252.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Cotta, Gaius Aurelius ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

251– 252.

This article in turn cites: Cicero , De oratore , iii.3 Cicero , Brutus , 49 Archived 2023-07-07 at the Wayback Machine , 55 Archived 2023-07-07 at the Wayback Machine , 90 Archived 2019-06-28 at the Wayback Machine , 92 Archived 2019-06-28 at the Wayback Machine Sallust , Hist. Frag.

, 2.47M Appian , Bell. Civ.

i.37 Sumner, G.V. (1973).

The Orators in Cicero's Brutus : Prosopography and Chronology . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 0-8020-5281-9 .

Preceded by Gn. Octavius G. Scribonius Curio Consul of Rome 75 BC With: Lucius Octavius Succeeded by L. Licinius Lucullus M. Aurelius Cotta v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany United States People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaius_Aurelius_Cotta&oldid=1301895085 " Categories : 124 BC births 73 BC deaths 2nd-century BC Romans 1st-century BC Roman consuls Aurelii Cottae Family of Julius Caesar Senators of the Roman Republic Academic skeptics People of the Sertorian War Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 07:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaius Aurelius Cotta 16 languages Add topic

