Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Organizations Toggle Organizations subsection 2.1 Government agency 2.2 Professional association 2.3 Non-governmental organization 3 Pre colonial period 4 Colonial period Toggle Colonial period subsection 4.1 Early chroniclers 4.2 Colonial Era Historians 5 Post colonial period Toggle Post colonial period subsection 5.1 Writers and Historians from the Nationalist History tradition 5.2 Historians from the Critical Historiography tradition 5.3 Writers from the Folkloristics tradition 5.4 Historians and Writers from the Postmodern, Local/Ethnic History, and Religious History traditions 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Historiography of the Philippines 2 languages Español Tagalog Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on the History of the Philippines Timeline Prehistoric period (pre-900) Early hominin activity Homo luzonensis Tabon Man Austronesian expansion Angono Petroglyphs Lal-lo and Gattaran Shell Middens Sa Huỳnh culture Precolonial barangay Maritime Silk Road Events/Artifacts Balangay Cordillera Rice Terraces Grave goods Kalanay Cave Maitum anthropomorphic pottery Manunggul Jar Prehistoric beads Shell tools Precolonial period (900–1565) Historically documented states/polities (north to south) Pangasinan (historical polity) Caboloan Cainta Tondo Namayan Maynila Kumintang Ibalon Ma-i Pulilu Sandao Madja-as Cebu Bo-ol Butuan Sanmalan Sultanate of Maguindanao Sultanate of Buayan Sultanates of Lanao Sultanate of Sulu Events/Artifacts Maragtas Laguna Copperplate Inscription Butuan Ivory Seal Limestone tombs of Kamhantik Kabayan Mummies Baybayin Batanes Ijang fortresses Golden Tara of Agusan Monreal Stones Butuan Silver Paleograph Piloncitos Barter rings Luzones Magellan expedition Battle of Mactan Spanish colonial period (1565–1898) Events Voyage of Miguel López de Legazpi Sandugo Treaty of Cebu Blockade of Cebu Spanish capture of Manila Battle of Bangkusay New Spain Spanish East Indies Captaincy General Tondo Conspiracy Manila galleon Revolts and uprisings Igorot resistance to Spanish colonization Spanish–Moro conflict Battles of La Naval de Manila British invasion Propaganda Movement 1872 Cavite mutiny La Liga Filipina Katipunan Cry of Pugad Lawin Philippine Revolution Tejeros Convention Republic of Biak-na-Bato Spanish–American War Treaty of Paris (1898) Battle of Manila Bay Declaration of Independence American capture of Manila Malolos Congress First Republic Philippine–American War Artifacts Boxer Codex Doctrina Christiana UST Baybayin Documents Velarde map American colonial period (1898–1946) Tagalog Republic Negros Republic Zamboanga Republic Military Government Moro Rebellion Insular Government Jones Law Tydings–McDuffie Act Commonwealth World War II Japanese occupation Battle of Bataan Battle of Corregidor Second Republic Philippine resistance Hukbalahap Battle of Leyte Gulf Philippines campaign Post-independence (1946–1965) Third Republic Treaty of Manila Mutual Defense Treaty Hukbalahap rebellion Filipino First policy North Borneo dispute Marcos era (1965–1986) Communist rebellion Moro conflict Martial law Fourth Republic People Power Revolution Contemporary period (1986–present) Fifth Republic 1997 Asian financial crisis 2000 campaign against the MILF 2nd People Power Revolution EDSA III Oakwood mutiny Philippine drug war Territorial disputes Siege of Marawi Bangsamoro COVID-19 pandemic By topic Ancient religions Rulers Queen consorts Administrative divisions Agriculture Archaeology Communications Conflicts Cultural achievements Diet and health Education Economy Geography Historiography Languages Medicine Military Names Politics Science and technology World Heritage Sites Philippines portal v t e The historiography of the Philippines includes historical and archival research and writing on the history of the Philippine archipelago including the islands of Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Before the arrival of Spanish colonial powers the Philippines did not actually exist. Southeast Asia is classified as part of the Indosphere [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and the Sinosphere .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The archipelago has direct contact with China during Song dynasty (960-1279) [ 7 ] and has been a part of the Srivijaya and Majapahit empires.

[ 8 ] Overview [ edit ] Historiography of the Philippines refers to the studies, sources, critical methods and interpretations used by scholars to study the history of the Philippines . The Philippine archipelago has been part of many empires before the Spanish empire has arrived in the 16th century.

The pre-colonial Philippines uses the Abugida writing system that has been widely used in writing and seals on documents though it was for communication and no recorded writings of early literature or history [ 9 ] Ancient Filipinos usually write documents on bamboo, bark, and leaves which did not survive unlike inscriptions on clays, metals, and ivories did like the Laguna Copperplate Inscription and Butuan Ivory Seal . The discovery of the Butuan Ivory Seal also proves the use of paper documents in ancient Philippines.

The arrival of the Spanish colonizers, pre-colonial Filipino manuscripts and documents were gathered and burned to eliminate pagan beliefs. This has been the burden of historians in the accumulation of data and the development of theories that gave historians many aspects of Philippine history that were left unexplained.<ref=SebastianUndated / /> The interplay of pre-colonial events, the use of secondary sources written by historians to evaluate the primary sources, do not provide a critical examination of the methodology of the early Philippine historical study.

[ 10 ] Organizations [ edit ] Scholarly organizations and societies have been formed which usually hold conferences, publish journals and promote historical knowledge and studies.

Government agency [ edit ] Main article: National Historical Commission of the Philippines The National Historical Commission of the Philippines is a government agency of the Philippines whose mission is "the promotion of Philippine history and cultural heritage through research, dissemination, conservation, sites management and heraldry works and aims to inculcate awareness and appreciation of the noble deeds and ideals of our heroes and other illustrious Filipinos, to instill pride in the Filipino people and to rekindle the Filipino spirit through the lessons of history.

Professional association [ edit ] Main article: Philippine Historical Association The Philippine Historical Association is the largest professional association of historians in the Philippines founded in 1955 by a group of prominent Filipino historians which includes Encarnacion Alzona , Gabriel Fabella, Gregorio Zaide , Nicolas Zafra, Celedonio Resurreccion, Teodoro Agoncillo and Esteban de Ocampo.

Non-governmental organization [ edit ] The Philippine Association for the Study of Culture, History and Religion is a Non-governmental organization founded in 2013. This group initiates, facilitates, and organizes conferences and other academic events. They disseminate information on scholarship and research opportunities and publication of journals, books, and newsletters in the national and international communities to increase awareness about Philippine culture, history, and religion.

Pre colonial period [ edit ] Laguna Copperplate Inscription Butuan Ivory Seal Monreal stone Pre-colonial Filipino noble couple Indian culture has long reached the archipelago during the period of Pallava dynasty and the Gupta Empire that led to the Indianized kingdoms established in the Philippines.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] A clear evidence is the use of pre-colonial Philippines use of honorific titles . No other significant historical documents from this period except for Laguna Copperplate Inscription , a legal document inscribed on a copper plate dated 900 CE which is the earliest known calendar dated document found in the Philippines.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Ma-i , an ancient sovereign state located in what is now the Philippines is notable in the history of the Philippines for being the first place in the archipelago ever to be mentioned in any foreign account which was first documented in 971 AD, in the Song dynasty documents known as the History of Song .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Its existence was also mentioned in the 10th-century records of the Sultanate of Brunei .

[ 18 ] Until the year 1000 CE, maritime societies exists in the archipelago but there was no significant political state unifying the entire Philippines.

[ 19 ] The region included only numerous small administrative divisions (ranging in size from villages to city-states) under the sovereignty of competing thalassocracies ruled by datus , rajahs , sultans or lakans .

[ 20 ] Colonial period [ edit ] Main article: Historiography of early Philippine settlements § Early Chroniclers The first recorded document that mentions the archipelago was Antonio Pigafetta 's chronicle Report of the first trip around the world on his narrative record of the journey of a Spanish expedition in search of the Spice Islands published sometimes between 1524-1525.

[ 21 ] Another notable document was Antonio de Morga 's Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas published in 1609 based on the author's personal experience and documentations from eye-witnesses of the survivors of Miguel López de Legazpi 's expedition.

Documents published are chronicles by the early Spanish explorers and navigators and religious records of Spanish friars of their Catholic mission during the Spanish colonial period.

[ 22 ] Early chroniclers [ edit ] Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas Boxer Codex Illustrations of tattooed Cebuanos Antonio Pigafetta Rodrigo de Aganduru Moriz Hernando de Riquel Miguel López de Legazpi Juan de Plasencia Pedro de San Buenaventura Pedro Chirino Colonial Era Historians [ edit ] Antonio de Morga Emma Helen Blair and James A. Robertson Francisco Ignacio Alcina Francisco Colin, S.J.

Felix Huerta, O.F.M Ferdinand Blumentritt Isabelo de los Reyes Jose Rizal Pedro Paterno Trinidad Pardo de Tavera Post colonial period [ edit ] The historiography of the post-colonial period focused on the Philippine revolutions and the Philippine–American War as historians saw the colonial era as a prelude. The critical role played by the Filipinos in shaping the Philippine national history in this period is well highlighted and analyzed based on the accounts on the revolution and the Philippine–American War as it describes the social, economic, political, and cultural conditions of the Philippines.

[ 23 ] Historian Reynaldo C. Ileto in his seminal work on Pasyon and Revolution: Popular Movements in the Philippines, 1840-1910 , the historiography of the Philippine Revolution was explored in a new meaning. Historian Vicente L. Rafael introduced poststructuralist theories in the analysis of the colonial society on his Contracting Colonialism: Translation and Christian Conversion in Tagalog Society under Early Spanish Rule .

[ 24 ] Main article: Historiography of early Philippine settlements § Key figures in the Historiography of early Philippine settlements Writers and Historians from the Nationalist History tradition [ edit ] Teodoro Agoncillo Horacio de la Costa Gregorio Zaide O.D. Corpuz Cesar Adib Majul Nick Joaquin Historians from the Critical Historiography tradition [ edit ] Carlos Quirino F. Landa Jocano Felix M. Keesing William Henry Scott Laura Lee Junker Damon L. Woods Writers from the Folkloristics tradition [ edit ] Damiana Eugenio Gilda Cordero-Fernando Grace Odal-Devora Historians and Writers from the Postmodern, Local/Ethnic History, and Religious History traditions [ edit ] Ambeth Ocampo Bambi Harper Melba Padilla Maggay Vicente L. Rafael Go Bon Juan Luciano P.R. Santiago Luis Camara Dery References [ edit ] ^ Foronda, Marcelino A. (1972).

Some Notes on Philippine Historiography . United Publishing Company . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ Sebastian, Raul Roland R.

"Philippine Historiography: Issues and Trends" (PDF) . Polytechnic University of the Philippines. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 1, 2019.

^ Sagar, Krishna Chandra (2002).

An Era of Peace . Northern Book Centre. pp.

39– 51.

ISBN 9788172111212 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Cœdès, George (1968).

The Indianized States of Southeast Asia . Australian National University Press.

ISBN 9780824800710 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Lynn, Pan (1994).

Sons of the Yellow Emperor: A History of the Chinese Diaspora . Kodansha International. p. 418.

ISBN 9781568360324 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Fogel, Joshua A. (2009).

Articulating the Sinosphere: Sino-Japanese Relations in Space and Time . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674053823 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Wickberg, Edgar (2000).

The Chinese in Philippine Life, 1850-1898 . Ateneo University Press.

ISBN 9789715503525 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Francisco, Juan R. (1964).

Indian Influences in the Philippines: With Special Reference to Language and Literature . University of the Philippines. p. 310 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Rodríguez, Rebeca Ferndández (9 July 2013).

"Early writing and printing in the Philippines" .

History and Philosophy of the Language Sciences . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Scott, William Henry (1994).

Barangay: Sixteenth-century Philippine Culture and Society . Ateneo University Press.

ISBN 9789715501354 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Philippine Journal of Linguistics – 23 – p. 67 ^ The Earth and Its Peoples: A Global History by Richard Bulliet, Pamela Crossley, Daniel Headrick, Steven Hirsch, Lyman Johnson p.186 ^ Postma, Antoon (April–June 1992).

"The Laguna Copper-Plate Inscription: Text and Commentary" .

Philippine Studies .

40 (2). Ateneo de Manila University: 182– 203.

JSTOR 42633308 .

^ Tiongson, Jaime F. (August 8, 2010).

"Laguna Copperplate Inscription:  A New Interpretation Using Early Tagalog Dictionaries" . Bayang Pinagpala. Retrieved on 2011-11-18.

Archived September 29, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Valdes, Cynthia O.; Long, Kerry Nguyen; Barbosa, Artemio C. (1992).

A Thousand Years of Stoneware Jars in the Philippines . Jar Collectors (Philippines) with the support of Eugenio Lopez Foundation Incorporated and. p. 71.

ISBN 9789719132905 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Go 2005 .

^ Scott 1989 .

^ Scott 1989 , p. 79.

^ de San Agustin, G.; Díaz, C.; Bardón, T.L. (1975).

Conquistas de las islas Filipinas: la temporal, por las armas del señor don Phelipe Segundo el Prudente; y la espiritval, por los religiosos del orden de nuestro padre San Augustin: fvndacion, y progressos de sv provincia del santissimo nombre de Jesus ...

(in Spanish). L.N. de Gaviria. pp.

374– 376.

^ http://ovcrd.upd.edu.ph/asp/article/view/5493/4927 Victor Estella, The Death of Gold in Early Visayan Societies: Ethnohistoric Accounts and Archaeological Evidences .

^ PIGAFETTA, ANTONIO (1524).

Relazione del primo viaggio intorno al mondo – via Wikisource .

^ Blair, E. H.

"The Philippine Islands, 1493–1803: explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and their peoples, their history and records of the catholic missions, as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the beginning of the nineteenth century, Volume III, 1569–1576" .

www.gutenberg.org . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Gealogo, Francis A. (2003).

"Katagalugan Historiography: Historical Sources, Current Trends, and Future Prospects" .

The Journal of History .

49 ( 1– 4): 1 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ Yoneno-Reyes, Michiyo; Nagano, Yoshiko (7 June 2007).

"Philippine Historiography and Colonial Discourse: Eight Selected Essays on Postcolonial Studies in the Philippines (An Introduction to the Japanese Translation) by Yoshiko Nagano (translated into English by Michiyo Yoneno-Reyes)" . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

Works cited [ edit ] Go, Bon Juan (2005).

"Ma'I in Chinese Records - Mindoro or Bai? An Examination of a Historical Puzzle" .

Philippine Studies .

53 (1). Ateneo de Manila UP: 119– 138.

Archived from the original on October 21, 2013.

Scott, William Henry (1989). "Societies in Prehispanic Philippines".

Prehispanic Source Materials for the Study of Philippine History . Quezon City: New Day Publishers.

ISBN 978-9711002268 .

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5fd594db65‐phkm5
Cached time: 20250805055750
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.718 seconds
Real time usage: 0.851 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7343/1000000
Revision size: 16656/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 373082/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11582/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 106196/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.335/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8295957/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  622.015      1 -total
 34.23%  212.903      1 Template:Reflist
 33.40%  207.741      1 Template:Historiography
 32.81%  204.070      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 31.42%  195.414     16 Template:Navbox
 20.83%  129.558     11 Template:Cite_book
 17.66%  109.827      1 Template:History_of_the_Philippines
 16.94%  105.368     36 Template:Ill
  7.30%   45.434      5 Template:Flatlist
  6.28%   39.052     36 Template:Separated_entries Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:61933395:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250805055750 and revision id 1177931557. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historiography_of_the_Philippines&oldid=1177931557 " Categories : Historiography of the Philippines History of the Philippines Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) This page was last edited on 30 September 2023, at 15:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historiography of the Philippines 2 languages Add topic

