Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Hereditary and constitutional Toggle Hereditary and constitutional subsection 2.1 Leopold I, Leopold II and Albert I 2.2 Leopold III and Baudouin 2.3 Constitutional, political, and historical consequences 3 List of kings of the Belgians 4 Title 5 Constitutional role Toggle Constitutional role subsection 5.1 Inviolability 5.2 Traditions 6 Popular support 7 Royal Household 8 Royal family Toggle Royal family subsection 8.1 Other members of the royal family 8.2 Other descendants of Leopold III 8.3 Family tree of members 9 Deceased members 10 Royal consorts 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Monarchy of Belgium 30 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Lietuvių Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Română Shqip සිංහල Simple English Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Belgian royal family ) "King of the Belgians" redirects here. For the 2016 film, see King of the Belgians (film) .

King of the Belgians Koning der Belgen ( Dutch ) Roi des Belges ( French ) König der Belgier ( German ) Federal Royal coat of arms of Belgium Incumbent Philippe since 21 July 2013 Details Style His Majesty Heir apparent Princess Elisabeth, Duchess of Brabant First monarch Leopold I Formation 21 July 1831 ; 194 years ago ( 1831-07-21 ) Residence Royal Palace of Brussels Royal Castle of Laeken Website monarchie.be House of Belgium Saxe-Coburg-Belgium Coat of arms of the Royal House Parent house Saxe-Coburg and Gotha Place of origin Belgium Founded 1831 ; 194 years ago ( 1831 ) Founder Leopold I of Belgium Current head Philippe Politics of Belgium Constitution Taxation Constitutional Court Monarchy Monarch ( list ) Philippe Duchess of Brabant Elisabeth of Belgium Crown Council Royal Family Federal Parliament Senate President : Vincent Blondel Chamber of Representatives President : Peter De Roover Federal Cabinet De Wever Government Prime Minister : Bart De Wever Judiciary Administrative jurisdictions Council of State Highest court Court of Cassation Appellate courts Court of appeal Court of labour Trial courts Court of assizes Tribunal of first instance Civil tribunal Correctional tribunal Family and juvenile tribunal Sentence enforcement tribunal Labour tribunal Enterprise tribunal Minor crimes Minor claims Police tribunal Justice of the peace Recent elections European 2009 2014 2019 2024 Federal 2010 2014 2019 2024 Regional 2009 2014 2019 2024 Local 2006 2012 2018 2024 Political parties Subdivisions Communities and regions Provinces Arrondissements Municipalities Foreign relations France-Belgium relations Belgium-Germany relations Belgium-United Kingdom relations Belgium-Netherlands relations Belgium–Luxembourg relations Politics of the European Union Belgium portal Other countries v t e The monarchy of Belgium is the constitutional and hereditary institution of the monarchical head of state of the Kingdom of Belgium . As a popular monarchy , the Belgian monarch uses the title king/queen of the Belgians [ a ] and serves as the country's head of state and commander-in-chief of the Belgian Armed Forces .

[ 1 ] There have been seven Belgian monarchs since independence in 1830.

[ 2 ] The incumbent, Philippe , ascended the throne on 21 July 2013, following the abdication of his father Albert II .

[ 3 ] Origins [ edit ] Main article: History of Belgium When Belgium gained independence from the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1830, the National Congress chose a constitutional monarchy as the form of government . The Congress voted on the question on 22 November 1830, supporting monarchy by 174 votes to 13. In February 1831, the Congress nominated Louis, Duke of Nemours , the son of the French king Louis-Philippe , but international considerations deterred Louis-Philippe from accepting the honour for his son.

[ 4 ] Following this refusal, the National Congress appointed Erasme-Louis, Baron Surlet de Chokier to be the Regent of Belgium on 25 February 1831.

Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld , since 1826 also called Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha , was designated as King of the Belgians by the National Congress and swore allegiance to the Belgian constitution in front of the Church of St. James on Coudenberg in Brussels on 21 July.

[ 2 ] This day has since become a national holiday for Belgium and its citizens.

[ 5 ] Hereditary and constitutional [ edit ] As a hereditary constitutional monarchy system, the role and operation of Belgium's monarchy are governed by the Constitution . The royal office of King is designated solely for a descendant of the first King of the Belgians, Leopold I.

Since he is bound by the Constitution (above all other ideological and religious considerations, political opinions and debates and economic interests) the King is intended to act as an arbiter and guardian of Belgian national unity and independence.

[ 6 ] Belgium's monarchs are inaugurated in a purely civil swearing-in ceremony .

Leopold I, Leopold II and Albert I [ edit ] King Leopold I was head of Foreign Affairs "as an ancien régime monarch", the foreign ministers having the authority to act only as ministers of the king.

[ 7 ] Leopold I quickly became one of the most important shareholders of the Société Générale de Belgique .

[ 8 ] Equestrian statue of King Leopold II in Brussels, Belgium Leopold's son, King Leopold II , is chiefly remembered for the founding and capitalization of the Congo Free State as a personal fiefdom. There was scandal when the atrocities in the Congo Free State were made public, causing the Free State to be taken over by the Belgian Government. Many Congolese were killed as a result of Leopold's policies in the Congo before the reforms of direct Belgian rule.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] The Free State scandal is discussed at the Museum of the Congo at Tervuren in Belgium.

[ 12 ] On several occasions Leopold II publicly expressed disagreement with the ruling government (e.g. on 15 August 1887, and in 1905, against Prime Minister Auguste Beernaert ) [ 13 ] and was accused by Yvon Gouet of noncompliance with the country's parliamentary system.

[ 14 ] Leopold II died without surviving legitimate sons. The line now descends from his nephew and successor, Albert I of Belgium , who ruled while 90% of Belgium was overrun by the forces of Kaiser Wilhelm II and is notable for his forays into colonial rule of the Belgian Congo and later, abeyant Wilhelm , the League of Nations mandate in Ruanda-Urundi . In 1934, Albert died under mysterious circumstances as he climbed solo on the Roche du Vieux Bon Dieu at Marche-les-Dames .

Leopold III and Baudouin [ edit ] Louis Wodon (the chef de cabinet of Leopold III from 1934 to 1940), thought the King's oath to the Constitution implied a royal position "over and above the Constitution". He compared the King to a father, the head of a family: "Regarding the moral mission of the king, it is permissible to point to a certain analogy between his role and that of a father, or more generally, of parents in a family. The family is, of course, a legal institution as is the state. But what would a family be where everything was limited among those who compose it to simply legal relationships? In a family when one considers only legal relationships one comes very close to a breakdown in the moral ties founded on reciprocal affection without which a family would be like any other fragile association" [ 15 ] According to Arango, Leopold III of Belgium shared these views about the Belgian monarchy.

In 1991, towards the end of the reign of Baudouin , Senator Yves de Wasseige, a former member of the Belgian Constitutional Court , cited four points at which the Belgian Constitution lacks democracy: [ 16 ] the King chooses the ministers, the King is able to influence the ministers when he speaks with them about bills, projects and nominations, the King promulgates bills, and, the King must agree to any change of the Constitution Constitutional, political, and historical consequences [ edit ] The Belgian monarchy was from the beginning a constitutional monarchy, patterned after that of the United Kingdom.

[ 17 ] Raymond Fusilier wrote the Belgian regime of 1830 was also inspired by the French Constitution of the Kingdom of France (1791–1792) , the United States Declaration of Independence of 1776, and the old political traditions of both Walloon and Flemish provinces.

[ 18 ] "It should be observed that all monarchies have suffered periods of change as a result of which the power of the sovereign was reduced, but for the most part those periods occurred before the development of the system of constitutional monarchy and were steps leading to its establishment." [ 17 ] The characteristic evidence of this is in Great Britain where there was an evolution from the time when kings ruled through the agency of ministers to that time when ministers began to govern through the instrumentality of the Crown .

Unlike the British constitutional system, in Belgium "the monarchy underwent a belated evolution" which came "after the establishment of the constitutional monarchical system" [ 19 ] because, in 1830–1831, an independent state, parliamentary system and monarchy were established simultaneously. Hans Daalder, professor of political science at the Rijksuniversiteit Leiden wrote: "Did such simultaneous developments not result in a possible failure to lay down the limits of the royal prerogatives with some precision—which implied that the view of the King as the Keeper of the Nation, with rights and duties of its own, retained legitimacy?" [ 20 ] For Raymond Fusilier, the Belgian monarchy had to be placed—at least in the beginning—between the regimes where the king rules and those in which the king does not rule but only reigns . The Belgian monarchy is closer to the principle "the King does not rule", [ 21 ] but the Belgian kings were not only "at the head of the dignified part of the Constitution".

[ 22 ] The Belgian monarchy is not merely symbolic, because it participates in directing affairs of state insofar as the King's will coincides with that of the ministers, who alone bear responsibility for the policy of government.

[ 23 ] For Francis Delpérée , to reign does not only mean to preside over ceremonies but also to take a part in the running of the State.

[ 24 ] The Belgian historian Jean Stengers wrote that "some foreigners believe the monarchy is indispensable to national unity. That is very naive. He is only a piece on the chessboard, but a piece which matters".

[ 25 ] List of kings of the Belgians [ edit ] Main article: List of Belgian monarchs The monarchs of Belgium originally belonged to the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha . The family name was changed by Albert I in 1920, to the House of Belgium [ 26 ] [ 27 ] and the armorial bearings of Saxony from the House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha were dropped from the Belgian royal coat of arms.

[ 27 ] In 2019, King Phillippe codified the coats of arms of himself and those of his family through Royal Decree . The personal arms of the reigning monarch was modified to restore the Saxonian escutcheon. The arms of other members of the royal family were similarly modified.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The reinstatement of the shield of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha into the royal arms occurred shortly after the visit of the king and queen to their ancestral Friedenstein Castle . The latest royal decree therefore reverses previous changes made to Royal versions of the coat arms which removed these Saxon ties during the First World War.

[ 30 ] By including the three official languages in the motto it reflects his wish "to be the King of the whole Kingdom and of all Belgians".

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] The coat of arms of Belgium remains unchanged, i.e. it does not incorporate the Saxon arms.

Since the 2017 edition of the Carnet Mondain , the title "Saxe-Cobourg-Gotha", along with "of Belgium" were again in use for all descendants of Leopold I, with the exception of King Philippe , his wife , his sister and his brother ,who keep their title "of Belgium"; therefore, the descendants of Astrid of Belgium do not bear this title, but that of "of Austria-Este" from their father .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] For completeness, the family tree should include Princess Delphine of Belgium (born 1968). She is the legally acknowledged half-sibling of King Philippe of Belgium , and her children are also recognised as members of the royal family.

Leopold I [ 36 ] King of the Belgians 1790–1865 r.1831-1865 Leopold II [ 37 ] King of the Belgians 1835–1909 r.1865-1909 Philippe Count of Flanders 1837–1905 Albert I [ 38 ] King of the Belgians 1875–1934 r.1909-1934 Leopold III King of the Belgians 1901–1983 r.1934-1951 Baudouin [ 39 ] King of the Belgians 1930–1993 r.1951-1993 Albert II King of the Belgians b. 1934 r.1993-2013 Philippe [ 40 ] King of the Belgians b. 1960 r.2013-present Title [ edit ] The proper title of the Belgian monarch is "King of the Belgians " rather than "King of Belgium " as is common for other monarchies throughout Europe. The title is linked to a concept of popular monarchy as defined by Kingsley Martin in his work The Evolution of Popular Monarchy , published in 1936. According to Martin, the term is meant to emphasize the bond and connection to the people of the land over the territory the state controls.

[ 41 ] His work further implies that such a monarch is de facto appointed by the people as a nominal figurehead rather than being an authoritarian ruler.

[ 41 ] Belgium is the only extant European monarchy in which the heir to the throne does not ascend immediately upon the death or abdication of his or her predecessor. According to Article 91 of the Belgian constitution , the heir accedes to the throne only upon taking a constitutional oath before a joint session of the two Houses of Parliament .

[ 42 ] The joint session has to be held within ten days of the death or abdication of the previous monarch. The new Belgian monarch is required to take the Belgian constitutional oath, "I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Belgian people, to maintain the national independence and the integrity of the territory," which is uttered in the three official languages: French , Dutch , and German .

Members of the Belgian royal family are often known by two names: a Dutch and a French one. For example, the current monarch is called 'Philippe' in French and 'Filip' in Dutch; the fifth King of the Belgians was 'Baudouin' in French and 'Boudewijn' in Dutch.

In contrast to King Philippe's title of "King of the Belgians", Princess Elisabeth is called "Princess of Belgium " as the title "Prince of the Belgians" does not exist. She is also Duchess of Brabant , the traditional title of the heir apparent to the Belgian throne. This title precedes the title "Princess of Belgium".

In the other official language of German, monarchs are usually referred to by their French names. The same is true for English with the exception of Leopold, where the accent is removed for the purpose of simplicity.

Because of the First World War and the resultant strong anti-German sentiment, the family name was changed in 1920, from Saxe-Coburg-Gotha to van België, de Belgique , or von Belgien ("of Belgium"), depending upon which of the country's three official languages (Dutch, French, and German) is in use. It is this family name which is used on the identity cards and in all official documents by Belgium's royalty (e.g. marriage licenses). In addition to this change of name, the armorial bearings of Saxony were removed from the Belgian royal coat of arms ( see above ). Other Coburgers from the multi-branched Saxe-Coburg family have also changed their name, such as George V , who adopted the family name of Windsor after the British royal family 's place of residence.

[ 43 ] Only Simeon Sakskoburggotski kept his Saxony-Coburg family name, but he was ousted from the Bulgarian throne in 1946 at the age of nine.

Nevertheless, the Royal Decree published on 19 July and signed on 12 July 2019 by King Philip , reinstated the Saxonian escutcheon in the all royal versions of the family's coat of arms.

[ 28 ] [ 44 ] The reinstatement of the Saxe-Coburg-Gotha main royal arms occurred shortly after the visit of King Philip and Queen Mathilde to the ancestral Friedenstein Castle .

[ citation needed ] Constitutional role [ edit ] Busts of the first five Kings of the Belgians The Belgian monarchy symbolises and maintains a feeling of national unity by representing the country in public functions and international meetings.

In addition, the monarch has a number of responsibilities in the process of the formation of the Government. The procedure usually begins with the nomination of the " Informateur " by the monarch. After the general election the Informateur officially informs the monarch of the main political formations which may be available for governance. After this phase, the monarch can appoint another "informateur" or appoint a " Formateur ", who will have the charge of forming a new government, of which he or she generally becomes the Prime Minister.

Article 37 of the Constitution of Belgium vests the "federal executive power" in the monarch. Under Section III, this power includes the appointment and dismissal of ministers, the implementation of the laws passed by the Federal Parliament , the submission of bills to the Federal Parliament and the management of international relations. The monarch sanctions and promulgates all laws passed by Parliament. In accordance with Article 106 of the Belgian Constitution, the monarch is required to exercise his powers through the ministers. His acts are not valid without the countersignature of the responsible minister, who in doing so assumes political responsibility for the act in question. This means that federal executive power is exercised in practice by the Federal Government , which is accountable to the Chamber of Representatives in accordance with Article 101 of the Constitution.

The monarch receives the prime minister at the Palace of Brussels at least once a week, and also regularly calls other members of the government to the palace in order to discuss political matters. During these meetings, the monarch has the right to be informed of proposed governmental policies, the right to advise, and the right to warn on any matter as the monarch sees fit. The monarch also holds meetings with the leaders of all the major political parties and regular members of parliament. All of these meetings are organised by the monarch's personal political cabinet which is part of the Royal Household.

The monarch is the Commander-in-Chief of the Belgian Armed Forces and makes appointments to the higher positions. The names of the nominees are sent to the monarch by the Ministry of Defence. The monarch's military duties are carried out with the help of the Military Household which is headed by a General office. Belgians may write to the monarch when they meet difficulties with administrative powers.

The monarch is also one of the three components of the federal legislative power, in accordance with the Belgian Constitution, together with the two chambers of the Federal Parliament : the Chamber of Representatives and the Senate . All laws passed by the Federal Parliament must be signed and promulgated by the monarch.

Previously, children of the King were entitled to a seat in the senate ( Senator by right ) when they were 18. This right was abolished in 2014 as part of the Sixth Belgian state reform .

Inviolability [ edit ] The Basilica of the Sacred Heart in Brussels is the National Basilica of Belgium.

The Inviolability of Monarchy is a legal principle in Belgium that protects the King or Queen from legal prosecution, civil or criminal, during their reign. This principle is enshrined in Article 88 of the Belgian Constitution .

According to this principle, the King or Queen cannot be held responsible for their actions as monarch, nor can they be subjected to legal proceedings during their reign. This is intended to ensure that the monarch can perform their duties without fear of political interference or retribution.

However, it is important to note that the principle of inviolability does not extend to the actions of the monarch outside of their official duties. If a monarch commits a crime or engages in unlawful activities outside of their role as head of state, they can still be held legally accountable for their actions.

[ 45 ] In Belgium, the principle of inviolability is seen as an important safeguard for the constitutional monarchy, which is a key component of the country's political system. It is also seen as a way to ensure that the monarch can act as a unifying figure for the country, representing all Belgians regardless of political affiliation or ideology.

Overall, the principle of inviolability of the monarchy in Belgium is a key feature of the country's political system, designed to protect the monarch and preserve the stability of the constitutional monarchy.

Traditions [ edit ] The Court still keeps some old traditions, most famous is the tradition that the Reigning King of the Belgians becomes the godfather of a seventh son and the Queen the godmother of a seventh daughter.

[ 46 ] The child is then given the name of the Sovereign and receives a gift from the palace and Burgomaster of the city.

[ 47 ] Similar traditions are attached to the Russian Tsar and the President of Argentina .

[ 48 ] Another tradition is the centuries-old ceremonial welcome the new king receives in the country during the Joyous Entry ; this tradition apparently dates back to the Dukes of Brabant .

Popular support [ edit ] Popular support for the monarchy had historically been higher in Flanders and lower in Wallonia . The generally pro-monarchy Catholic Party and later Christian Social Party dominated in Flanders, while the more industrialised Wallonia had more support for the Belgian Labour Party and later Socialist Party . For example, the 1950 referendum saw Flanders voting strongly in favour of King Leopold III returning, whereas Wallonia was largely against. However, in recent decades these roles have reversed, as religiosity in Flanders has decreased and the King is seen as protecting the country against (Flemish) separatism and the country's partition .

[ 49 ] Royal Household [ edit ] Au grand Rasoir, a Royal warrant holder with Royal crest.

The Royal palace is used for state occasions at court.

The King's Household ( Dutch : Het Huis van de Koning , French : La Maison du Roi , German : Das Haus des Königs ) was reorganised in 2006, and consists of seven autonomous departments and the Court's Steering Committee. Each Head of Department is responsible for his department and is accountable to the King.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] The following departments currently make up the King's Household: [ 53 ] the Department for Economic, Social and Cultural Affairs the King's Cabinet the King's Military Household the King's Civil List the Department for Foreign Relations the Department of the Protocol of the Court the Department of Petitions The King's Chief of Cabinet is responsible for dealing with political and administrative matters and for maintaining the relations with the government, trade unions and industrial circles. In relation to the King, the Chief assists in keeping track of current events; informs regarding all aspects of Belgian life; proposes and prepares audiences; assists in preparing speeches and informs the King about developments in international affairs. The Chief of Cabinet is assisted by the Deputy and Legal Adviser, the Press Adviser and the Archivist. The incumbent Chief of Cabinet is Baron Frans Van Daele, former Chief of Cabinet of President of the European Council Herman Van Rompuy.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] King Philippe and Queen Mathilde wave to the crowds in Brussels after Philippe's swearing in as the new Belgian monarch, 21 July 2013.

The Head of the King's Military Household assists the King in fulfilling his duties in the field of defence. He informs the King about all matters of security, defence policy, the views of Belgium's main partner countries and all aspects of the Belgian Armed Forces . He organises the King's contacts with the Armed Forces, advises in the fields of scientific research and police and coordinates matters with patriotic associations and former service personnel. The Military Household is also responsible for managing the Palace's computer system. The Head of the Military Household is a General Officer , currently General Jef Van den put and assisted by an adviser, currently Lieutenant-Colonel Aviator Serge Vassart . The King's Aides-de-Camp and the King's Equerries are also attached to the Military Household.

[ 53 ] [ 56 ] The King's aides-de-camp are senior officers chosen by the monarch and charged with carrying out certain tasks on his behalf, such as representing him at events. The King's Equerries are young officers who take turns preparing the King's activities, informing him about all the aspects that may be important to him and providing any other useful services such as announcing visitors. The equerry accompanies the King on his trips except for those of a strictly private nature.

[ 56 ] The Intendant of the King's Civil List is responsible for managing the material, financial and human resources of the King's Household. He is assisted by the Commandant of the Royal Palaces, the Treasurer of the King's Civil List and the Civil List Adviser. The Intendant of the Civil List also advises the King in the field of energy, sciences and culture and administers the King's hunting rights. The Commandant of the Royal Palaces is mainly in charge, in close cooperation with the Chief of Protocol, of the logistic support of activities and the maintenance and cleaning of the Palaces, Castles and Residences. He is also Director of the Royal Hunts.

[ 57 ] The Chief of Protocol is charged with organising the public engagements of the King and the Queen, such as audiences, receptions and official banquets at the Palace, as well as formal activities outside of the Palace. He is assisted by the Queen's Secretary, who is mainly responsible for proposing and preparing the Queen's audiences and visits.

[ 53 ] The Head of the Department for Economic, Social and Cultural Affairs advises the King in the economic, social and cultural fields. He is also responsible for providing coordination between the various Households and Services and for organising and minuting the meetings of the Steering Committee. The Head of the Department for Foreign Relations informs the King of developments in international policy, assists the King from a diplomatic viewpoint on royal visits abroad and prepares the King's audiences in the international field. He is also responsible for maintaining contacts with foreign diplomatic missions. The Head of the Department of Petitions is charged with processing petitions and requests for social aid addressed the King, the Queen or other members of the royal family. He is also responsible for the analysis and coordination of royal favours and activities relating to jubilees, and advises the King in the fields for which he is responsible.

[ 58 ] For the personal protection of the King and the royal family, as well as for the surveillance of the royal estates, the Belgian Federal Police at all times provides a security detail to the Royal Palace, commanded by a chief police commissioner.

[ 59 ] The other members of the royal family have a service at their disposal.

[ 60 ] Royal family [ edit ] Belgian royal family The King The Queen The Duchess of Brabant Prince Gabriel Prince Emmanuel Princess Eléonore King Albert II Queen Paola Princess Astrid Prince Lorenz Prince Amedeo Princess Elisabetta Princess Maria Laura Prince Joachim Princess Luisa Maria Princess Laetitia Maria Prince Laurent Princess Claire Princess Louise Prince Nicolas Prince Aymeric Princess Delphine Princess Joséphine Prince Oscar Princess Léa Princess Marie-Christine, Mrs Gourges Princess Marie-Esméralda, Lady Moncada v t e Members of the Belgian royal family, other than the monarch, hold the title of Prince or Princess of Belgium, with the style of Royal Highness . Prior to the First World War , they used the additional titles of Prince or Princess of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Duke or Duchess of Saxony, as members of the House of Wettin .

The title Prince or Princess of Belgium is a specific noble title within the Belgian nobility reserved for members of the Belgian royal family. Originally the Royal Decree of 14 March 1891, reserved this title for all persons descending in the direct male line from king Leopold I . The royal decree also automatically granted the title to the princesses who joined the Belgian royal family by their marriage to a Prince of Belgium. This royal decree was amended by the Royal Decree of 2 December 1991, which reserved the title for the direct male and female descendants of Albert II and abolished the Salic Law with regards to its granting. The Royal Decree of 12 November 2015, published in the Belgian official journal on 24 November 2015, abolished the aforementioned Royal Decree of 1991, and restricts new grants of this title to the children and grandchildren of the reigning monarch, and to the children and grandchildren of the crown prince(ss). The spouse of a Prince or Princess of Belgium is no longer automatically granted the title but he or she can still be granted the title by royal decree on an individual basis.

[ 61 ] Prior to this, all descendants of Albert II were entitled to the title of prince or princess.

[ 62 ] King Philippe (born 15 April 1960) is King of the Belgians. He married, on 4 December 1999, Jonkvrouwe Mathilde d'Udekem d'Acoz , who was created Princess Mathilde of Belgium a day before their wedding , after which she also took the title Duchess of Brabant as the wife of the Duke of Brabant , and became, from 21 July 2013, Queen Mathilde of the Belgians. She is a daughter of Patrick d'Udekem d'Acoz (made a count prior to the wedding) and his wife, Countess Anna Maria Komorowska .

[ 3 ] They have four children: Princess Elisabeth, Duchess of Brabant , who will inherit the throne after her father due to a 1991 act of succession which established absolute (gender-neutral) primogeniture , altering the order of succession from "eldest son" to "eldest child".

[ 63 ] Prince Gabriel of Belgium [ 64 ] Prince Emmanuel of Belgium [ 65 ] Princess Eléonore of Belgium [ 66 ] Other members of the royal family [ edit ] King Albert II (born 6 June 1934). He was the king between 1993 (following the death of his brother King Baudouin ) and 21 July 2013, the Belgian National Day, when he abdicated in favour of his son Philippe, Duke of Brabant, because of ill health.

[ 67 ] On 2 July 1959, he married Donna Paola Ruffo di Calabria (born 11 September 1937) in Brussels, who became HRH Princess Paola of Belgium, Princess of Liège, and after 1993, became Queen Paola of the Belgians. She is the daughter of Fulco VIII, Prince Ruffo di Calabria, 6th Duke of Guardia Lombarda (1884–1946) and his wife, Luisa Gazelli dei Conti di Rossana e di Sebastiano (1896–1989).

[ 68 ] Together they have three children, the current king (see above), a daughter and another son: Princess Astrid, Archduchess of Austria-Este (born 5 June 1962). She is the wife of Prince Lorenz of Belgium, Archduke of Austria-Este , Prince Royal of Hungary and Bohemia, whom she married on 22 September 1984 and who was created a prince of Belgium in 1995. Princess Astrid, with her own descendants, is before her brother Laurent in the order of succession to the Belgian throne, due to the 1991 act of succession mentioned above.

[ 69 ] They have five children: Prince Amedeo of Belgium, Archduke of Austria-Este . He married Elisabetta Maria Rosboch von Wolkenstein on 5 July 2014. They have two daughters and one son: Archduchess Anna Astrid of Austria-Este Archduke Maximilian of Austria-Este Archduchess Alix of Austria-Este Princess Maria Laura of Belgium, Archduchess of Austria-Este . She married William Isvy on 10 September 2022. They have one son: Albert Isvy Prince Joachim of Belgium, Archduke of Austria-Este Princess Luisa Maria of Belgium, Archduchess of Austria-Este Princess Laetitia Maria of Belgium, Archduchess of Austria-Este Prince Laurent of Belgium (born 19 October 1963). He married Claire Coombs , an Anglo-Belgian former land surveyor , on 12 April 2003, who was created HRH Princess Claire of Belgium 11 days before their wedding.

[ 70 ] They have one daughter and two sons: Princess Louise of Belgium Prince Nicolas of Belgium Prince Aymeric of Belgium Princess Delphine of Belgium (born 22 February 1968). She is the non-marital daughter of King Albert II by his former mistress, Baroness Sybille de Selys Longchamps . After winning a paternity case in 2020, she and her children were elevated to the rank of prince/princess of Belgium by a court ruling on 1 October 2020. She has been in a relationship with James O'Hare since 2000.

[ 71 ] They have one daughter and one son: Princess Joséphine of Belgium Prince Oscar of Belgium Other descendants of Leopold III [ edit ] Source: [ 72 ] Princess Léa of Belgium (born 2 December 1951). She is the widow of Prince Alexandre of Belgium , half-brother of both Kings Baudouin and Albert II , and half-uncle of King Philippe .

Princess Marie-Christine, Mrs Gourgues (born 6 February 1951). She is the eldest daughter of Leopold III and Lilian, Princess of Réthy , half-sister of both Kings Baudouin and Albert II and half-aunt of King Philippe . Her first marriage, to Paul Drucker (Toronto, Ontario, 1 November 1937 – 1 April 2008) in Coral Gables, Miami-Dade County, Florida, on 23 May 1981, lasted 40 days (though they weren't formally divorced till 1985); she subsequently married Jean-Paul Gourges in Los Angeles, California, on 28 September 1989.

Princess Marie-Esméralda, Lady Moncada (born 30 September 1956). She is the youngest daughter of Leopold III and Lilian, Princess of Réthy , half-sister of both Kings Baudouin and Albert II and half-aunt of King Philippe . Princess Marie-Esméralda is a journalist, writing under the name Esméralda de Réthy . She married Sir Salvador Moncada , a Honduran-British pharmacologist, in London on 4 April 1998. They have a daughter, Alexandra Leopoldine (born in London on 4 August 1998), and a son, Leopoldo Daniel (born in London on 21 May 2001).

Family tree of members [ edit ] See also: Family tree of Belgian monarchs Family tree Queen Astrid King Leopold III Lilian, Princess of Réthy King Albert II Queen Paola Prince Alexander Princess Léa Princess Marie-Christine, Mrs. Gourges Princess Maria-Esméralda, Lady Moncada The King The Queen The Archduchess of Austria-Este The Archduke of Austria-Este Prince Laurent Princess Claire Princess Louise Prince Nicolas Prince Aymeric Prince Amedeo, Archduke of Austria-Este Princess Elisabetta, Archduchess of Austria-Este Princess Maria Laura, Archduchess of Austria-Este Prince Joachim, Archduke of Austria-Este Princess Luisa Maria, Archduchess of Austria-Este Princess Laetitia Maria, Archduchess of Austria-Este The Duchess of Brabant Prince Gabriel Prince Emmanuel Princess Eléonore Deceased members [ edit ] King Albert and Queen Elisabeth in prayer for Our Lady of Laeken, an image displaying the Catholic faith of the royal house.

Crown Prince Louis Philippe (eldest son of Leopold I, died in 1834); Queen Louise-Marie (second wife of Leopold I, died in 1850); King Leopold I (second son of Prince Francis , died in 1865); Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico (husband of Princess Charlotte , daughter of Leopold I, died in 1867); Prince Leopold, Duke of Brabant (eldest son of Leopold II, died in 1869); Princess Joséphine-Marie (second daughter of Prince Philippe, third son of Leopold I, died in 1871); Crown Prince Rudolf of Austria (first husband of Princess Stéphanie , daughter of Leopold II, died in 1889); Prince Baudouin (eldest son of Prince Philippe, third son of Leopold I, died in 1891); Queen Marie Henriette (wife of Leopold II, died in 1902); Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders (third son of Leopold I, died in 1905); King Leopold II (second son of Leopold I, died in 1909); Princess Marie, Countess of Flandres (widow of Prince Philippe, third son of Leopold I, died in 1912); Prince Karl Anton of Hohenzollern (husband of Princess Joséphine Caroline , sister of Albert I, died in 1919); Prince Philipp of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, Duke in Saxony (husband of Princess Louise, daughter of Leopold II, died in 1921); Princess Louise of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, Duchess in Saxony (eldest daughter of Leopold II, died in 1924); Prince Victor, Prince Napoléon (husband of Princess Clémentine , daughter of Leopold II, died in 1926); Empress Carlota of Mexico (eldest daughter of Leopold I, died in 1927); Prince Emmanuel, Duke of Vendôme and Alençon (husband of Princess Henriette, sister of Albert I, died in 1931); King Albert I (youngest son of Prince Philippe, third son of Leopold I, died in 1934); Queen Astrid (first wife of Leopold III, died in 1935); Crown Princess Stéphanie of Austria, Princess Lónyai de Nagy-Lónya (eldest daughter of Leopold II, died in 1945); Prince Elemér Lónyai de Nagy-Lónya (widower of Princess Stéphanie, daughter of Leopold II, died in 1946); Princess Henriette, Duchess of Vendôme and Alençon (eldest daughter of Prince Philippe, third son of Leopold I, died in 1948); Clémentine, Princess Napoléon (youngest daughter of Leopold II, died in 1955); Princess Joséphine-Caroline of Hohenzollern (third daughter of Prince Philippe, son of Leopold I, died in 1958); Queen Elisabeth (widow of Albert I, died in 1965); King Umberto II of Italy (husband of Princess Maria-José , daughter of Albert I, died in 1983); Prince Regent Charles, Count of Flanders (second son of Albert I, died in 1983); King Leopold III (eldest son of Albert I, died in 1983); King Baudouin I (eldest son of Leopold III, died in 1993); Queen Marie-José of Italy (eldest daughter of Albert I, died in 2001); Lilian, Princess of Réthy (second wife of Leopold III, died in 2002); Grand Duchess Joséphine-Charlotte of Luxembourg (eldest daughter of Leopold III, died in 2005); Prince Alexandre (third son of Leopold III, died in 2009); Queen Fabiola (widow of Baudouin I, died in 2014); Grand Duke Jean of Luxembourg (widower of Princess Joséphine-Charlotte, daughter of Leopold III, died in 2019); Royal consorts [ edit ] Main article: List of Belgian royal consorts Princess Louise d'Orléans (second wife of King Leopold I) Archduchess Marie Henriette of Austria (wife of King Leopold II) Duchess Elisabeth in Bavaria (wife of King Albert I) Princess Astrid of Sweden (first wife of King Leopold III) Mary Lilian Baels * (second wife of King Leopold III) Doña Fabiola de Mora y Aragón (wife of King Baudouin) Donna Paola Ruffo di Calabria (wife of King Albert II) Jonkvrouwe Mathilde d'Udekem d'Acoz (wife of King Philippe) See also [ edit ] List of Belgian monarchs List of heirs to the Belgian throne Line of succession to the Belgian throne Crown Council of Belgium Notes [ edit ] ^ Dutch : Koning(in) der Belgen , French : Roi / Reine des Belges , German : König(in) der Belgier References [ edit ] ^ "The King - For Children" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ a b "History" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ a b "The King" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "The Belgian Revolution and the Dissolution of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands (1830–1839)" .

Oxford Public International Law . © Oxford University Press . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Belgian Federal Government.

"National Day and feast days of Communities and Regions" . Retrieved 4 December 2023 .

^ "La Constitution Belge" [The Belgian Constitution] (PDF) .

Belgian Federal Parliament . May 2014 . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ Van Kalken, Frans (1950).

La Belgique contemporaine (1780–1949) (in French). Paris: Armand Colin. p. 43.

...dirigeant personnellement les Affaires étrangères, comme un souverain d'Ancien Régime, en discutant toutes les questions importantes avec ses ministres, ceux-ci n'ayant d'autorité que pour autant qu'ils étaient ministres du roi...

^ Lebrun, Pierre (1981).

Essai sur la révolution industrielle en Belgique: 1770–1847 (in French) (Second ed.). Bruxelles: Palais des Académies.

^ Forbath, Peter (1977).

The River Congo: The Discovery, Exploration and Exploitation of the World's Most Dramatic Rivers . Harper & Row. p. 278.

ISBN 978-0061224904 .

^ Wertham, Frederic (1969).

A Sign For Cain: An Exploration of Human Violence . Paperback Library.

[ page needed ] ^ Hochschild, Adam (1998).

King Leopold's Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror, and Heroism in Colonial Africa . Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-0618001903 .

King Leopold's Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror, and Heroism in Colonial Africa.

^ "A Belgian Visit to "Kongo" " .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 20 October 2018 .

^ Raymond Fusilier, Les monarchies parlementaires en Europe Editions ouvrières, Paris, 1960, p. 399.

^ Yvon Gouet, De l'unité du cabinet parlementaire , Dalloz, 1930, p. 232, quoted by Raymond Fusilier, p. 400.

^ Arango, p. 31.

^ Yves de Wasseige, Le roi, la loi la liberté: inconciliables en démocratie?

in Les faces cachées de la monarchie belge , TOUDI (n° 5/Contradictions (n° 65/66) 1991, ISBN 2-87090-010-4 ^ a b Arango, Ramon (1961).

Leopold III and the Belgian Royal Question . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press. p. 9.

ISBN 9780801800405 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Les monarchies parlementaires en Europe , Editions ouvrières, Paris, 1960, p. 350 ^ Arango, p. 12.

^ Hans Daalder, The monarchy in a parliamentary system, in Res Publica, Tijdschrift voor Politologie, Revue de Science Politique , Belgian Journal of Political Science, number 1, 1991, pp. 70–81, p. 74.

^ Raymond Fusilier, Les monarchies parlementaires – étude sur les systèmes de gouvernement en Suède, Norvège, Luxembourg, Belgique, Pays-bas, Danemark , Editions ouvrières, Paris, 1960, pp. 419–420.

^ Bagehot, The English Constitution ^ R.Fusilier, pp. 419–420. French Elle n'est pas purement symbolique, car elle participe à la direction des affaires de l'Etat dans la mesure où sa volonté coïncide avec la volonté des ministres, lesquels seuls assument la responsabilité de la politique du gouvenement.

^ French Le Roi règne. Pendant plus d'un siècle et demi (...) on ne s'est guère interrogé sur cette maxime. Ou bien on a cherché à lui donner un sens réducteur. Le Roi préside les Te Deum et les cérémonies protocolaires (...) Régner ne signifie pas suivre d'un oeil distrait les occupations du gouvernement (...) C'est contribuer (...) au fonctionnement harmonieux de l'Etat , in La Libre Belgique (April 1990) quoted by Les faces cachées de la monarchie belge , Contradictions, number 65–66, 1991, p. 27.

ISBN 2-87090-010-4 ^ French Certains étrangers croient – ils le disent souvent – que le maintien de l'unité belge tient à la personne du Roi. Cela est d'une grande naïveté. Il n'est qu'une pièce sur l'échiquier. Mais, sur l'échiquier, le Roi est une pièce qui compte.

, Jean Stengers, L'action du roi en Belgique depuis 1831 , Duculot, Gembloux, 1992, p. 312.

ISBN 2-8011-1026-4 ^ ROEGIERS, Patrick (17 August 2017).

"Chapitre 23 : Le « roi-chevalier » n'est pas un héros" .

La spectaculaire histoire des rois des Belges [ The spectacular history of the Kings of the Belgian ] (in French). Perrin.

ISBN 978-2-262-07112-7 .

Il [Albert Ier] décide le 22 avril 1921 de ne plus porter ses titres de comte de Saxe et prince de Saxe-Cobourg-Gotha, mais n'abandonne pas ses qualités et titres officiels allemands, tout comme Elisabeth garde son titre de duchesse en Bavière. Leur fils, Léopold III, les reprendra plus tard, ces titres n'ayant pas été juridiquement supprimés.

^ a b Balfoort, Brigitte; Van Paemel, Eddy, eds. (2010).

"The Belgian monarchy" (PDF) .

belgium.be . Olivier Alsteens. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 December 2019.

^ a b "Le Moniteur belge" .

www.ejustice.just.fgov.be . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ "Royal Decree of July 12, 2019" .

Moniteur Belge . 19 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ Philippe, Koning der Belgen (12 July 2019).

"Koninklijk besluit houdende vaststelling van het wapen van het Koninklijk Huis en van zijn leden" (PDF) .

Belgisch Staatsblad . Retrieved 24 July 2019 .

^ "Belgian royal coat of arms gets a 'modern' update" .

Brussel Times . 1 August 2019 . Retrieved 2 August 2019 .

^ "19_2" (PDF) .

ejustice.just.fgov.be .

^ Newmedia, R. T. L. (4 May 2017).

"La famille royale s'appelle à nouveau Saxe-Cobourg: pourquoi est-ce bientôt la fin des "de Belgique"?" .

RTL Info (in French) . Retrieved 25 February 2020 .

^ "La famille royale s'appelle à nouveau de Saxe-Cobourg" .

Le Soir Plus (in French). 4 May 2017 . Retrieved 25 February 2020 .

^ Libre.be, La (5 May 2017).

"Famille royalement de Belgique et Saxe-Cobourg" .

www.lalibre.be (in French) . Retrieved 25 February 2020 .

^ Pirenne 1948 , p. 30.

^ "Leopold II" .

The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 4 December 2013 .

^ Carlo Bronne.

Albert 1er: le roi sans terre .

^ "King Baudouin" . Belgian Monarchy Official Website . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ "Belgium's King Albert II gives up throne to son" .

CNN . 21 July 2013 . Retrieved 21 July 2013 .

^ a b Martin, Kingsley (April 1936), "The Evolution of Popular Monarchy", Political Quarterly , 7 (2): 155– 78, doi : 10.1111/j.1467-923X.1936.tb01608.x .

^ "The Belgian Constitution" (PDF) . Belgian Parliament . Retrieved 21 July 2013 .

^ Balfoort, Brigitte; et al.

"journalist" (PDF) .

The Belgian Monarchy . Olivier Alsteens, Director-General of the FPS Chancellery of the Prime Minister, Wetstraat 16, 1000 Brussels. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 18 July 2012 .

^ "Royal Decree of July 12, 2019" .

Moniteur Belge . 19 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ "Minutes of the Belgian Senate of September 9, 2004" (in Dutch). The Belgian Senate . Retrieved 17 September 2007 .

^ "Zevende zoon zorgt voor zevende viergeslacht en peterschap van koning Filip: "Ze noemen ons Sneeuwwitje en de zeven dwergen" " . 27 January 2018.

^ "Voici la nouvelle filleule de la reine Mathilde (Photos)" . 14 April 2017.

^ "No, Argentina's president did not adopt a Jewish child to stop him turning into a werewolf" .

TheGuardian.com . 29 December 2014 . Retrieved 21 October 2018 .

^ "Walen zijn veel koningsgezinder dan Vlamingen" . deredactie.be. 15 November 2016.

^ de Visscher, Christian; Randour, François (18 March 2014).

"The reform of the Belgian federal administration 10 years on: what balance has been achieved between operational autonomy of top managers and the supervision carried out by the horizontal ministerial departments?" .

International Review of Administrative Sciences .

80 (1). Bruxelles, Belgique: © International Institute of Administrative Sciences: 33– 51.

doi : 10.1177/002085231350953 . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Karel DE GUCHT,  Minister for Foreign Affairs (December 2007).

"Activity Report - 2006" (PDF) .

Federal Public Service Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Development  Cooperation .

Kingdom of Belgium . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Belgium: Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV Consultation" .

IMF eLibrary .

2007 (89).

International Monetary Fund . 5 March 2007.

doi : 10.5089/9781451803273.002 .

ISBN 9781451803273 .

ISSN 1934-7685 . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ a b c d "Staff" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "King's Cabinet" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ The Brussels Times with Belga (11 July 2025).

"Who are King Philippe's two new staff members?" .

The Brussels Times . © The Brussels Times . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ a b "Military Household" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Civil List" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Discover the FPS Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation" (PDF) .

About Us - Federal Public Service Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation .

Kingdom of Belgium . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Belgian Federal Police - Security Management" .

Politie.be .

Kingdom of Belgium . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Security Detail" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Arrêté royal relatif à l'octroi du titre de Prince ou Princesse de Belgique" [Royal Decree on the granting of the title of Prince or Princess of Belgium] (in French). Federal Parliament of Belgium. 12 November 2015.

^ Clevers, Antoine (25 November 2015).

"Le Roi limite l'octroi du titre de "prince de Belgique" " [The King limits the granting of the title of "Prince of Belgium"].

La Libre Belgique . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ "Princess Elisabeth, Duchess of Brabant" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Prince Gabriel" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Prince Emmanuel" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Princess Eléonore" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "King Albert II" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Queen Paola" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Princess Astrid" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Prince Laurent" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Jureidini, Ben (18 November 2024).

"Royally uninvited: Princess Delphine, the illegitimate daughter of King Albert II of Belgium, slams the government for icing her out of royal family duties" .

Tatler . No. Royal Society. © Condé Nast Britain . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "King Leopold III" .

The Belgian Monarchy . © The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

Sources [ edit ] Pirenne, Henri (1948).

Histoire de Belgique (in French). Vol. VII: De la Révolution de 1830 à la Guerre de 1914 (2nd ed.). Brussels: Maurice Lamertin.

Further reading [ edit ] Aronson, Theo .

The Coburgs of Belgium (Cassell, 1969) Hindley, Geoffrey.

The Royal Families of Europe (Constable, 2000) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Belgian monarchy .

The Belgian monarchy – official site of the Belgian royal family The Belgian monarchy Archived 9 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine – official brochure of the Belgium government What role for a Belgian monarch?

– website Expatica.com v t e Belgium articles History Gallia Belgica Prince-Bishopric of Liège Burgundian Netherlands Southern Netherlands Spanish Netherlands Austrian Netherlands Brabant Revolution United Kingdom of the Netherlands Long nineteenth century Belgian Revolution Crisis of 1870 Empire World War I invasion occupation World War II invasion occupation Royal Question Congo Crisis State reform Geography Climate Extreme points Lakes Mountains Rivers Subdivisions Politics Constitution Elections Executive Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Judiciary Military Monarchy Parliament Political parties Prime Minister Economy 2008–2009 financial crisis Banking Central bank Communications Energy Tourism Trade unions Transport Rail Science and technology Society Abortion Crime Demographics Education Healthcare Honours Irreligion Languages Media People Prostitution Religion Culture Architecture Art Cinema Comics Cuisine Beer wine waffle Flag Literature Music Public holidays Sport Television World Heritage Sites Outline Index Category Portal v t e Heads of state of the European Union member states Austria: Van der Bellen Belgium: Philippe Bulgaria: Radev Croatia: Milanović Cyprus: Christodoulides Czech Republic: Pavel Denmark: Frederik X Estonia: Karis Finland: Stubb France: Macron Germany: Steinmeier Greece: Tasoulas Hungary: Sulyok Ireland: Higgins Italy: Mattarella Latvia: Rinkēvičs Lithuania: Nausėda Luxembourg: Henri Malta: Spiteri Debono Netherlands: Willem-Alexander Poland: Nawrocki Portugal: Rebelo de Sousa Romania: Dan Slovakia: Pellegrini Slovenia: Pirc Musar Spain: Felipe VI Sweden: Carl XVI Gustaf Italics indicate acting heads of state.

v t e Heads of state and government of Europe Heads of state UN members and observers Albania Andorra Armenia 1 Austria Azerbaijan 1 Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus 1 Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia 1 Germany Greece Holy See (Vatican City) Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan 1 Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russian Federation 1 San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Sovereign Military Order of Malta Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey 1 Ukraine United Kingdom Partially recognised 2 Abkhazia 1 Kosovo Northern Cyprus 1 South Ossetia 1 Unrecognised states 3 Transnistria Heads of government UN members and observers Albania Andorra Armenia 1 Austria Azerbaijan 1 Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus 1 Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia 1 Germany Greece Holy See (Vatican City) Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan 1 Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russian Federation 1 San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Sovereign Military Order of Malta Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey 1 Ukraine United Kingdom Partially recognised 2 Abkhazia 1 Kosovo Northern Cyprus 1 South Ossetia 1 Unrecognised states 3 Transnistria 1. Partially or entirely in Asia, depending on geographical definition.

2. Recognised by at least one United Nations member.

3. Not recognised by any United Nations members.

v t e European royal families Reigning Belgium Denmark Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Non-reigning pretenders Albania Austria-Hungary Bulgaria France Bourbon Orléans Bonaparte Georgia Germany Greece Hanover Italy Lithuania Montenegro Portugal Romania Russia Saxony Serbia v t e Monarchies Monarch Imperial, royal and noble ranks List of current sovereign monarchs List of current non-sovereign monarchs List of monarchy referendums Type Absolute Constitutional Diarchy Elective Federal Hereditary Non-sovereign Personal union Regency Topics Abdication Abolition of monarchy Aristocracy Criticism of monarchy Decolonization Democratization Dynasty Government Head of state Legitimacy (political) Oligarchy Order of succession Republicanism Self-proclaimed monarchy Sovereignty Titles Chhatrapati Emperor Khan King Queen regnant Pharaoh Prince regnant Raja Shah Sultan Tsar Current Africa Eswatini Lesotho Morocco list Asia Bahrain Bhutan Brunei Cambodia Japan Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Thailand United Arab Emirates list Europe Andorra Belgium Denmark Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden Vatican City (Holy See) Oceania Tonga Commonwealth realms Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Belize Canada Grenada Jamaica New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Papua New Guinea Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Solomon Islands Tuvalu United Kingdom Former Africa Adamawa Ankole Aussa Bagirmi Barotseland Bornu Burundi Central Africa Dahomey Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Gomma Gumma Islands of Refreshment Kaffa Kongo Libya Luba Madagascar Mali Maore Maravi Mwali Ndzuwani Ngazidja Rwanda Shilluk Tunisia Wituland Wassoulou Yeke Zanzibar Zimbabwe and other Americas Araucanía Aztec Brazil Haiti Inca Mexico Miskito Suriname Talamanca Trinidad Thirteen Colonies Asia Afghanistan Asir Bengal Bukhara Burma Cebu Chehab China Dapitan Hejaz Indonesia Iran ( Qajar ) Iraq Jabal Shammar Kathiri Khiva Korea Kumul Kurdistan Laos Maguindanao Mahra Maldives Manchukuo Mongolia Najran Nepal Qu'aiti Ryukyu Sarawak Shan Sikkim Sri Lanka Sip Song Chau Tai Sulu Syria Tibet Taiwan Upper Asir Upper Yafa Vietnam Yemen Emirates of South Arabia South Arabia Europe Albania Aragon Asturias Austria Austria-Hungary Bavaria Bosnia Brittany Bulgaria Catalonia Cilicia Corsica Crimea Cyprus Finland France Galicia Georgia Germany Granada Greece Hanover Hungary Iceland Imereti Ireland Italy Kartli-Kakheti Lithuania Majorca Man Moldavia Montenegro Navarre Neuchâtel Ottoman Empire Papal States Piedmont-Sardinia Poland–Lithuania Portugal Prussia Romania Russia Samos Savoy Saxony Scotland Serbia Tavolara Tuscany Two Sicilies United Baltic Duchy Valencia Württemberg Yugoslavia Oceania Abemama Bora Bora Easter Island Fiji Hawaii Huahine Mangareva Niuē-Fekai Nuku Hiva Raiatea Rapa Iti Rarotonga Rimatara Rurutu Tahiti Tahuata Commonwealth realms Barbados Ceylon (Sri Lanka) Fiji The Gambia Ghana Guyana India ( British Raj , princely states ) Irish Free State / Ireland Kenya Malawi Malta Mauritius Nigeria Pakistan Rhodesia Sierra Leone South Africa Tanganyika Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monarchy_of_Belgium&oldid=1305442776#Royal_family " Categories : Monarchy of Belgium Lists of monarchs 1831 establishments in Belgium Hidden categories: Pages using the EasyTimeline extension Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2014 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 02:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monarchy of Belgium 30 languages Add topic

