Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 High energy physics compared to low energy physics 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Macroscopic scale 29 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Length scale which are visible to the naked eye "Macroscopic" redirects here; not to be confused with Macroscope .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Macroscopic scale" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Not to be confused with Microscopic scale .

The macroscopic scale is the length scale on which objects or phenomena are large enough to be visible with the naked eye , without magnifying optical instruments .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is the opposite of microscopic .

Overview [ edit ] When applied to physical phenomena and bodies, the macroscopic scale describes things as a person can directly perceive them, without the aid of magnifying devices. This is in contrast to observations ( microscopy ) or theories ( microphysics , statistical physics ) of objects of geometric lengths smaller than perhaps some hundreds of micrometres .

A macroscopic view of a ball is just that: a ball. A microscopic view could reveal a thick round skin seemingly composed entirely of puckered cracks and fissures (as viewed through a microscope ) or, further down in scale, a collection of molecules in a roughly spherical shape (as viewed through an electron microscope ). An example of a physical theory that takes a deliberately macroscopic viewpoint is thermodynamics . An example of a topic that extends from macroscopic to microscopic viewpoints is histology .

Not quite by the distinction between macroscopic and microscopic, classical and quantum mechanics are theories that are distinguished in a subtly different way.

[ 3 ] At first glance one might think of them as differing simply in the size of objects that they describe, classical objects being considered far larger as to mass and geometrical size than quantal objects, for example a football versus a fine particle of dust. More refined consideration distinguishes classical and quantum mechanics on the basis that classical mechanics fails to recognize that matter and energy cannot be divided into infinitesimally small parcels, so that ultimately fine division reveals irreducibly granular features. The criterion of fineness is whether or not the interactions are described in terms of the Planck constant . Roughly speaking, classical mechanics considers particles in mathematically idealized terms even as fine as geometrical points with no magnitude, still having their finite masses. Classical mechanics also considers mathematically idealized extended materials as geometrically continuously substantial. Such idealizations are useful for most everyday calculations, but may fail entirely for molecules, atoms, photons, and other elementary particles (and vice versa). In many ways, classical mechanics can be considered a mainly macroscopic theory. On the much smaller scale of atoms and molecules, classical mechanics may fail, and the interactions of particles are then described by quantum mechanics. Near the absolute minimum of temperature , the Bose–Einstein condensate exhibits effects on macroscopic scale that demand description by quantum mechanics.

In the quantum measurement problem the issue of what constitutes macroscopic and what constitutes the quantum world is unresolved and possibly unsolvable. The related correspondence principle can be articulated thus: every macroscopic phenomena can be formulated as a problem in quantum theory. A violation of the correspondence principle would thus ensure an empirical distinction between the macroscopic and the quantum.

In pathology , macroscopic diagnostics generally involves gross pathology , in contrast to microscopic histopathology .

The term "megascopic" is a synonym. "Macroscopic" may also refer to a "larger view", namely a view available only from a large perspective (a hypothetical "macroscope" ). A macroscopic position could be considered the "big picture".

High energy physics compared to low energy physics [ edit ] Particle physics , dealing with the smallest physical systems, is also known as high energy physics . Physics of larger length scales, including the macroscopic scale, is also known as low energy physics . Intuitively, it might seem incorrect to associate "high energy" with the physics of very small, low mass–energy systems, like subatomic particles. By comparison, one gram of hydrogen , a macroscopic system, has ~ 6 × 10 23 times [ 4 ] the mass–energy of a single proton , a central object of study in high energy physics. Even an entire beam of protons circulated in the Large Hadron Collider , a high energy physics experiment, contains ~ 3.23 × 10 14 protons, [ 5 ] each with 6.5 × 10 12 eV of energy, for a total beam energy of ~ 2.1 × 10 27 eV or ~ 336.4 MJ , which is still ~ 2.7 × 10 5 times lower than the mass–energy of a single gram of hydrogen. Yet, the macroscopic realm is "low energy physics", while that of quantum particles is "high energy physics".

The reason for this is that the "high energy" refers to energy at the quantum particle level . While macroscopic systems indeed have a larger total energy content than any of their constituent quantum particles, there can be no experiment or other observation of this total energy without extracting the respective amount of energy from each of the quantum particles – which is exactly the domain of high energy physics. Daily experiences of matter and the Universe are characterized by very low energy. For example, the photon energy of visible light is about 1.8 to 3.2 eV. Similarly, the bond-dissociation energy of a carbon-carbon bond is about 3.6 eV. This is the energy scale manifesting at the macroscopic level, such as in chemical reactions . Even photons with far higher energy, gamma rays of the kind produced in radioactive decay , have photon energy that is almost always between 10 5 eV and 10 7 eV – still two orders of magnitude lower than the mass–energy of a single proton. Radioactive decay gamma rays are considered as part of nuclear physics , rather than high energy physics.

Finally, when reaching the quantum particle level, the high energy domain is revealed. The proton has a mass–energy of ~ 9.4 × 10 8 eV ; some other massive quantum particles, both elementary and hadronic , have yet higher mass–energies. Quantum particles with lower mass–energies are also part of high energy physics; they also have a mass–energy that is far higher than that at the macroscopic scale (such as electrons ), or are equally involved in reactions at the particle level (such as neutrinos ).

Relativistic effects , as in particle accelerators and cosmic rays , can further increase the accelerated particles' energy by many orders of magnitude, as well as the total energy of the particles emanating from their collision and annihilation .

See also [ edit ] High energy physics Microscopic scale References [ edit ] ^ Reif, F. (1965).

Fundamentals of Statistical and Thermal Physics (International student ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill. p.

2 .

ISBN 007-051800-9 .

we shall call a system " macro scopic" (i.e., " large scale") when it is large enough to be visible in the ordinary sense (say greater than 1 micron, so that it can at least be observed with a microscope using ordinary light).

^ Jaeger, Gregg (September 2014). "What in the (quantum) world is macroscopic?".

American Journal of Physics .

82 (9): 896– 905.

Bibcode : 2014AmJPh..82..896J .

doi : 10.1119/1.4878358 .

^ Jaeger, Gregg (September 2014). "What in the (quantum) world is macroscopic?".

American Journal of Physics .

82 (9): 896– 905.

Bibcode : 2014AmJPh..82..896J .

doi : 10.1119/1.4878358 .

^ "CODATA Value: Avogadro constant" . The NIST Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty. US National Institute of Standards and Technology. June 2015. Retrieved 13 December 2016.

^ "Beam Requirements and Fundamental Choices" (PDF) . CERN Engineering & Equipment Data Management Service (EDMS) . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .

v t e Orders of magnitude Quantity Acceleration Angular momentum Area Bit rate Charge Computing Current Data Density Energy / Energy density Entropy Force Frequency Illuminance Length Luminance Magnetic moment Magnetic field Mass Molarity Numbers Power Pressure Probability Radiation Sound pressure Specific heat capacity Speed Temperature Torque Time Voltage Volume See also Back-of-the-envelope calculation Fermi problem Powers of 10 and decades 10th 100th 1000000th Metric (SI) prefix Macroscopic scale Microscopic scale Related Astronomical system of units Earth's location in the Universe Cosmic View (1957 book) To the Moon and Beyond (1964 film) Cosmic Zoom (1968 film) Powers of Ten (1968 and 1977 films) Cosmic Voyage (1996 documentary) The Scale of the Universe (2010) Cosmic Eye (2012) Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Macroscopic_scale&oldid=1291039049 " Categories : Concepts in physics Orders of magnitude Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2013 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia introduction cleanup from July 2023 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from July 2023 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 18:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Macroscopic scale 29 languages Add topic

