Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Morphology Toggle Morphology subsection 1.1 Cellular morphology 2 History 3 Use in brewing 4 Pathology 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Saccharomyces 27 languages العربية Беларуская Català Cebuano Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Polski Português Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genus of fungi Saccharomyces Scientific classification Kingdom: Fungi Division: Ascomycota Class: Saccharomycetes Order: Saccharomycetales Family: Saccharomycetaceae Genus: Saccharomyces Meyen (1838) Type species Saccharomyces cerevisiae Meyen (1838) Species Saccharomyces arboricolus Saccharomyces bayanus Saccharomyces bulderi Saccharomyces cariocanus Saccharomyces cariocus Saccharomyces cerevisiae Saccharomyces cerevisiae var.

boulardii Saccharomyces chevalieri Saccharomyces dairenensis Saccharomyces ellipsoideus Saccharomyces eubayanus Saccharomyces exiguus Saccharomyces florentinus Saccharomyces fragilis Saccharomyces kudriavzevii Saccharomyces martiniae Saccharomyces mikatae Saccharomyces monacensis Saccharomyces norbensis Saccharomyces paradoxus Saccharomyces pastorianus Saccharomyces spencerorum Saccharomyces turicensis Saccharomyces unisporus Saccharomyces uvarum Saccharomyces zonatus Saccharomyces is a genus of fungi that includes many species of yeasts .

Saccharomyces is from Greek σάκχαρον (sugar) and μύκης (fungus) and means sugar fungus . Many members of this genus are considered very important in food production where they are known as brewer's yeast , baker's yeast and sourdough starter among others. They are unicellular and saprotrophic fungi. One example is Saccharomyces cerevisiae , which is used in making bread , wine , and beer , and for human and animal health. Other members of this genus include the wild yeast Saccharomyces paradoxus that is the closest relative to S. cerevisiae , Saccharomyces bayanus , used in making wine, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae var.

boulardii , used in medicine.

Morphology [ edit ] Colonies of Saccharomyces grow rapidly and mature in three days. They are flat, smooth, moist, glistening or dull, and cream in color. The inability to use nitrate and ability to ferment various carbohydrates are typical characteristics of Saccharomyces .

Cellular morphology [ edit ] Generally, they have a diameter of 2–8 μm and length of 3–25 μm.

Blastoconidia (cell buds ) are observed. They are unicellular, globose, and ellipsoid to elongate in shape. Multilateral (multipolar) budding is typical. Pseudohyphae, if present, are rudimentary.

Hyphae are absent.

Saccharomyces produces ascospores , especially when grown on V-8 medium, acetate ascospor agar , or Gorodkowa medium. These ascospores are globose and located in asci. Each ascus contains 1–4 ascospores. Asci do not rupture at maturity. Ascospores are stained with Kinyoun stain and ascospore stain. When stained with Gram stain , ascospores appear Gram-negative , while vegetative cells appear Gram-positive .

History [ edit ] The presence of yeast in beer was first suggested in 1680, although the genus was not named Saccharomyces until 1837. It was not until 1876 that Louis Pasteur demonstrated the involvement of living organisms in fermentation and in 1883, Emil C. Hansen isolated brewing yeast and propagated the culture, leading to the discovery of the importance of yeast in brewing.

[ 1 ] The use of microscopes for the study of yeast morphology and purity was crucial to understanding their functionality.

Use in brewing [ edit ] See also: Yeast in winemaking Saccharomyces cerevisiae —the yeast most used for brewing and baking. Numbered ticks are 10 micrometres apart.

Brewing yeasts are polyploid and belong to the genus Saccharomyces . The brewing strains can be classified into two groups; the ale strains ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) and the lager strains ( Saccharomyces pastorianus or Saccharomyces carlsbergensis in the old taxonomy). Lager strains are a hybrid strain of S. cerevisiae and S. eubayanus and are often referred to as bottom fermenting. In contrast, ale strains are referred to as top fermenting strains, reflecting their separation characteristics in open square fermenters. Although the two species differ in a number of ways, including their response to temperature, sugar transport and use, the S. pastorianus and S. cerevisiae species are closely related within the genus Saccharomyces .

Saccharomyces yeasts can form symbiotic matrices with bacteria, and are used to produce kombucha , kefir and ginger beer .

Saccharomyces fragilis , for example, is part of kefir cultures [ 2 ] and is being grown on the lactose contained in whey (as a byproduct in cheesemaking ) to be used as animal fodder itself.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Pathology [ edit ] Saccharomyces cause food spoilage of sugar-rich foods, such as maple sap, syrup, concentrated juices and condiments .

[ 5 ] Case report suggest extended exposure to S. cerevisiae can cause hypersensitivity in humans.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Mating of yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae virus L-A Schizosaccharomyces pombe (fission yeast) References [ edit ] ^ Boulton, Chris and Quain, David.

Brewing yeast and fermentation . John Wiley & Sons, 2001, p. 18 ^ The "kefir starter culture" .

Archived 2016-09-15 at the Wayback Machine .

Cultures for Health ^ Rory A. M. Delaney, Robert Kennedy, Bernard D. Walley.

"Composition of Saccharomyces fragilis biomass grown on lactose permeate†" . 1975 ^ Aaron E. Wasserman, William J. Hopkins and Nandor Porges.

"Whey Utilization: Growth Conditions for Saccharomyces Fragilis" .

Sewage and Industrial Wastes , Vol. 30, No. 7 (July 1958), pp. 913–920 ^ MICROBES INVOLVED IN FOOD SPOILAGE Archived 2008-02-24 at the Wayback Machine Authors: Gabriel Chavarria, Julia Neal, Parul Shah, Katrina Pierzchala, Bryant Conger ^ Yamamoto Y, Osanai S, Fujiuchi S, et al. (2002). "[ Saccharomyces -induced hypersensitivity pneumonitis in a dairy farmer: a case report]".

Nihon Kokyuki Gakkai Zasshi (in Japanese).

40 (6): 484– 8.

PMID 12325333 .

External links [ edit ] Saccharomyces at Milk the Funk Wiki Saccharomyces Genome Database Taxon identifiers Saccharomyces Wikidata : Q1146293 Wikispecies : Saccharomyces AusFungi : 60014997 CoL : 7BFM EoL : 18923 EPPO : 1SACCG GBIF : 2518181 iNaturalist : 200007 IndexFungorum : 4813 IRMNG : 1099544 ITIS : 194154 MycoBank : 4813 NBN : BMSSYS0000050867 NCBI : 4930 NZOR: fa55d145-fec1-4edd-9209-de6cc68fe0d0 Open Tree of Life : 908546 SpeciesFungorum : 4813 WoRMS : 147592 Authority control databases National Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saccharomyces&oldid=1296310331 " Categories : Saccharomyces Ascomycota genera Gut flora Yeasts used in brewing Taxa described in 1838 Taxa named by Franz Meyen Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 06:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Saccharomyces 27 languages Add topic

