Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Animals and food 3 Mobile petting zoos 4 Health effects 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Petting zoo 8 languages العربية Deutsch 한국어 עברית Nederlands Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Zoo where visitors can touch the animals For the film, see Petting Zoo (film) .

Child petting a domestic goat at the "Little Kids" Children's Zoo, St. Louis Zoo , St. Louis, Missouri , US A zoo visitor interacts with a reticulated python at the Reptile Park in Taman Mini Indonesia Indah , Jakarta , Indonesia .

A petting zoo (also called a children's zoo , children's farm , or petting farm ) features a combination of domesticated animals and some wild species that are docile enough to touch and feed. In addition to independent petting zoos, many general zoos contain a petting zoo.

Most petting zoos are designed to provide only relatively placid, herbivorous domesticated animals, such as sheep , goats , rabbits , ponies and donkeys to feed and interact physically with safety. This is in contrast to the usual zoo experience, where normally wild animals are viewed from behind safe enclosures where no contact is possible. A few provide wild species (such as pythons or big cat cubs) to interact with, but these are rare and usually found outside Western nations.

History [ edit ] In 1938, the London Zoo included the first children's zoo in Europe and the Philadelphia Zoo was the first in North America to open a special zoo just for children.

During the 1990s, Dutch cities began building petting zoos in many neighbourhoods, so that urban children could interact with animals.

[ 1 ] Animals and food [ edit ] Petting zoos feature a variety of domestic animals. Common animals include cattle , zebu , yaks , sheep , goats , rabbits , guinea pigs , ponies , alpacas , llamas , pigs , miniature donkeys , miniature horses , ducks , geese , chickens , and turkeys . They occasionally contain a few exotic animals such as kangaroos , wallabies , emus , deer , zebras , parrots , porcupines , camels , ostriches , bison , water buffaloes , rheas , peafowl , guineafowl , antelopes , capybaras , lemurs , tortoises and many others.

Petting zoos are popular with small children, who will often feed the animals. In order to ensure the animals' health, the food is supplied by the zoo, either from vending machines or a kiosk . Food often fed to animals includes grass or hay, pellets, or crackers. Such feeding is an exception to the usual rule about not feeding animals .

Mobile petting zoos [ edit ] Some petting zoos are also mobile and will travel to a home for a children's party or event. Many areas have a qualified mobile petting zoo. One of the first mobile petting zoos in Australia (begun in 1992), was Kindifarm. As a result of its popularity, many Australians use the term kindy farms to describe petting zoos. In Australia, mobile petting zoos are allowed in schools, child care centres and even shopping centres. For many children, a mobile petting zoo is their first opportunity to see and touch an animal. American mobile petting zoos have gained popularity in the southern states.

[ citation needed ] Health effects [ edit ] Touching animals can result in the transmission of diseases between animals and humans ( zoonosis ) so it is recommended that people should thoroughly wash their hands before and after touching the animals.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] There have been several outbreaks of E. coli etc.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Another threat is salmonella specifically from chicks handled by children. Petting zoo attendees under the age of 5 are at a higher risk of contracting these diseases and they are a major target audience of these petting zoos.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Petting zoos .

Cat café Pet rental References [ edit ] ^ Siegal, Nina (2017-03-21).

"The Dutch Way: Tulips, Windmills and Barnyard Animals" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2017-04-05 .

^ "Zoonoses associated with petting farms and open zoos" . Archived from the original on 2015-02-26 . Retrieved 2012-09-28 .

^ Beware The Fair (And Petting Zoos) ^ Tests suggest E. coli spread through air ^ Harper, Paul (1 May 2014).

"Children win compensation after Godstone Farm E.coli outbreak" .

getSurrey . Retrieved 1 May 2014 .

^ "WHAT HAPPENS TO ANIMAL MOMS & THEIR BABIES ON FACTORY FARMS" .

thehumaneleague.org . Retrieved 2024-11-23 .

v t e Zoos , aquariums , and aviaries Types of zoos Animal sanctuary Animal theme park Aquarium Aviary Bear pit Butterfly house Dolphinarium Herpetarium Insectarium Nature center Marine mammal park Menagerie Oceanarium Penguinarium Pheasantry Petting zoo Reptile centre Safari park Virtual zoo Vivarium Zoo Conservation Biodiversity Captive breeding Conservation biology Endangered species Ex situ conservation In situ conservation Species reintroduction Lists Zoos Aquariums largest Animal sanctuaries Butterfly houses Dolphinariums Conservation topics Former zoos and aquariums Nature centers Zoo associations WAZA members Related Animal rights Animal cruelty Animals in captivity Animal training Behavioral enrichment Frozen zoo Immersion exhibit Nocturnal house Wildlife conservation Zookeeper Zoo emergency response team Zoo key Zoological society Zoology Animals portal Category: Zoos Category: Aquariums Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Petting_zoo&oldid=1282123581 " Categories : Children's entertainment Early childhood education Play (activity) Zoos Entertainment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 13:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Petting zoo 8 languages Add topic

