Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Class A foams 3 Class B foams Toggle Class B foams subsection 3.1 Synthetic foams 3.2 Protein foams 4 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 4.1 Application techniques 5 History 6 Environmental and health concerns 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Firefighting foam 13 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Foam used for fire suppression Firefighters spraying foam on structures in the Mammoth Hot Springs complex on 10 September 1988 during the Yellowstone Fires Firefighting foam is a foam used for fire suppression . Its role is to cool the fire and to coat the fuel, preventing its contact with oxygen, thus achieving suppression of the combustion .

Firefighting foam was invented by the Moldovan engineer and chemist Aleksandr Loran in 1902.

[ 1 ] The surfactants used must produce foam in concentrations of less than 1%. Other components of fire-retardant foams are organic solvents (e.g., trimethyl- trimethylene glycol and hexylene glycol ), foam stabilizers (e.g., lauryl alcohol ), and corrosion inhibitors .

Overview [ edit ] Low-expansion foams, such as aqueous film forming foams (AFFFs), have an expansion ratio of less than 20, are low-viscosity, mobile, and can quickly cover large areas.

Medium-expansion foams have an expansion ratio of 20–200.

[ 2 ] High-expansion foams have an expansion ratio over 200–1000 and are suitable for enclosed spaces such as hangars, where quick filling is needed.

Alcohol-resistant foams contain a polymer that forms a protective layer between the burning surface and the foam, preventing foam breakdown by alcohols in the burning fuel. Alcohol-resistant foams are used in fighting fires of fuels containing oxygenates , e.g.

methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), or fires of liquids based on or containing polar solvents.

Class A foams [ edit ] A fire demonstrating Class A foam in a CAFS system Class A foams were developed in the mid-1980s for fighting wildfires . Class A foams lower the surface tension of the water, which assists in the wetting and saturation of Class A foams with water. It penetrates and extinguishes embers at depth. This aids fire suppression and can prevent re-ignition.

[ 3 ] Favourable experiences led to its acceptance for fighting other types of class A fires , including structure fires.

[ 4 ] Class B foams [ edit ] Class B foams are designed for flammable liquid fire classes . The use of class A foam on a class B fire may yield unexpected results, as class A foams are not designed to contain the explosive vapours produced by flammable liquids. Class B foams have two major subtypes.

Synthetic foams [ edit ] Synthetic foams are based on synthetic surfactants . They provide better flow and spreading over the surface of hydrocarbon-based liquids, for faster knockdown of flames. They have limited post-fire security and are toxic groundwater contaminants.

Aqueous film forming foams (AFFF) are water-based and frequently contain hydrocarbon-based surfactants such as sodium alkyl sulfate , and fluorosurfactants , such as fluorotelomers , perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), or perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS).

Alcohol-resistant aqueous film-forming foams (AR-AFFF) are foams resistant to the action of alcohols and can form a protective film.

Fluorine-free foams (FFF, also called F3) are mostly based on hydrocarbon surfactants and are free of any fluorosurfactant.

[ 5 ] Protein foams [ edit ] Protein foams contain natural proteins as the foaming agents. Unlike synthetic foams, protein foams are bio-degradable . They flow and spread slower, but provide a foam blanket that is more heat-resistant and more durable.

Protein foams include regular protein foam (P), fluoroprotein foam (FP) (a mixture of protein foam and fluorinated surfactants), film-forming fluoroprotein (FFFP), [ 6 ] [ full citation needed ] alcohol-resistant fluoroprotein foam (AR-FP), and alcohol-resistant film-forming fluoroprotein (AR-FFFP).

Applications [ edit ] Every type of foam has its application. High-expansion foams are used when an enclosed space, such as a basement or hangar, must be quickly filled. Low-expansion foams are used on burning spills. AFFF is the best for spills of jet fuels, FFFP is better for cases where the burning fuel can form deeper pools, and AR-AFFF is suitable for burning alcohols. High-performing FFF are viable alternatives to AFFF and AFFF-AR for various applications. The most flexibility is achieved by AR-AFFF or AR-FFFP. AR-AFFF must be used in areas where gasoline is blended with oxygenates, since the alcohols prevent the formation of the film between the FFFP foam and the gasoline, breaking down the foam, and rendering the FFFP foam virtually useless.

Application techniques [ edit ] There are 2 main application techniques [ 7 ] of applying foam onto a fire, recognized by the European (EN1568) and international (ISO7203) standards: Sweep (roll-on) method - Use only on a pool of flammable product on open ground. Direct the foam stream onto the ground in front of the product involved. May need to move the hose line or use multiple lines to cover the material. If multiple lines are used, be aware of other firefighters in the area.

Bankshot (bankdown) method - Firefighter uses an object to deflect the foam stream so it flows down the burning surface. Application should be as gentle as possible. Direct the foam at a vertical object. Allow the foam to spread over the material and form a foam blanket.

Raindown method - Used when unable to employ the bankshot method or the roll-on method. Loft the foam stream into the air above the material and let it fall gently onto the surface. Effective as long as the foam stream completely covers the material. Might not be effective if wind conditions are unfavorable History [ edit ] This section contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( February 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Water has long been a universal agent for suppressing fires, but is not best in all cases. For example, water is typically ineffective on oil fires, and can be dangerous. Fire-fighting foams were developed for extinguishing oil fires.

In 1902, a method of extinguishing flammable liquid fires by blanketing them with foam was introduced by Russian engineer and chemist Aleksandr Loran . Loran was a teacher in a school in Baku , the center of the Russian oil industry at that time. Impressed by large, difficult-to-extinguish oil fires that he had seen there, Loran tried to find a liquid substance that could deal effectively with them. He invented fire-fighting foam, which was successfully tested in experiments in 1902 and 1903.

[ 1 ] In 1904 Loran patented his invention, and developed the first foam extinguisher the same year.

[ 8 ] The original foam was a mixture of two powders and water produced in a foam generator. It was called chemical foam because of the chemical action to create it. In general, the powders used were sodium bicarbonate and aluminium sulfate , with small amounts of saponin or liquorice added to stabilise the bubbles. Hand-held foam extinguishers used the same two chemicals in solution. To actuate the extinguisher, a seal was broken and the unit inverted, allowing the liquids to mix and react. Chemical foam is a stable solution of small bubbles containing carbon dioxide with lower density than oil or water, and exhibits persistence for covering flat surfaces. Because it is lighter than the burning liquid, it flows freely over the liquid surface and extinguishes the fire by a smothering (removal/prevention of oxygen) action. Chemical foam is considered obsolete today because of the many containers of powder required, even for small fires.

In the 1940s, Percy Lavon Julian developed an improved type of foam called Aerofoam . Using mechanical action, a liquid protein -based concentrate, made from soy protein , was mixed with water in either a proportioner or an aerating nozzle to form air bubbles with the free-flowing action. Its expansion ratio and ease of handling made it popular. Protein foam is easily contaminated by some flammable liquids, so care should be used so that the foam is applied only above the burning liquid. Protein foam has slow knockdown characteristics, but it is economical for post-fire security.

In the early 1950s, high-expansion foam was conceived by Herbert Eisner in England at the Safety in Mines Research Establishment (now the Health & Safety Laboratory) to fight coal mine fires. Will B. Jamison, a Pennsylvania Mining Engineer, read about the proposed foam in 1952, requested more information about the idea. He proceeded to work with the US Bureau of Mines on the idea, testing 400 formulas until a suitable compound was found. In 1964, Walter Kidde & Company (now Kidde ) bought the patents for high-expansion foam.

[ 9 ] In the 1960s, National Foam, Inc.

developed fluoroprotein foam. Its active agent is a fluorinated surfactant that provides an oil-rejecting property to prevent contamination. In general, it is better than protein foam because its longer blanket life provides better safety when entry is required for rescue. Fluoroprotein foam has fast knockdown characteristics and it can also be used together with dry chemicals that destroy protein foam.

In the mid-1960s, the US Navy developed aqueous film-forming foam (AFFF). This synthetic foam has a low viscosity and spreads rapidly across the surface of most hydrocarbon fuels. A water film forms beneath the foam, which cools the liquid fuel, stopping the formation of flammable vapors. This provides dramatic fire knockdown, an important factor in crash rescue firefighting.

In the early 1970s, National Foam, Inc. invented alcohol-resistant AFFF technology. AR-AFFF is a synthetic foam developed for both hydrocarbon and polar-solvent materials. Polar solvents are combustible liquids that destroy conventional fire-fighting foam. These solvents extract the water contained in the foam, breaking down the foam blanket. Hence, these fuels require an alcohol- or polar-solvent-resistant foam. Alcohol-resistant foam must be bounced off of a surface and allowed to flow down and over the liquid to form its membrane, compared to standard AFFF that can be sprayed directly onto the fire.

In 1993, Pyrocool Technologies Inc. acquired the patent rights to a wetting agent with superior cooling properties that is effective on Class A, Class B, Class D as well as pressurized and 3-dimensional fires involving both hydro carbon based fuels and polar solvents such as alcohol and ethanol. The wetting agent is marketed under the name of Pyrocool. Pyrocool Technologies Inc. was awarded the 1998 Presidential Green Chemistry Award by the USEPA. Carol Browner, the USEPA Administrator in 1998, described Pyrocool as the "Technology for the Third Millennium: The Development and Commercial Introduction of an Environmentally Responsible Fire Extinguishment and Cooling Agent". A dispute with the manufacturer, Baum's Castorine, resulted in Baum's rebranding this formula under the name Novacool UEF and has been selling this product under that name since 2008.

In 2002, BIOEX a French manufacturer of firefighting foam, pioneer in environmentally friendly foams, launched the first fluorine-free foam (ECOPOL) into the market. The foam concentrate is highly efficient on class B hydrocarbon and polar solvent fires, as well as on class A fires. Their environmental challenge has been to convince their customers to choose their new generation of green products, which are 100% fluorine free, and have proven to be effective.

[ 10 ] In 2010, Orchidee International of France developed the first FFHPF, the highest performing fluorine-free foam. The foam has achieved a 97% degradability rating and is currently marketed by Orchidee International under the brand name "BluFoam". The foam is used at 3% both on hydrocarbon and polar solvent fires.

Environmental and health concerns [ edit ] Studies have shown that PFOS is a persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic pollutant.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] It was added to Annex B of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants in May 2009.

[ 14 ] Regulations in the United States, Canada, European Union, Australia, and Japan have banned the new production of PFOS-based products, including firefighting foams.

[ 15 ] 3M phased out production of PFOS in 2002 due to toxicity concerns.

[ 16 ] One study, published in 2015, found that firefighters were more likely to have fluorinated surfactants in their bloodstream .

[ 17 ] In 2016, the United States Air Force paid $4.3 million for a water treatment system for residents downstream of Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In the United States, discharges of AFFF by vessels to surface waters are regulated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Department of Defense , pursuant to the Clean Water Act .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In Australia, in 2015 a public safety announcement was issued by the New South Wales Environment Protection Authority following a water source contamination near RAAF Base Williamtown . Surface water, groundwater, and fish were reported to contain chemicals from firefighting foams that had been released by the local Royal Australian Air Force base prior to training protocol changes in 2008.

[ 22 ] The residents of the area were advised to not consume any bore water, in addition to eggs and seafood from fauna exposed to the contaminated water.

[ 23 ] The discovery led to the banning of all forms of fishing in the waters of Fullerton Cove until the beginning of October 2016.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] As of 2017, the Australian Department of Defence was dealing with two class-action suits brought by those affected by contamination at Williamtown and at Army Aviation Centre Oakey .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Along with many airports and fire services, the Department of Defence is investigating possible contamination at 18 military sites across Australia.

[ 28 ] At Williamtown, it is also conducting studies on the uptake and residual contamination in plants, chickens, and eggs.

[ 29 ] In December 2017, New Zealand's Minister for the Environment announced that higher than acceptable levels of PFOS and PFOA were found in groundwater at two Royal New Zealand Air Force bases, thought to be from historic use of firefighting foam containing the substances.

[ 30 ] Residents residing near the airbases were told to drink bottled water until more extensive testing could be carried out.

[ 31 ] In 2020, state government agencies in the US are planning to dispose of firefighting foam, either by incineration or landfilling. Nearly 1 million US gal (3,800 kl) of foam will be disposed by the US. The potential health risks of incinerating AFFF are still being investigated by EPA and state agencies.

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Compressed air foam system Foam depopulation – often done with firefighting foam Foam path Timeline of events related to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances Wet water References [ edit ] ^ a b Loran and the fire extinguisher Archived 27 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine at p-lab.org (in Russian) ^ "Application of firefighting foam concentrate in low, medium and high expansion" . Bioex . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ Phos Chek WD881 Brochure (PDF) , Phos-Chek, archived from the original (PDF) on 5 January 2009 , retrieved 5 December 2008 ^ "Class A Foam: Q & A" . Archived from the original on 29 September 2005.

^ "ECOPOL Fluorine-free firefighting foam" (PDF) .

^ Clause 1 BS 5306-6.1 ^ "Direct and indirect firefighting foam application methods - BIOEX" .

BIOEX - Fire suppression foam manufacturer Firefighting company .

^ The history of fire extinguisher (in Russian) ^ Kearney, Paul (February 1966).

"Shut the Windows!" .

Popular Mechanics . Vol. 125, no. 2. Hearst Magazines. pp.

136– 139, 210– 212.

ISSN 0032-4558 .

^ "Fighting fire with fluorine-free foams" .

^ OECD (2002). "Hazard Assessment of Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS) and its salts".

ENV/JM/RD(2002)17/FINAL (Page 5) .

^ "How safe is firefighting foam?" .

FireRescue1 . Retrieved 14 February 2017 .

^ " 'Dark Waters' movie poses risk for 3M, analyst says" .

AFFF contamination on ArmyBases . Retrieved 20 November 2019 .

^ Governments unite to step-up reduction on global DDT reliance and add nine new chemicals under international treaty . Geneva: Stockholm Convention Secretariat. 8 May 2008.

^ "Fact Sheet on AFFF Fire Fighting Agents" (PDF) . Arlington, VA: Fire Fighting Foam Coalition. 2017.

^ Pelley, Janet.

"Novel Fluorinated Surfactants Discovered In Firefighters' Blood – Chemical & Engineering News" . Retrieved 19 November 2016 .

^ Rotander, Anna; Kärrman, Anna; Toms, Leisa-Maree L.; Kay, Margaret; Mueller, Jochen F.; Gómez Ramos, María José (2015). "Novel Fluorinated Surfactants Tentatively Identified in Firefighters Using Liquid Chromatography Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Tandem Mass Spectrometry and a Case-Control Approach".

Environmental Science & Technology .

49 (4): 2434– 2442.

Bibcode : 2015EnST...49.2434R .

doi : 10.1021/es503653n .

ISSN 0013-936X .

PMID 25611076 .

^ Finley, Bruce (10 May 2017).

"Elevated cancer rates found south of Colorado Springs where water supplies contain toxic chemicals" .

Denver Post .

^ "Tainted Water Near Colorado Bases Hints at Wider Safety Concerns" .

New York Times . 26 July 2016 . Retrieved 19 November 2016 .

^ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington, D.C. (12 April 2013). "Final National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for Discharges Incidental to the Normal Operation of a Vessel." Federal Register.

78 FR 21938 .

^ DOD and EPA (11 January 2017). "Uniform National Discharge Standards for Vessels of the Armed Forces-Phase II Batch One." Federal Register, 82 FR 3173 .

^ "Department of Defence and NSW Government investigating chemicals around Williamtown RAAF Base" .

Media and information . Sydney: New South Wales Environment Protection Authority . 3 September 2015. Archived from the original on 12 September 2015.

^ "Expert Panel recommends oyster ban end, further fish testing" .

Chief Scientist and Engineer . Sydney: New South Wales Government. 2 October 2015. Archived from the original on 23 September 2017 . Retrieved 22 September 2017 .

^ Chris Ray (25 March 2016).

"What's happening to the water in Williamtown?" .

Sydney Morning Herald . Fairfax Media . Retrieved 15 August 2017 .

^ Tonkin, Emma; Cook, Carly (27 September 2016).

"Fishing ban put in place due to contamination set to be lifted north of Newcastle" .

ABC News . Retrieved 25 October 2017 .

^ Daniel Burdon (21 April 2017).

"Federal government considering phasing out toxic fire-fighting foam chemicals" .

Canberra Times . Fairfax Media . Retrieved 15 August 2017 .

^ Gregory, Katherine (12 May 2017).

"Williamtown residents angry over revelations Defence delayed information on contamination" .

ABC News (Australia) . Retrieved 17 August 2017 .

^ "PFAS Investigation & Management Program" .

Department of Defence . 16 November 2003 . Retrieved 16 August 2017 .

^ "PFAS Uptake Studies in Plants, Chicken & Eggs" .

Department of Defence . 16 November 2003 . Retrieved 16 August 2017 .

^ "Agencies investigating potential water contamination" .

Radio New Zealand . 7 December 2017 . Retrieved 8 December 2017 .

^ "Defence force knew of possible contamination for months" .

Radio New Zealand . 8 December 2017 . Retrieved 8 December 2017 .

^ Carignan, Sylvia; Clukey, Keshia (16 July 2020).

"States Must Throw Out Almost 1 Million Gallons of PFAS Foam" .

Environment & Energy Report . Bloomberg Law.

Oke, Shawn, "Performance Characteristics of Wetting Agents." U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Further reading [ edit ] Associated Fire Protection 16 Sept. 2006 Clark, William E. Firefighting Principles and Practices. New Jersey: Saddle Brook, 1991.

Hawthorne, Ed. Petroleum Liquids: Fire and Emergency Control. New Jersey: Englewood Cliffs, 1987 Riecher, Anton. Innovation: Ideas Advance Fire Fighting. Vol. 20 No. 6, Industrial Fire World Magazine. 5 October 2005 [1] http://fireworld.com/Archives/tabid/93/articleType/ArticleView/articleId/86678/Innovation.aspx Archived 2 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine Reney, Varghese Bio-degradable Fire Fighting Foams. Dubai:Journal, 2007.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Fire fighting foam at Wikimedia Commons v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Firefighting_foam&oldid=1293450235 " Categories : Fire suppression agents Foams Russian inventions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2022 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from June 2016 Articles with a promotional tone from February 2015 All articles with a promotional tone Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Firefighting foam 13 languages Add topic

