Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 History 3 Natural endowment 4 Social endowment 5 References Toggle the table of contents Endowment (philosophy) 1 language Қазақша Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about individual human capabilities. For other uses, see Endowment (disambiguation) .

Endowment is a concept in philosophy that refers to human capacities and abilities which can be naturally or socially acquired.

[ 1 ] Natural endowment is biologically analysed.

[ 1 ] It is examined through individual genes or inborn abilities. Social endowment is explored through the culture and ethics of human lives in their communities.

[ 1 ] Natural and social endowment can be used to explain the behaviour of individuals.

[ 2 ] This natural and social distinction exemplifies individuals' positions within communities. The differences in human capacities enables diverse perceptions towards a similar situation.

[ 3 ] This includes Stephen Covey 's human endowments, which are self-awareness, imagination, willpower, abundance mentality, courage, creativity, and self-renewal.

[ 3 ] The philosophical studies of human nature or endowment is outlined in the theories of medieval philosophers on human evolution such as; Jean-Jacques Rousseau , Aristotle , and Baruch Spinoza .

[ 4 ] Description [ edit ] See also: Human nature Endowment in philosophical terms encompasses human innate and acquired capacities. The disciplinary focus of philosophy on human capacities is inclusive in the ontological studies of human nature.

[ 5 ] The innate and learned human capacities reflects the intrinsic lives and realities of human beings .

Endowment, either innate or acquired, varies among individuals and societies. Each individual consists of their own body and mind from birth until they become socially incorporated in communities where culture is learned and communal living is inevitable.

[ 6 ] This enables people to live together despite their different set of innate capacities. The necessity of living together as groups in order to thrive is part of individuals' acquired capacities.

The epistemological nature of human endowment can be explored through the state of nature theory with the focus on self-interested individuals and the creation of states .

[ 7 ] Human endowment is also inclusive in the theories of human nature exploring individuals' rational and social behaviours.

[ 4 ] : xxvi, 241 Jean-Jacques Rousseau (Medieval Philosophers) History [ edit ] In-depth analysis of human endowment is attributed to theories and perceptions of human evolution .

[ 4 ] : xxvi, 241 The biological and cultural evolution is an ongoing process that shapes similarities and distinctive human attributes.

[ 8 ] : 3 Biological and cultural evolution coexist to influence human activities. Biological evolution is determined by genes or hereditary, which naturally gives individuals the ability to speak the language of their associated communities.

[ 8 ] : 5 Cultural evolution is the process where beliefs and a community's way of living is passed down to generations which includes their spoken language.

[ 8 ] : 5 The state of nature by Rousseau offers an understanding of self-preservation as the main innate human capacity.

[ 9 ] Natural human endowment is peoples' willingness to survive and enjoy life. This allows the existence of states which individuals have formulated in order to live peacefully and ensure their continual survival.

Aristotle (Medieval Philosopher) Aristotle's human nature focuses on rationality as an innate human capacity that enables them to form communities and states.

[ 10 ] Aristotle shows the natural existence of communities and states due to individuals' innate capacities to live together. Living in communities reflects the differences between humans' innate abilities. This includes the innate abilities towards political participation between male and female.

[ 11 ] Human endowment is considered to be of divine nature according to Spinoza.

[ 12 ] Divine nature is reference to God's influence on human actions. The natural capacities of people to realise what they need enables them to make reasonable decisions and act accordingly. Spinoza's idea of necessity as part of human endowment is connected to God or nature which is the only existing substance .

[ 12 ] Baruch Spinoza (Medieval Philosopher) Stephen Covey 's human endowment is divided into primary and secondary categories. Primary endowment includes; self-awareness, imagination, conscience, volition or will power. Secondary endowments are; abundance mentality, courage and consideration, creativity, and self-renewal. These endowments are explored through the stages of human life which are dependence, independence, and interdependence.

[ 3 ] Covey's list of human endowment distinguishes between principles and values. Principles are external natural laws that determines the consequences of individual behaviour caused by their internal values.

[ 3 ] Principles are attributes of acquired or learned human endowment while values are of innate human capacities.

Natural endowment [ edit ] Endowment in the natural category refers to innate capacities of human beings which they are born with.

[ 1 ] Humans' instinct nature to preserve themselves is considered a natural endowment under Rousseau's state of nature theory.

[ 9 ] Individuals without having to acquire any instinctual value have the ability of wanting security to ensure their survival. The natural capacities of individuals to thrive and survive stems unilaterally from human mind rather than a polity . Natural endowment includes individuals' natural rights that allow humans' to be rational without any form of law in place.

[ 13 ] This differentiates natural endowment from social endowment.

Aristotle focuses on reason and mind as part of human natural endowment.

[ 14 ] Individuals are born with the natural ability to think, which enables them to make rational decisions. Individuals, through their minds and reason, develop abilities which could become habits if they continue to be rational. Aristotle's political perceptions of human nature reflect the idea of unequal natural abilities between genders.

[ 11 ] This is due to the level of authority individuals have in expressing their innate cognitive faculties.

Baruch Spinoza builds on individuals' natural impulses as innate capacities which is from the recognition of what is necessary and nature itself.

[ 12 ] Humans natural capacities include the innate ability to realise what is necessary and act through reasoning and make decisions. This stems from humans' dependency as part of their innate capacities which cannot be separated from nature or God.

[ 15 ] The social construction of communities and states is a result of individuals' realisation that living together in a civilised manner is necessary for survival.

[ 6 ] Stephen Covey's primary endowment includes; self-awareness or self-conscious and imagination as part of humans' natural endowment. Self-awareness or self-conscious is the innate capacity of human beings to be more sensitive of their environment with what they encounter and experience.

[ 16 ] Individuals' have the natural ability to act reasonably towards certain situations as they know what the situation is and its consequences. Imagination is of individual minds where thoughts beyond real life occurrences and situations take place.

[ 16 ] Individuals make sense of their environment and world through their natural ability to imagine beyond reality.

[ 16 ] Social endowment [ edit ] Further information: Culture Human endowment is social when they are acquired or learned from an environment. These learned characteristics varies between individuals and societies.

[ 1 ] Social endowment includes conscience as part of individuals' learned ability to distinguish between what is right and wrong.

[ 16 ] This moral decision is a reflection of rules and laws in place to govern a certain group people or society.

[ 6 ] Individuals develop conscience from their cultures or the way of life within their communities. This differentiates peoples' reactions to certain situations they encounter and experience. The uneven structures and material distribution of goods and services within societies determines individuals' conscience.

[ 16 ] Individuals who are most vulnerable and make up most of the lower class in society develop a more self-motivated and determined conscience.

[ 16 ] This social endowment is a reflection of individuals' environment and their corresponding response to it.

Social endowment emerges from these communal societies with embedded rules that govern people. The set of rules in place is a result of social endowment where individuals distinguishes between acceptable and inappropriate behaviour.

[ 6 ] The theory of human nature by Aristotle includes the philosophy of both natural and social human endowment.

[ 14 ] Social endowment flows from the natural capacities of people like their ability to think and make rational decisions. The gathering of communities and establishing of states are a result of rational decisions people make. This reflects the idea that humans are rational social and political animals.

[ 14 ] Individuals' social ability to think and make moral decisions allows them to live together in a polity. Living in a polity requires individuals to follow certain rules and way of life which becomes part of their social endowment. Sanctions are in place to correspond governing rules and ensure the maintenance of the polity.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Griffiths, Paul (2020), "The Distinction Between Innate and Acquired Characteristics" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-05-28 ^ Weisfeld, Glenn E. (1986). "Teaching about Sex Differences in Human Behavior and the Biological Approach in General".

Politics and the Life Sciences .

5 (1): 36– 43.

doi : 10.1017/S073093840000160X .

ISSN 0730-9384 .

JSTOR 4235480 .

S2CID 142425188 .

^ a b c d Covey, Stephen R.

The 7 habits of highly effective people .

ISBN 978-1-7971-1508-5 .

OCLC 1152892486 .

^ a b c Ward, Ann (2009).

Matter and Form: from natural science to political philosophy . Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-0-7391-3568-6 .

^ Guorong, Yang. (2016).

The mutual cultivation of self and things a contemporary Chinese philosophy of the meaning of being . Indiana University Press.

OCLC 1066441578 .

^ a b c d e Forji George, Amin (2010). "The correlation between law and behaviour as pillars of human society".

International Journal of Punishment and Sentencing .

6 : 85+.

^ Bertram, Christopher (2010-09-27).

"Jean Jacques Rousseau" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b c Ehrlich, Paul (2000).

Human Natures: Genes, Cultures, and the Human Prospect . Island Press: Island Press. p. 3.

ISBN 1597262668 .

^ a b Neumann, Harry (1976).

"Philosophy and Freedom: An Interpretation of Rousseau's State of Nature" .

Journal of General Education .

27 : 301– 307.

ProQuest 64032264 – via Social Science Premium Collection.

^ Everson, Stephen (1988).

"Aristotle on the foundations of the state" .

Political Studies .

XXXVI : 89– 101.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9248.1988.tb00218.x .

S2CID 144587597 .

ProQuest 36898151 – via Social Science Premium Collection.

^ a b Ward, Julie (2005).

"Aristotle on Physics: Human Nature in the Ethics and Politics" .

Polis .

22 (2): 287– 308.

doi : 10.1163/20512996-90000081 .

ProQuest 60522105 – via Social Science Premium Collection.

^ a b c Doomen, J. (2011).

Spinozan Freedom .

OCLC 1081515366 .

^ Grace, Eve Herausgeber. Kelly, Christopher 1950- Herausgeber. (2019).

The Rousseauian mind .

ISBN 978-0-429-02077-3 .

OCLC 1125186446 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Annas, Julia (1996). "Aristotle's Politics: A Symoposium: Aristotle on Human Nature and Political Virtue".

The Review of Metaphysics .

49 : 731– 753.

^ Garrett, Don. (2006).

The Cambridge companion to Spinoza . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-00048-2 .

OCLC 723455248 .

^ a b c d e f Lin, Yi; Forrest, Bailey (2011-12-14), "Interaction Between Civilizations", Systemic Structure Behind Human Organizations , Springer New York, pp.

127– 144, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4614-2311-9_6 , ISBN 978-1-4614-2310-2 v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐g56zh
Cached time: 20250815003914
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.757 seconds
Real time usage: 0.900 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5127/1000000
Revision size: 14035/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 184194/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4188/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 119509/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.409/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18869309/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  650.517      1 -total
 33.42%  217.372      7 Template:Navbox
 18.73%  121.839      1 Template:Social_and_political_philosophy
 16.95%  110.273      1 Template:Ethics
 16.05%  104.404      9 Template:Lang
 13.77%   89.555      2 Template:Citation
  8.24%   53.605      1 Template:About
  7.94%   51.670      7 Template:Cite_journal
  7.46%   48.532     49 Template:Smaller
  7.05%   45.835      4 Template:R Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:992706:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815003914 and revision id 1292096337. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Endowment_(philosophy)&oldid=1292096337 " Categories : Concepts in ethics Virtue Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 05:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Endowment (philosophy) 1 language Add topic

