Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Elementary functions Toggle Elementary functions subsection 1.1 Algebraic functions 1.2 Elementary transcendental functions 2 Special functions Toggle Special functions subsection 2.1 Piecewise special functions 2.2 Arithmetic functions 2.3 Antiderivatives of elementary functions 2.4 Gamma and related functions 2.5 Elliptic and related functions 2.6 Bessel and related functions 2.7 Riemann zeta and related functions 2.8 Hypergeometric and related functions 2.9 Iterated exponential and related functions 2.10 Other standard special functions 2.11 Miscellaneous functions 3 See also 4 External links Toggle the table of contents List of mathematical functions 21 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ລາວ Lëtzebuergesch 日本語 ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina தமிழ் Türkçe اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from List of functions ) In mathematics , some functions or groups of functions are important enough to deserve their own names. This is a listing of articles which explain some of these functions in more detail. There is a large theory of special functions which developed out of statistics and mathematical physics . A modern, abstract point of view contrasts large function spaces , which are infinite-dimensional and within which most functions are "anonymous", with special functions picked out by properties such as symmetry , or relationship to harmonic analysis and group representations .

See also List of types of functions Elementary functions [ edit ] Elementary functions are functions built from basic operations (e.g. addition, exponentials, logarithms...) Algebraic functions [ edit ] Algebraic functions are functions that can be expressed as the solution of a polynomial equation with polynomial coefficients.

Polynomials : Can be generated solely by addition, multiplication, and raising to the power of a positive integer.

Constant function : polynomial of degree zero, graph is a horizontal straight line Linear function : First degree polynomial, graph is a straight line.

Quadratic function : Second degree polynomial, graph is a parabola .

Cubic function : Third degree polynomial.

Quartic function : Fourth degree polynomial.

Quintic function : Fifth degree polynomial.

Rational functions : A ratio of two polynomials.

n th root Square root : Yields a number whose square is the given one.

Cube root : Yields a number whose cube is the given one.

Elementary transcendental functions [ edit ] Transcendental functions are functions that are not algebraic.

Exponential function : raises a fixed number to a variable power.

Hyperbolic functions : formally similar to the trigonometric functions .

Inverse hyperbolic functions : inverses of the hyperbolic functions , analogous to the inverse circular functions .

Logarithms : the inverses of exponential functions; useful to solve equations involving exponentials.

Natural logarithm Common logarithm Binary logarithm Power functions : raise a variable number to a fixed power; also known as Allometric functions ; note: if the power is a rational number it is not strictly a transcendental function.

Periodic functions Trigonometric functions : sine , cosine , tangent , cotangent , secant , cosecant , exsecant , excosecant , versine , coversine , vercosine , covercosine , haversine , hacoversine , havercosine , hacovercosine , Inverse trigonometric functions etc.; used in geometry and to describe periodic phenomena. See also Gudermannian function .

Special functions [ edit ] Main article: Special functions Piecewise special functions [ edit ] Indicator function : maps x to either 1 or 0, depending on whether or not x belongs to some subset.

Step function : A finite linear combination of indicator functions of half-open intervals .

Heaviside step function : 0 for negative arguments and 1 for positive arguments. The integral of the Dirac delta function .

Sawtooth wave Square wave Triangle wave Rectangular function Floor function : Largest integer less than or equal to a given number.

Ceiling function : Smallest integer larger than or equal to a given number.

Sign function : Returns only the sign of a number, as +1, −1 or 0.

Absolute value : distance to the origin (zero point) Arithmetic functions [ edit ] Main article: Arithmetic function Sigma function : Sums of powers of divisors of a given natural number .

Euler's totient function : Number of numbers coprime to (and not bigger than) a given one.

Prime-counting function :  Number of primes less than or equal to a given number.

Partition function :  Order-independent count of ways to write a given positive integer as a sum of positive integers.

Möbius μ function : Sum of the nth primitive roots of unity, it depends on the prime factorization of n.

Prime omega functions Chebyshev functions Liouville function : Λ Λ ( n ) = ( − − 1 ) Ω Ω ( n ) {\displaystyle \Lambda (n)=(-1)^{\Omega (n)}} Von Mangoldt function , Λ( n ) = log p if n is a positive power of the prime p Carmichael function : λ λ ( n ) = {\displaystyle \lambda (n)=} The smallest integer m {\displaystyle m} such that a m ≡ ≡ 1 ( mod n ) {\displaystyle a^{m}\equiv 1{\pmod {n}}} for all a {\displaystyle a} coprime to n {\displaystyle n} Radical function : The product of the distinct prime factors of a positive integer input.

Antiderivatives of elementary functions [ edit ] Logarithmic integral function : Integral of the reciprocal of the logarithm, important in the prime number theorem .

Exponential integral Trigonometric integral : Including Sine Integral and Cosine Integral Inverse tangent integral Error function : An integral important for normal random variables .

Fresnel integral : related to the error function; used in optics .

Dawson function : occurs in probability .

Faddeeva function Gamma and related functions [ edit ] Gamma function : A generalization of the factorial function.

Barnes G-function Beta function : Corresponding binomial coefficient analogue.

Digamma function , Polygamma function Incomplete beta function Incomplete gamma function K-function Multivariate gamma function : A generalization of the Gamma function useful in multivariate statistics .

Student's t-distribution Pi function Π Π ( z ) = z Γ Γ ( z ) = ( z ) !

{\displaystyle \Pi (z)=z\Gamma (z)=(z)!} Elliptic and related functions [ edit ] Elliptic integrals : Arising from the path length of ellipses ; important in many applications. Alternate notations include: Carlson symmetric form Legendre form Nome Quarter period Elliptic functions : The inverses of elliptic integrals; used to model double-periodic phenomena.

Jacobi's elliptic functions Weierstrass's elliptic functions Lemniscate elliptic functions Theta functions Neville theta functions Modular lambda function Closely related are the modular forms , which include J-invariant Dedekind eta function Bessel and related functions [ edit ] Airy function Bessel functions : Defined by a differential equation ; useful in astronomy , electromagnetism , and mechanics .

Bessel–Clifford function Kelvin functions Legendre function : From the theory of spherical harmonics .

Scorer's function Sinc function Hermite polynomials Laguerre polynomials Chebyshev polynomials Synchrotron function Riemann zeta and related functions [ edit ] Riemann zeta function : A special case of Dirichlet series .

Riemann Xi function Dirichlet eta function : An allied function.

Dirichlet beta function Dirichlet L-function Hurwitz zeta function Legendre chi function Lerch transcendent Polylogarithm and related functions: Incomplete polylogarithm Clausen function Complete Fermi–Dirac integral , an alternate form of the polylogarithm.

Dilogarithm Incomplete Fermi–Dirac integral Kummer's function Riesz function Hypergeometric and related functions [ edit ] Hypergeometric functions : Versatile family of power series .

Confluent hypergeometric function Associated Legendre functions Meijer G-function Fox H-function Iterated exponential and related functions [ edit ] Hyper operators Iterated logarithm Pentation Super-logarithms Tetration Other standard special functions [ edit ] Lambert W function : Inverse of f ( w ) = w exp( w ).

Lamé function Mathieu function Mittag-Leffler function Painlevé transcendents Parabolic cylinder function Arithmetic–geometric mean Miscellaneous functions [ edit ] Ackermann function : in the theory of computation , a computable function that is not primitive recursive .

Dirac delta function : everywhere zero except for x = 0; total integral is 1. Not a function but a distribution , but sometimes informally referred to as a function, particularly by physicists and engineers.

Dirichlet function : is an indicator function that matches 1 to rational numbers and 0 to irrationals . It is nowhere continuous .

Thomae's function : is a function that is continuous at all irrational numbers and discontinuous at all rational numbers. It is also a modification of Dirichlet function and sometimes called Riemann function.

Kronecker delta function : is a function of two variables, usually integers, which is 1 if they are equal, and 0 otherwise.

Minkowski's question mark function : Derivatives vanish on the rationals.

Weierstrass function : is an example of continuous function that is nowhere differentiable See also [ edit ] List of types of functions Test functions for optimization List of mathematical abbreviations List of special functions and eponyms External links [ edit ] Special functions : A programmable special functions calculator.

Special functions at EqWorld: The World of Mathematical Equations.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hctnk
Cached time: 20250812001516
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.141 seconds
Real time usage: 0.228 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 880/1000000
Revision size: 10517/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 14208/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8171/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 3004/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.062/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1839389/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  130.209      1 -total
 60.96%   79.375      1 Template:Short_description
 31.58%   41.123      2 Template:Pagetype
 20.88%   27.185     10 Template:Main_other
 20.55%   26.762      4 Template:Columns-list
 18.20%   23.700      1 Template:SDcat
 17.58%   22.885      2 Template:Main
  3.85%    5.017      1 Template:Short_description/lowercasecheck
  1.84%    2.394      1 Template:First_word Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:54316:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001516 and revision id 1305234831. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_mathematical_functions&oldid=1305234831 " Categories : Calculus Mathematics-related lists Number theory Functions and mappings Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 21:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of mathematical functions 21 languages Add topic

