Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 2.1 The Institutes 2.2 The Conferences 3 Spirituality 4 Accusations of Semipelagianism Toggle Accusations of Semipelagianism subsection 4.1 As viewed by the Roman Catholic Church 4.2 As viewed by the Eastern Orthodox Church 4.3 In Cassian's writings 4.4 Other views 5 Influence 6 Veneration 7 Works 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Notes 9.2 Citations 9.3 Sources 9.4 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents John Cassian 36 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian monk and theologian Saint John Cassian Church Father Theologian, Monk Born c.

360 [ 1 ] Scythia Minor , Roman Empire Died c.

435 Massilia , Gallia Narbonensis , Western Roman Empire Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox Church Anglican Communion Major shrine Monastery of St Victor , Marseille Feast East: February 29th (28th non-leap years) West: July 23 Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Sarcophagus of John Cassian, from the Abbey of Saint Victor, Marseille John Cassian , also known as John the Ascetic and John Cassian the Roman ( Latin : Ioannes Eremita Cassianus , Ioannes Cassianus , or Ioannes Massiliensis ; [ 2 ] Greek : Ἰωάννης Κάσσιος ὁ Ἐρημίτης ; c.

AD 360 – c.

435 ), was a Christian monk and theologian celebrated in both the Western and Eastern churches for his mystical writings.

[ 3 ] Cassian is noted for his role in bringing the ideas and practices of early Christian monasticism to the medieval West.

Biography [ edit ] Cassian was born around 360, most likely in the region of Scythia Minor (now Dobruja , a historical region shared today by Romania and Bulgaria ), [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] although some scholars assume a Gallic origin.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] The son of wealthy parents, he received a good education: his writings show the influence of Cicero and Persius .

[ 13 ] He was bilingual in Latin and Greek.

[ 14 ] Cassian mentions having a sister in his first work, the Institutes , with whom he corresponded in his monastic life; she may have ended up with him in Marseille.

[ 15 ] As a young adult he traveled to Palestine with an older friend Germanus, with whom he would spend much of the next twenty-five years. There they entered a hermitage near Bethlehem . After remaining in that community for about three years, [ 11 ] they journeyed to the desert of Scete in Egypt , which was rent by Christian struggles. There they visited a number of monastic foundations.

Approximately fifteen years later, about 399, Cassian and Germanus faced the Anthropomorphic controversy provoked in letter form by Theophilus, Archbishop of Alexandria . Cassian noted that the majority of the monks received the message of their patriarch "with bitterness", and charged Theophilus with heresy for impugning the plain teaching of scripture.

[ 16 ] Following an unsuccessful journey to Alexandria to protest the matter, Cassian and Germanus fled with about 300 other Origenist monks. Cassian and Germanus went to Constantinople , where they appealed to the Patriarch of Constantinople , John Chrysostom , for protection. Cassian was ordained a deacon and became a member of the clergy attached to the patriarch while the struggles with the imperial family ensued. When the patriarch was forced into exile from Constantinople in 404, the Latin-speaking Cassian was sent to Rome to plead his cause before Pope Innocent I .

[ 13 ] While he was in Rome, Cassian accepted the invitation to found an Egyptian-style monastery in southern Gaul , near Marseille . He may also have spent time as a priest in Antioch between 404 and 415. In any case, he arrived in Marseille around 415. His foundation, the Abbey of St Victor , was a complex of monasteries for both men and women, one of the first such institutes in the West, and served as a model for later monastic development.

[ 10 ] Cassian's achievements and writings influenced Benedict of Nursia , who incorporated many of the principles into his monastic rule , and recommended to his own monks that they read the works of Cassian. Since Benedict's rule is still followed by Benedictine , Cistercian , and Trappist monks, John Cassian's thought still exercises influence over the spiritual lives of thousands of men and women in the Latin Church .

[ citation needed ] Cassian died in 435 at Marseille.

[ citation needed ] Writings [ edit ] Cassian came very late into writing and did so only when a request was made by one or more important persons.  His sources were the same as those of Evagrius Ponticus , but he added his own ideas, which were arranged in extensive collections. Evagrius was, however, the single most important influence on Cassian's ideas, due to his reverence for the "Origenist" monks (who also relied predominantly on Evagrius) of Nitria , Kellia , and Scetis , three early monastic centres in the desert of the northwestern Nile Delta .

[ 14 ] [ 17 ] Around 420, at the request of Bishop Castor of Apt in Gallia Narbonensis, Cassian wrote two major spiritual works, the De institutis coenobiorum ( Institutes of the Coenobia ) and the Conlationes or Collationes patrum in scythica eremo ( Conferences of the Desert Fathers ). In these, he codified and transmitted the wisdom of the Desert Fathers of Egypt. The Institutes deal with the external organization of monastic communities, while the Conferences deal with "the training of the inner man and the perfection of the heart".

[ 10 ] His books were written in Latin , in a simple, direct style. They were swiftly translated into Greek, which indicates the Eastern monks recognized him as one of their own.

[ 14 ] Some of his works had been translated into Georgian by the 11th century.

[ 18 ] The Institutes [ edit ] The Institutes were meant to help Castor to establish a coenobium following the model of Egypt, in contrast to the existing monastic life in Gaul, which included the work of Martin of Tours . According to Hugh Feiss the Institutes are a counterweight to Sulpicius Severus’ Life of Martin and Dialogues , and are an attempt to put order into a movement Cassian regarded as chaotic. Cassian, who insists on manual work, had a higher opinion of and close ties with the monastery on the Island of Lerins , founded by Honoratus .

[ 14 ] In Books 1–4 of Institutions , Cassian discusses clothing, prayer and rules of monastic life. Books 5–12 are rules on morality, specifically addressing the eight vices – gluttony , lust , greed , hubris , wrath , envy , listlessness , and boasting – and what to do to cure these vices. In the Institutions , Cassian discusses a will that is more complex than the will at the heart of the Pelagian message. Willful monks are a contentious problem, and Cassian paid considerable attention to analyzing the will, treating the corrupt will, and chiefly subordinating even the good will for the good of the community and ultimately, the will of God.

[ 19 ] Below is an outline of Cassian's Institutes : [ 20 ] Book Title in Latin Topics 1 De habitu monachorum The monastic habit and its allegorical meaning 2 De canonico nocturnarum orationum et psalmorum modo Method of praying the psalms: night prayers 3 De canonico diurnarum orationum et psalmorum modo Method of praying the psalms: day prayers 4 De institutis renuntiantium Rules and instructions for new monks 5 De spiritu gastrimargiae First Vice: Gluttony 6 De spiritu fornicationis Second Vice: Fornication 7 De spiritu filargyriae Third Vice: Love of money 8 De spiritu irae Fourth Vice: Anger 9 De spiritu tristitiae Fifth Vice: Sadness 10 De spiritu acediae Sixth Vice: Listlessness (acēdia) 11 De spiritu cenodoxiae Seventh Vice: Vainglory 12 De spiritu superbiae Eighth Vice: Pride The Conferences [ edit ] The Conferences , dedicated to Pope Leo , to the bishop of Fréjus , and to the monk Helladius, summarize important conversations that Cassian had with elders from the monastery at Scetis about principles of the spiritual and ascetic life.  This book addresses specific problems of spiritual theology and the ascetic life.  It was later read in Benedictine communities after the evening meal, [ 21 ] and from the Latin title, Collationes , comes the word collation in the sense of "light meal".

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Outline of Cassian's Conferences : [ 20 ] First Set Conference Title in Latin Topic Speaker 1 De monachi destinatione vel fine The goal and end of the monk Moses (of Scetis) 2 De discretione Discernment Moses 3 De tribus abrenunitationibus The three renunciations Paphnutius (of Scetis ) 4 De concupiscentia carnis ac spiritus Desires of the flesh Daniel (of Scetis) 5 De octo vitiis principalibus The eight principle vices Sarapion (of Scetis) 6 De nece sanctorum The murder of saintly people Theodore (of Kellia) 7 De animae mobilitate et spiritalibus nequitiis Evil spirits and the soul's changeability Serenus (of Scetis) 8 De principatibus The principalities Serenus 9 De oratione Prayer (disposition, types) Isaac (of Scetis) 10 De oratione Prayer (unceasing, method) Isaac Second Set Conference Title in Latin Topics Speaker 11 De perfectione Perfection Chaeremon (an anchorite near Panephysis) 12 De castitate Chastity Chaeremon 13 De protectione Dei Grace and free will Chaeremon 14 De spiritali scientia Spiritual knowledge, biblical interpretation Nestoros (an anchorite near Panephysis) 15 De charismatibus diuinis Charisms Nesteros 16 De amicitia Friendship Joseph (an anchorite near Panephysis) 17 De definiendo Oaths and promises Joseph Third Set Conference Title in Latin Topics Speaker 18 De tribus generibus monachorum Three types of monks Piamun (of Diolcos, a cenobite turned anchorite) 19 De fine coenobiotae et heremitae Cenobites and anchorites John (of Diolcos, an anchorite turned cenobite) 20 De paenitentiae fine et satisfactionis indicio Penitence and reparation Pinufius (of Panephysis, cenobite) 21 De remissione quinquagensimae Relaxing during Pentecost Pinufius 22 De nocturnis inlusionibus Dreams and nocturnal emissions Pinufius 23 De anamarteto Sinlessness Theonas (of Scetis, an anchorite) 24 De mortificatione Mortification, renunciation Abraham (of Diolcos, an anchorite) Spirituality [ edit ] The desert ascetics of Egypt followed a three-step path to mysticism: Purgatio , Illuminatio , and Unitio . These stages correspond to the three ways of later Catholic theology. During the first level, Purgatio (in Greek, Catharsis ), young monks struggled through prayer and ascetic practices to gain control of "the flesh"—specifically by purging their gluttony, lust and desire for possessions. This period of purgation, which often took many years, was intended to teach young monks that whatever strength they had to resist these desires ( grace ) came directly from the Holy Spirit .

[ citation needed ] At this point, the Illuminatio ( theoria in Greek) commenced. During this period the monks practiced the paths to holiness as revealed in the Gospel, identifying strongly with the Christ who taught the Sermon on the Mount (found in Matthew 5–7). Many monks took in visitors and students and tended the poor as much as their resources allowed. Many monks died never having moved past this period. The final stage was the Unitio ( theosis in Greek), a period in which the soul of the monk was meant to bond with the Spirit of God in a union often described as the marriage of the Song of Solomon (also called the "Song of Songs" or the "Canticle of Canticles"). To find the solitude and peace that this level of mystical awareness demanded, elderly monks often fled into the deep desert or into remote forests.

[ citation needed ] His asceticism, while rigorous, was tempered by common sense. Cassian says hospitality should override ascetical routine. Even the most contemplative of anchorites should entertain visitors. Both asceticism and ministry are aspects of the practical life.

[ 14 ] In his Conferences , Cassian recommended as "absolutely necessary for possessing the perpetual awareness of God" the formula in Psalm 70 (69) v. 2, Deus, in adiutorium meum intende. Domine, ad adiuvandum me festina ("God, incline unto my aid; O Lord, make haste to help me").

[ 24 ] He says of it: Not without reason has this verse been selected out of the whole body of Scripture. For it takes up all the emotions that can be applied to human nature and with great correctness and accuracy it adjusts itself to every condition and every attack. It contains an invocation of God in the face of any crisis, the humility of a devout confession, the watchfulness of concern and of constant fear, a consciousness of one's own frailty, the assurance being heard, and confidence in a protection that is always present and at hand, for whoever calls unceasingly on his protector is sure that he is always present. It contains a burning love and charity, an awareness of traps, and a fear of enemies. Seeing oneself surrounded by these day and night, one confesses that one cannot be set free without the help of one's defender. This verse is an unassailable wall, an impenetrable breastplate, and a very strong shield for those who labour under the attack of demons.

— Cassian 1997 , p. 381, Tenth Conference, X, 2-4 Benedict of Nursia praises Cassian's Conferences in his rule [ 25 ] [ 26 ] and use of this formula became part of the Liturgy of the Hours in the Western Church, in which all the canonical hours , including the minor hours, start with this versicle , which is omitted only if the hour begins with the Invitatory , the introduction to the first hour said in the day, whether it be the Office of Readings or Morning Prayer.

Alphonsus Liguori also cites Cassian's recommendation to use this short prayer continually.

[ 27 ] In the West, Cassian's proposition that "the slightest glimmer of goodwill" could be attributed to the human drive was widely regarded as unacceptable in relation to the prosperity of the Augustinianism of the period (Conf. 13.7.1; cf Prosper of Aquitaine Contra Collatorem; Cassiodorus, Institutiones 1.29; Decretum Gelasianum V.7 ) .

[ 28 ] In his Thirteenth Conference and in writings to the Monks of Lerins, Cassian qualifies this by saying the good will is "stirred" by God: For when God sees us inclined to will what is good, He meets, guides, and strengthens us: for "At the voice of thy cry, as soon as He shall hear, He will answer thee;" and:  "Call upon Me," He says, "in the day of tribulation and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me." And again, if He finds that we are unwilling or have grown cold, He stirs our hearts with salutary exhortations, by which a good will is either renewed or formed in us.

— Schaff 2009 , p. 428 Cassian finds the will to be insufficient for spiritual progress, and traces this back to the initial sin of pride. Cassian illustrates advanced cases of the will's pathology in the Institutions , saying these problems began when man "believed himself capable of attaining the glory of the Godhead by his freedom of will and hard work." To this end, Cassian believes the renunciate must conquer his will, overcome it, and even kill it.

[ 29 ] In regards to demons, Cassian noted that the earliest coenobites would ensure one monk was reciting a prayer, psalmody, or reading at all times, due to their belief that demons were especially prevalent at night. Cassian promotes David's evil spirit repulsing prayer at Ps. 35: 1–3, for demons actively oppose the virtuous life, and could be warded off with prayer.

[ 30 ] Accusations of Semipelagianism [ edit ] As viewed by the Roman Catholic Church [ edit ] His third book, On the Incarnation of the Lord , was a defense of orthodox doctrine against the views of Nestorius , and was written at the request of the Archdeacon of Rome, later Pope Leo I . In this book Cassian points out a link between Nestorianism which stresses the humanity of Jesus and Pelagianism which stresses human effort. Later theologians, however, labeled Cassian as " Semipelagian " because he stressed the role of the human will , as opposed to Augustine's stress on the totality of grace, in moving towards salvation.

[ 13 ] The ideas expressed by Cassian to which critics have pointed as examples of his alleged Semipelagianism are found in his Conferences , in book 3, the Conference of Abbot Paphnutius; book 5, the Conference of Abbot Serapion; and most especially in book 13, the Third Conference of Abbot Chaeremon.

[ citation needed ] The view that Cassian propounded Semipelagianism has been disputed. Lauren Pristas, writes: "For Cassian, salvation is, from beginning to end, the effect of God's grace. It is fully divine. Salvation, however, is salvation of a rational creature who has sinned through free choice. Therefore, salvation necessarily includes both free human consent in grace and the gradual rehabilitation in grace of the faculty of free choice. Thus Cassian insists salvation is also fully human. His thought, however, is not Semi-Pelagian, nor do readers who submit to the whole corpus emerge Semi-Pelagians." [ 31 ] And Augustine Casiday states that "for Cassian ... although sparks of goodwill may exist (which are not directly caused by God), they are totally inadequate and only direct divine intervention can ensure our spiritual progress".

[ 32 ] The Latin Church condemned Semipelagianism in the local Council of Orange (529) , but recognizes Cassian himself as a saint.

[ 33 ] It did not endorse Augustine entirely [ 34 ] and, while later Catholic theologians accepted Augustine's authority, they interpreted his views in the light of writers such as Cassian.

[ 35 ] As viewed by the Eastern Orthodox Church [ edit ] Augustine Casiday states that Cassian "boldly asserts that God's grace, not human free will , is responsible for 'everything which pertains to salvation' - even faith." [ 36 ] Some other Orthodox, who do not apply the term "Semi-Pelagian" to their theology, criticize the Roman Catholics for allegedly rejecting Cassian, whom they accept as fully orthodox, [ 37 ] and for holding, as, in Casiday's interpretation, that everything which pertains to salvation comes from God's grace, and so that even the human consent to God's justifying action is itself an effect of grace.

[ a ] This position of the Roman Catholic Church and of Cassian as interpreted by Casiday is attributed by Eastern Orthodox theologian Georges Florovsky also to the Eastern Orthodox Church, which, he says, "always understood that God initiates, accompanies, and completes everything in the process of salvation", rejecting instead the Calvinist idea of irresistible grace .

[ b ] Neither Cassian nor any of his teachings have ever been directly or indirectly called into question or condemned by Eastern Orthodox, as they are considered a witness to the Orthodox position.

[ c ] In Cassian's writings [ edit ] In The Book of Mystical Chapters , a compilation of sayings of the Church Fathers by renowned theologian and early church historian [ 38 ] John Anthony McGuckin , Cassian is quoted as saying the following: The thief on the cross certainly did not receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a reward for his virtues but as a grace and a mercy from God.

He can serve as an authentic witness that our salvation is given to us only by God's mercy and grace.

All the holy masters knew this and unanimously taught that perfection in holiness can be achieved only through humility.

— McGuckin 2003 , p. 24 Other views [ edit ] According to some scholars, Cassian is a prominent representative of a monastic movement in southern Gaul which,  ca. 425, gave expression to the soteriological view that much later was called Semipelagianism.

[ 39 ] This emphasized the role of free will in that the first steps of salvation are in the power of the individual, without the need for divine grace . His thought has been described as a "middle way" between Pelagianism , which taught that the will alone was sufficient to live a sinless life, and the view of Augustine of Hippo , which emphasizes original sin and the absolute need for grace.

[ citation needed ] For instance, Anglican priest and historian Owen Chadwick stated that Cassian held that man can come to God without the intervention of divine grace first; [ 40 ] and the Presbyterian theologian B. B. Warfield called Cassian the leader of the monastics in southern Gaul who asserted that men begin their turning to God and that God assists that beginning.

[ 41 ] Influence [ edit ] The spiritual traditions of Cassian had an immeasurable effect on Western Europe. Many different western spiritualities, from that of St Benedict of Nursia to that of St Ignatius of Loyola , owe their basic ideas to Cassian.

[ citation needed ] Pope Gregory I 's teaching on the seven deadly sins comes from Cassian, as does much of his teaching on compunction and prayer.

Philip Neri used to read Cassian to the laity and would frequently use his work as the starting point for his own addresses.

[ 42 ] He also influenced John Climacus and John of Damascus , [ 14 ] as well as Saint Dominic , Francis de Sales , and John Henry Newman .

[ 42 ] Cassian's writings stress the role of prayer and personal asceticism in attaining salvation by contrast with Augustine's writings which stress the role of God's justice and grace (predestination) and take a more negative view of human effort. His teaching on overcoming the eight evil tendencies (See Books 5 to 12 of The Institutes) were the inspiration behind the way the Irish monks practised asceticism, as shown in the Irish Penitentials.

[ 13 ] The Institutes had a direct influence on organization of monasteries described in the Rule of Saint Benedict ; Benedict also recommended that ordered selections of the Conferences be read to monks under his Rule. Moreover, the monastic institutions Cassian inspired kept learning and culture alive during the Early Middle Ages , and were often the only institutions that cared for the sick and poor.

[ citation needed ] His works are excerpted in the Philokalia ( Greek for "love of the beautiful"), the Eastern Orthodox compendium on mystical Christian prayer.

[ citation needed ] Even modern thinkers have been influenced by Cassian's thinking.

Michel Foucault was fascinated by the rigorous way Cassian defined and struggled against the "flesh".

[ 43 ] Perhaps because of investigations like these, Cassian's thought and writings are enjoying a recent popularity even in non-religious circles.

Veneration [ edit ] Abbey of Saint Victor, Marseille , where his relics are placed He is a saint of the Eastern Orthodox Churches , with a feast day on 29 February. Because this day occurs only once every four years on leap years , official church calendars often transfer his feast to another date (usually 28 February).

[ 44 ] He is also a saint of the Oriental Orthodox Churches , his Christology considered Miaphysite by the Church and his works being relevant in the theological discourse of the 4th and 5th centuries.

[ 45 ] The Roman Catholic Church also ranks him as a saint, with a feast day on 23 July ( death anniversary ). Like his contemporaries Augustine of Hippo and John Chrysostom , he was never formally canonized, a process that came into use several centuries after his death.

[ 10 ] Pope Urban V referred to him as sanctus (a saint) and he was included in the Gallican Martyrology [ 46 ] He is included also in the Roman Martyrology with a feast-day on 23 July.

[ 33 ] In the Irish church, at the beginning of the ninth century, Cassian was commemorated on 25 November, as indicated in the Martyrology of Óengus: "Lasin nEoin Cassian assa érchain corann" (With John Cassian whose crown is very fair).  Like the great majority of recognized saints of the church, he is not one of the saints in the General Roman Calendar , but the Archdiocese of Marseilles and some monastic orders celebrate his memorial on his feast day.

In 2022, John Cassian was officially added to the Episcopal Church liturgical calendar with a feast day on 23 July.

[ 47 ] Cassian's relics are kept in an underground chapel in the Monastery of Saint Victor in Marseilles . His head and right hand are in the main church there.

[ citation needed ] Works [ edit ] English Translations Cassian, John (1985).

Conferences . Translated by Colm Luibhéid. Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-0-8091-2694-1 .

Cassian, John (1997). Boniface Ramsey (ed.).

The Conferences .

ACW 57 . The Newman Press.

ISBN 978-0-8091-0484-0 .

Cassian, John (2000). Boniface Ramsey (ed.).

The Institutes .

ACW 58 . Newman Press.

ISBN 978-0-8091-0522-9 .

Cassian, John (2019).

The Institutes . Translated by Edgar C.S. Gibson, amended. SAGOM Press.

ISBN 978-1-9456-9909-2 .

French translations Cassian, John (1955–59). E. Pichery (ed.).

Conférences .

SC 42 . Éditions du Cerf.

Cassian, John (2024). Pascale-Dominique Nau, o.p. (ed.).

Entretiens I-X avec les Pères de Scété: Introduction, traduction et notes . Parole et Silence.

ISBN 978-2889595488 .

Cassian, John (1965). Jean-Claude Guy (ed.).

Institutions cénobitiques .

SC 109 . Éditions du Cerf.

See also [ edit ] Libertarianism (metaphysics) References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "When Catholics say that persons cooperate in preparing for an accepting justification by consenting to God's justifying action, they see such personal consent as itself an effect of grace, not as an action arising from innate human abilities" ( Karras, Valerie A.

"Beyond Justification: An Orthodox Perspective" . Archived from the original on 2010-11-30 . Retrieved 2010-07-16 .

) ^ The existential and ontological meaning of man's created existence is precisely that God did not have to create, that it was a free act of Divine freedom. But— and here is the great difficulty created by an unbalanced Christianity on the doctrine of grace and freedom— in freely creating man God willed to give man an inner spiritual freedom. In no sense is this a Pelagian or Semi-Pelagian position. The balanced synergistic doctrine of the early and Eastern Church, a doctrine misunderstood and undermined by Latin Christianity in general from Saint Augustine on— although there was always opposition to this in the Latin Church— always understood that God initiates, accompanies, and completes everything in the process of salvation. What it always rejected— both spontaneously and intellectually— is the idea of irresistible grace, the idea that man has no participating role in his salvation. ( Florovsky, Georges , The Ascetic Ideal and the New Testament: Reflections on the Critique of the Theology of the Reformation (PDF) ) ^ Augustine's writings found their way to parts of the West Roman provinces. Saint John Cassian (circa 360-433), former ascetic in the deserts of Egypt and then deacon of the Patriarch of Constantinople Saint John Chrysostom, challenged Augustine's teaching about original sin and pre-destination without mentioning him. The teachings of Augustine on these points were condemned by the Council of Orange in 529.[ 18 ] Augustine's writings completely captured the 8th century Carolingian tradition which knew basically only Augustine until the 12th century. At that time the Franks acquired a translation of Saint John of Damascus' "Book on the Orthodox Faith" which they simply understood within their own Augustinian categories. By the 11th century the Franks had taken over all of Western Europe, except Spain, by either conquest or diplomacy. The Spanish Romans under Arab rule were still under the direct surveillance of the Roman Emperor of Constantinople New Rome. The Umayad Arabs of Spain and the Abbasid Arabs of Damascus and then Baghdad called their Roman Orthodox subjects Melkites, i.e. those who belong to the religion of the Roman Emperor in New Rome Constantinople. ( Romanides, John S.

"The Cure of the Neurobiological Sickness of Religion" .

) Citations [ edit ] ^ Lake 2004 , pp. 27–41.

^ "John Cassian" .

Christian Classics Ethereal Library . Retrieved 5 April 2016 .

^ Chisholm 1911 , p. 458.

^ Kurian & Smith 2010 , p. 241.

^ Lamm 2012 , p. 220.

^ Hinson 2010 , p. 263.

^ Egan 2010 , p. 33.

^ Stone 2010 , p. 43.

^ Cassian 2000 , p. 3.

^ a b c d Hassett 1908 .

^ a b Lake 2004 , p. 27.

^ Stewart 1998 , p. 27.

^ a b c d "Feb 29 - St John Cassian (360-435)" .

^ a b c d e f "Feiss OSB, Hugh. "Cassian and Monasticism", Monastery of the Ascension; Jerome, Idaho" . Archived from the original on 2018-04-14 . Retrieved 2013-06-04 .

^ Stewart 1998 , p. 4.

^ Shepherd 1938 , pp. 263–273.

^ Driver 2002 , p. 4.

^ Chadwick 1950 , p. 172.

^ Casiday 2007 , p. 96.

^ a b Harmless, William (2004).

Desert Christians: an introduction to the literature of early monasticism . Oxford New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-516222-6 .

^ St. Benedict . "Chapter XLII: That No One Speak after Compline".

The Holy Rule of St. Benedict . Translated by Boniface Verheyen. (1949 ed.) . Retrieved 8 March 2019 .

^ Funk 2007 , p. 78-79.

^ McKean 2005 , p. 333.

^ Nova Vulgata, Psalmus 70 (69) ^ "Rule of St. Benedict" .

www.thelatinlibrary.com .

^ "Birrell, Martin Birrell, "'HELP!' St John Cassian in The Liturgy & in Devotion", Pluscarden Abbey" (PDF) .

^ Liguori 2009 , p. 39.

^ McGuckin 2011 , p. 533.

^ Casiday 2007 , p. 97.

^ Casiday 2007 , pp. 172–173.

^ Pristas 1993 .

^ Moss 2009 , p. 4.

^ a b Martyrologium romanum . Libreria editrice vaticana. 2001. p. 385.

ISBN 978-88-209-7210-3 .

^ Zackrison 2004 , p. 73.

^ Gonzalez 2010 , p. 58.

^ Casiday 2007 , p. 103.

^ Lossky 1976 , p. 198.

^ 1.

http://religion.columbia.edu/people/John%20McGuckin Archived 2016-06-20 at the Wayback Machine 2.

https://utsnyc.edu/academics/faculty/john-anthony-mcguckin/ Archived 2017-02-22 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cross & Livingstone 2005 , p. 701.

^ Cassian 1985 , p. 27.

^ Schaff 2007 , p. 21.

^ a b "The saint whose guide on virtue was read every day by monks in the Middle Ages" .

Catholic Herald . 23 July 2012 . Retrieved 31 July 2021 .

^ Foucault engages extensively with Cassian in his 1979-1980 lecture series at the College de France, published as Du gouvernement des vivants (2012); On the Government of the Living (English translation, 2014) ^ Petruzzello, Melissa (3 August 2020).

"St. John Cassian" . Encyclopedia Britannica Online . Retrieved 4 September 2021 .

^ "The Life of St John Cassian - Pimonakhos Articles" .

St Shenouda Monastery . 2016-02-20. Archived from the original on 2025-04-04 . Retrieved 2025-06-30 .

^ Sabine Baring-Gould , The Lives of the Saints (Baring-Gould) , p.521 ^ "General Convention Virtual Binder" .

www.vbinder.net . Archived from the original on 2022-09-13 . Retrieved 2022-07-22 .

Sources [ edit ] Casiday, A. M.C. (2007).

Tradition and Theology in St. John Cassian . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-929718-4 .

Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Cassianus, Joannes Eremita" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 458.

Chadwick, Owen (1950).

John Cassian: A Study in Primitive Monasticism . Cambridge: University Press.

Cross, Frank Leslie ; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005).

"Semipelagianism" .

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

Driver, Steven D. (2002).

John Cassian and the Reading of Egyptian Monastic Culture . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-93668-2 .

Egan, Harvey D. (2010).

Soundings in the Christian Mystical Tradition . Liturgical Press.

ISBN 978-0-8146-8003-2 .

Funk, Charles Earle (2007).

Thereby Hangs a Tale - Stories of Curious Word Origins . Read Books.

ISBN 978-1-4067-7319-4 .

Gonzalez, Justo L. (2010).

A History of Christian Thought Volume II: From Augustine to the Eve of the Reformation . Abingdon Press.

ISBN 978-1-4267-2191-5 .

Hassett, Maurice M. (1908).

"John Cassian" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Hinson, E. Glenn (2010).

The Early Church: Origins to the Dawn of the Middle Ages . Abingdon Press.

ISBN 978-1-4267-2468-8 .

Kurian, George Thomas; Smith, James D. (2010).

The Encyclopedia of Christian Literature . Vol. 2. Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7283-7 .

Lake, Stephen (2004).

"Knowledge of the Writings of John Cassian in Early Anglo-Saxon England" . In Michael Lapidge; Malcolm Godden; Simon Keynes (eds.).

Anglo-Saxon England . Vol. 32. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-81344-0 .

Lamm, Julia A. (2012).

The Wiley-Blackwell Companion to Christian Mysticism . Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-118-23276-7 .

Liguori, St Alphonsus (2009).

Treatise on Prayer . St Athanasius Press.

ISBN 978-0-9819901-0-1 .

Lossky, Vladimir (1976).

The Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church . St. Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 978-0-913836-31-6 .

McGuckin, John Anthony (2003).

The Book of Mystical Chapters: Meditations on the Soul's Ascent, from the Desert Fathers and Other Early Christian Contemplatives . Shambhala.

ISBN 978-1-59030-007-7 .

McGuckin, John Anthony (2011).

The Encyclopedia of Eastern Orthodox Christianity: N-Z . Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-4051-8539-4 .

McKean, Erin, ed. (2005).

The New Oxford American Dictionary . Vol. 2 (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press, USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-517077-1 .

Moss, Rodney (May 2009).

"Book Review : Casiday, A 2007. Tradition and theology in St. John Cassian" (PDF) .

Studia Historiae Ecclesiasticae .

35 (1). Pretoria. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-03-06.

Pristas, Lauren (1993).

The Theological Anthropology of John Cassian (PhD).

Boston College .

OCLC 39451854 .

Schaff, Philip, ed. (2007).

Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers: First Series . Vol. V St. Augustine: Anti-Pelagian Writings. Cosimo, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-60206-598-7 .

Schaff, Philip (2009).

Nicean and Post-Nicean Fathers Series Two Volume Eleven. Sulpitius Severus, Vincent of Lerins, John Cassian . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Christian Classics Ethereal Library. p. 428.

Shepherd, Massey Hamilton (Sep 1938). "The Anthropomorphic Controversy in the Time of Theophilus of Alexandria".

Church History .

7 (3): 263– 273.

doi : 10.2307/3160566 .

JSTOR 3160566 .

S2CID 162743853 .

Stewart, Columba (1998).

Cassian the Monk . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-511366-2 .

Stone, Barry (2010).

I Want to be Alone: Solitary Lives: salvation seekers, celebrity recluses, hermit poets and survivalists from the Buddha to Greta Garbo . Murdoch.

ISBN 978-1-74266-217-6 .

Zackrison, Edwin (2004).

In the Loins of Adam: A Historical Study of Original Sin in Adventist Theology . iUniverse.

ISBN 978-0-595-30716-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Brown, Peter (2003).

The Rise of Western Christendom : Triumph and Diversity, A.D. 200-1000 . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. p. 111.

Harper, James (1965).

Church History . Vol. 34. pp.

371– 380.

Jones, Lindsay, ed. (2005).

Encyclopedia of Religion . Vol. 3 (2nd ed.). Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA. pp.

1447– 1448.

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 3 (2nd ed.). Detroit: Gale. 2003. pp.

205– 207.

Rousseau, Philip (2003). Hornblower, Simon; Spawforth, Antony (eds.).

The Oxford Classical Dictionary . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 298.

External links [ edit ] John Cassian at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Online texts Conferences of John Cassian .

Christian Classics Ethereal Library .

Institutes of John Cassian New Advent Latin edition of the De Coenobiorum Institutis Text of the Conferences New Advent Text of On the Incarnation of the Lord (Against Nestorius) Collationes patrum XXIV.

From the Lessing J. Rosenwald Collection at the Library of Congress.

Lewis E 63 Collationes XXIV, incomplete at OPenn Lehigh Codex 5 John Cassian. Coliatiosses XXIV at UPenn Works by John Cassian at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Others Plotz, John. "Their Noonday Demons, and Ours", The New York Times Sunday Book Review , 23 December 2011 - Essay on Acedia, Cassian's Views, and modern application Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Latina Feiss OSB, Hugh. "Cassian and Monasticism", Monastery of the Ascension; Jerome, Idaho Archived 2018-04-14 at the Wayback Machine Venerable John Cassian the Roman Orthodox icon and synaxarion St. John Cassian Monastery, Constanta, Romania v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e Seven deadly sins The sins Lust Gluttony Envy Greed Sloth Pride Wrath Describing the sins Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld In art and culture Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio The Keys to the Kingdom (book series) The Seven Deadly Sins (1585 play) The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things (painting) The Seven Deadly Sins (1933 ballet) The Seven Deadly Sins (1952 film) The Seven Deadly Sins (1962 film) The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence (1975) Seven (1995 film) Fullmetal Alchemist (manga series) Fullmetal Alchemist (2003 anime) Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood (2009 anime) The Seven Deadly Sins (manga series) The Seven Deadly Sins of Modern Times (painting) Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World (light novel series) Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World (2016 anime) Four Last Things (video game) Graveyard Keeper (2018 video game) Shazam!

(comic book) Seven Deadly Enemies of Man Shazam!

(2019 film) Helluva Boss (2020 animated series) Limbus Company (2023 video game) Hazbin Hotel (2024 animated series) Related Seven Heavenly Virtues Seven Social Sins Sin Christian views on sin Christian views on the Old Covenant Hamartiology Peter Binsfeld Catholicism portal v t e Philokalia Authors Isaiah the Solitary Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Mark the Ascetic Hesychius of Sinai Nilus of Sinai Diadochos of Photiki John of Karpathos Anthony the Great Theodore of Edessa [ fr ] Maximus the Confessor Thalassios the Libyan [ fr ] John of Damascus Theognostos Philotheus of Sinai Ilias the Presbyter Theophanes the Monk Peter of Damascus Symeon the Metaphrast Symeon the New Theologian Nikitas Stithatos Theoleptos of Philadelphia Nikephoros the Monk Gregory of Sinai Gregory Palamas Callistus Ignatios Xanthopoulos Kallistos Angelikoudis [ ru ] Symeon of Thessalonica Mark the Gentle Compilers Nicodemus the Hagiorite Macarius of Corinth Translators Paisius Velichkovsky Ignatius Brianchaninov Theophan the Recluse Dumitru Stăniloae Gerald Palmer Philip Sherrard Kallistos (Ware) Portals : Biography Saints Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia 2 Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Cassian&oldid=1302163148 " Categories : 360 births 435 deaths 4th-century Byzantine monks 4th-century Christian mystics 4th-century Christian saints 4th-century Christian theologians 5th-century Byzantine monks 5th-century Christian mystics 5th-century Christian saints 5th-century Christian theologians 4th-century Gallo-Roman people 5th-century Gallo-Roman people Christian ascetics Byzantine Christian mystics Roman Catholic mystics Egyptian male non-fiction writers Egyptian Roman Catholic writers Deacons Egyptian Christian monks Founders of Christian monasteries Gallo-Roman saints Hesychasts 5th-century writers in Latin People from Dobruja 5th-century Byzantine writers 4th-century writers in Latin Philokalia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 CS1: abbreviated year range Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 19:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Cassian 36 languages Add topic

