Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Main ideas 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Liberal Party 2.2 Centre Union 2.3 Centrist Democratic Union 3 Legacy 4 Anti-Venizelism 5 See also 6 Footnotes 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Venizelism 11 languages العربية Български Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Հայերեն Italiano Македонски Shqip Српски / srpski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political movement in Greece This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Venizelism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Politics of Greece Constitution Constitutional history Human rights Executive Head of state President of the Republic ( list ): Konstantinos Tasoulas Presidential Departments Government Prime Minister ( list ): Kyriakos Mitsotakis Cabinet : Kyr. Mitsotakis II Legislature President : Nikitas Kaklamanis Presidium Conference of Presidents Parliamentary committees Constituencies Apportionment Judiciary Supreme Courts Special Highest Court Court of Cassation Council of State Chamber of Accounts Subdivisions Regions Municipalities Elections Political parties Recent elections: Parliamentary : 2019 2023 (May) 2023 (June) Local: 2014 2019 2023 European : 2014 2019 2024 Referendums: 1973 1974 2015 Foreign relations Ministry for Foreign Affairs Minister : Giorgos Gerapetritis Diplomatic missions of Greece Diplomatic missions in Greece KYSEA International Relations Passport Visa requirements Politics of the European Union Greece portal Other countries v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Venizelism ( Greek : Βενιζελισμός ) was one of the major political movements in Greece beginning from the 1910s. The movement first formed under Eleftherios Venizelos in the 1910s and saw a resurgence of support in the 1960s when Georgios Papandreou united a coalition of old Venizelists and nationalist politicians.

The movement was characterized by the beliefs of Eleftherios Venizelos and the ideas of Greek irredentism supporting the Megali Idea . It had a Francophile stance as the ideas of the French Revolution and the idea of one state which should have all the lands predominantly inhabited by a single ethnicity. In WWI , the Venizelists wished to join the Entente, mainly due to the entrance of the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria , which was one of the highest chances to gain all lands Greeks claim and thus fulfilling the Megali idea . Despite popular misconceptions, Venizelism is a movement that sides with monarchy, and it calls for a ruling class in which the urban class can rise to the ranks by merit. Additionally, the king should originate from the same country that he is ruling, thus not having loyalties to foreign interests. Venizelism called for early and more moderate capitalistic economic policies such as open markets, but the government should approve those markets. The movement had its strongest support in Crete, Thrace, Epirus, the North Aegean islands, and Macedonia.

Main ideas [ edit ] Named after Eleftherios Venizelos , the key characteristics of Venizelism are: Greek irredentism : The support of the Megali Idea .

Greek nationalism ( liberal nationalism ) Liberal democracy : Venizelists represented upcoming urban classes that were against the old conservative establishment, which also had close ties with the palace.

Pro-Western : Alliance with the Entente against the Central Powers during WWI, and with the Allies during WWII. Also pro-Western during the Cold War , but later diverged with direct confrontation between Greek nationalist forces in Cyprus against British colonial forces.

Republicanism : Despite Venizelos' moderation regarding the monarchy, most of his supporters were in favour of a Republic, on the French standards.

Mixed economic policies : from economically liberal to social democratic policies.

[ 1 ] Anti-Bolshevism : Venizelos rejected the bolshevik system and was the main introducer of the Idionymon anticommunist law in 1929. In a speech he had delivered in the Greek parliament, he had stated that socialism is democratic and Bolshevism authoritarian.

In the contemporary sense the ideology incorporates national liberalism , civic nationalism , economic liberalism , liberal democracy , pro-Europeanism , republicanism , secularism , centrism , radical centrism and generally moves from centre-right to social democracy.

History [ edit ] Liberal Party [ edit ] Eleftherios Venizelos Venizelos' liberal party ruled Greece from 1910 until 1916. That year, determined to enter World War I on the Entente side, Venizelos rebelled against the king and formed a Provisional Government of National Defence in Thessaloniki. Venizelos regained full control of the country in 1917 and ruled until losing the 1920 elections. The strongest support for Venizelism came in the "New Greece" gained after the Balkan Wars of 1912–1913, consisting of Crete, Thrace, Epirus, the North Aegean islands, and Macedonia.

[ 2 ] By contrast, people in " Old Greece " tended to be more much royalist. The fact that in 1916 King Constantine I had allowed the Bulgarians to occupy parts of Macedonia and had been willing to contemplate giving up all of recently gained "New Greece" in the north to the Bulgarians to weaken the Venizelist movement cemented the identification of people in northern Greece with Venizelism.

[ 3 ] Greek refugees from Turkey also tended to be firmly Venizelist, [ 4 ] at least until the 1930s and the signing of the Greco-Turkish friendship agreement by Venizelos (1930).

[ 5 ] Voters started to favour a balance between Venizelos and Constantine I. This crisis period for Venizelos occurred when Greece experienced a lagging economy, growing political corruption, profiteering by the few, and eight continuous years of mobilization.

[ 6 ] After a crisis period (including two short-lived pro-Venizelist military governments after Nikolaos Plastiras 1922 revolution) the liberals returned to power from 1928 until 1932. Venizelists Sophoklis Venizelos and Georgios Papandreou formed the core of the Greek government in exile during the Axis Occupation of Greece (1941–1944), and held power a number of times in the 1950s.

Centre Union [ edit ] Georgios Papandreou , leader of the Centre Union, which was formed by Venizelists Georgios Papandreou created the Centre Union party in 1961, as a coalition of old Venizelists and progressive politicians. In 1963 the party was elected and held power until 1965, when its right wing broke ranks in the events known as the Iouliana . The current Union of Centrists claims to be the ideological continuation of the old party Centre Union.

Centrist Democratic Union [ edit ] After the 1967–1974 Junta , Venizelists formed the Centre Union – New Forces party, which then evolved into the Union of the Democratic Centre ( Greek : ΕΔΗΚ ). While the Venizelist legacy was still popular, election results were disappointing as the abolition of the monarchy, the dilution of support for Greek nationalism after the seven years of the junta and the 1974 Turkish invasion of Cyprus , and Karamanlis ' move towards the political centre had blurred the differences between the liberals and their former conservative opponents, while the socialist PASOK party was gaining support at the left side of the spectrum.

Most members of the Centre Union – New Forces party with their leader Georgios Mavros were absorbed by PASOK.

Legacy [ edit ] Although the image of Venizelos is still very popular in Greece today, Venizelism is no longer a significant force in Greek politics. Venizelos' prestige and his ideology's connotations of republicanism and progressive reforms meant that most mainstream political forces claimed his political heritage. There are few explicitly "Venizelist" movements today in Greece. In the 2004 elections for the European Parliament , the leading Venizelist party was the Union of Centrists , gaining only 0.54% of the Greek popular vote. An attempted revival of the original Liberal Party, under the same name , was founded in the 1980s by Venizelos' grandson, Nikitas Venizelos . The party was dissolved in 2012.

Anti-Venizelism [ edit ] There were also various politicians of different political orientation during the 1910s (monarchists, conservatives, part of the clergy, but also socialists/communists of the newly founded SEKE ) who were against Venizelos' policies. Some points of disagreement included the Venizelos' extreme pro- Entente stance during the World War I and the National Schism (which led to the division of the country between a Venizelist and a royalist government), his policy about the Megali idea and its results (regarding the relations with Turkey and the Greeks who were still under Ottoman sovereignty) and later the Treaty of Lausanne and the population exchange .

Antivenizelism also sided with the religious minorities in Greece (Muslim, Jewish, etc.), being in general of conservative political orientation.

[ 7 ] Another common point of the anti-Venizelists was a criticism about the country's social and economic transformation/modernization, such as critics for political/economic mismanagement.

See also [ edit ] Greece portal Politics portal Greek nationalism Liberalism in Greece Metaxism Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Kitromilides 2006 , pp. 285–306.

^ Kostis 2018 , pp. 277–278.

^ Kostis 2018 , p. 278.

^ Kostis 2018 , p. 260.

^ Encyclopedia, Ankara .

^ Finefrock 1980 .

^ Dépret 2014 .

References [ edit ] Kitromilides, Paschalis , ed. (2006).

Eleftherios Venizelos: The Trials of Statesmanship . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 0-7486-2478-3 .

Kostis, Kostas (2018).

History's Spoiled Children: The Story of Modern Greece . London: Hurst.

ISBN 9781849048255 .

Dépret, Isabelle (2014).

"Ioannis Metaxas and Religion (1938–41): Historical Experience and Current Debates in Greece" .

Cahiers balkaniques (in French).

42 .

doi : 10.4000/ceb.5120 .

Finefrock, Michael M. (1980).

"Ataturk, Lloyd George and the Megali Idea: Cause and Consequence of the Greek Plan to Seize Constantinople from the Allies, June–August 1922" .

The Journal of Modern History .

52 (1): D1053.

doi : 10.1086/242238 .

ISSN 0022-2801 .

JSTOR 1881129 .

S2CID 144330013 .

"Ankara, Treaty of (1930) | Encyclopedia.com" .

encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 31 August 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Look up Venizelism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Μαυρογορδάτος, Γιώργος Θ.; Χατζηιωσήφ, Χρίστος, eds. (1992).

Βενιζελισμός Και Αστικός Εκσυγκρονισμός (in Greek). Πανεπιστημιακές Εκδόσεις Κρήτης.

ISBN 9789607309310 .

v t e Eleftherios Venizelos Family Kyriakos Venizelos Sofoklis Venizelos Helena Schilizzi Nikitas Venizelos Konstantinos Mitsotakis Politics Venizelism ( Liberal Party ) Democratic education Radicalism Modernization Greek Constitution of 1911 Balkan League Civic nationalism Megali Idea Secularism Anti-communism ( Idionymon ) Events Cretan State Theriso revolt Goudi coup French military mission to Greece (1911–1914) British naval mission to Greece (1911–1912) Balkan Wars London Conference of 1912–13 Gallipoli campaign Macedonian front National Defence coup d'état Provisional Government of National Defence National Schism Noemvriana French occupation of Thessaly Greece in WWI Occupation of Constantinople Allied intervention in Ukraine Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920) League of Nations establishment Greek landing at Smyrna Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922) 11 September 1922 Revolution Greek retreat from Eastern Thrace Conference of Lausanne Population exchange between Greece and Turkey 1928 Greek legislative election 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Support Cretan Gendarmerie Military League Triple Entente National Defence Army Corps Nikolaos Plastiras Theodoros Pangalos Pavlos Kountouriotis Panagiotis Danglis Emmanouil Zymvrakakis Leonidas Paraskevopoulos Georgios Papandreou Treaties Greek–Serbian Alliance of 1913 Treaty of London (1913) Treaty of Bucharest (1913) Treaty of Athens Armistice of Salonica Armistice of Mudros Venizelos–Tittoni agreement Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine Treaty of Sèvres Armistice of Mudanya Treaty of Lausanne Greco-Turkish Friendship Agreement Establishments Hellenic Air Force Hellenic Air Force Academy Hellenic Coast Guard Hellenic State Railways Remembrance Eleftherios Venizelos Museum of Chalepa Eleftherios Venizelos Foundation Athens International Airport Eleftherios Venizelos (film) Statue of Eleftherios Venizelos v t e Greek nationalism Ideology Modern Greek Enlightenment Megali Idea Hellenization Grecoman Venizelism Metaxism Enosis Greek Cypriot nationalism Organizations Filiki Eteria Ethniki Etaireia Macedonian Committee Military League National Youth Organisation EDES Northern Epirus Liberation Front EOKA EOKA B Political parties Napist Party New Party (1873) National Party Liberal Party Freethinkers' Party National Party of Greece New Party (1947) Politically Independent Alignment Greek Rally Progressive Party 4th of August Party National Democratic Union National Alignment United Nationalist Movement Party of Hellenism National Political Union Greek Unity Political Spring Golden Dawn Hellenic Front Front Line Popular Orthodox Rally Democratic Revival Patriotic Alliance ELAM (Cyprus) Panhellenic Macedonian Front National Hope United Popular Front National Unity Association Creation Independent Greeks National Front Union for the Homeland and the People Assembly of Greeks LEPEN National Unity New Right Greek Solution Spartans Victory National Popular Consciousness National Party – Greeks Free People Patriots National Accord National Creation Patriotic Force for Change Voice of Reason People Adamantios Korais Rigas Feraios Alexander Ypsilantis Ioannis Kapodistrias Athanasios Diakos Theodoros Kolokotronis Dionysios Solomos Constantine Paparrigopoulos Aristotelis Valaoritis Alexandros Koumoundouros Theodoros Diligiannis Kostis Palamas Pavlos Melas Ion Dragoumis Eleftherios Venizelos Nikolaos Plastiras Ioannis Metaxas Angelos Sikelianos Alexandros Papagos Napoleon Zervas Georgios Grivas Georgios Papadopoulos Dimitrios Ioannidis Antonis Samaras Historical events Greco-Persian Wars Byzantine Empire under the Palaiologos dynasty Greek War of Independence Epirus Revolt of 1854 1854 Macedonian rebellion 1867 Macedonian rebellion Cretan revolt (1866–1869) Cretan revolt (1878) Epirus Revolt of 1878 1878 Macedonian rebellion 1896–1897 Macedonian rebellion Greco-Turkish War (1897) Macedonian Struggle Maratha, Santalaris and Aloda massacre Theriso revolt Greece in the Balkan Wars Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus Greece during World War I Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922) 1931 Cyprus revolt 4th of August Regime Greek resistance Cyprus Emergency (1955–59) Cyprus crisis of 1963–64 Bloody Christmas (1963) Greek junta (1967–74) 1974 Cypriot coup d'état 1990 Komotini events Policies Aromanian question Geographical name changes Greek language question v t e Liberalism in Greece Ideology Centrism Modern Greek Enlightenment Republicanism Liberal nationalism Liberal democracy Venizelism Anti-nepotism Megali Idea Human rights Secularism Press freedom Land reform Political Parties Constitutional Party Modernist Party Liberal Party National Unionist Party Liberal Democratic Union National Progressive Center Union National Political Union Centre Union Centre Union – New Forces Democratic Centre Union (Greece) Union of the Democratic Centre Liberal Party (modern) Liberal Alliance (Greece) Union of Centrists The River People Adamantios Korais Theophilos Kairis Dionysios Solomos Alexandros Mavrokordatos Epameinondas Deligeorgis Charilaos Trikoupis Emmanuel Rhoides Ioannis Psycharis Konstantinos Raktivan Eleftherios Venizelos Pavlos Kountouriotis Nikolaos Plastiras Themistoklis Sofoulis Georgios Kafantaris Nikolaos Politis Georgios Kartalis Dimitrios Psarros Georgios Papandreou Sofoklis Venizelos Ioannis Zigdis Georgios Mavros Historical events Greek War of Independence First National Assembly at Epidaurus 3 September 1843 Revolution 23 October 1862 Revolution Theriso revolt Goudi coup Movement of National Defence National Schism 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Greek Resistance Anti-Junta movement Policies Democratic education Free public education Modernization Progressivism v t e Provisional Government of National Defence Ideas & Policies Venizelism Megali Idea Pro-Entente Anti-German sentiment Greece in WWI People Triumvirate: Eleftherios Venizelos Panagiotis Danglis Pavlos Kountouriotis Officers: Georgios Kondylis Nikolaos Plastiras Theodoros Pangalos Leonidas Paraskevopoulos Emmanouil Zymvrakakis Alexandros Mazarakis-Ainian Dimitrios Psarros Evripidis Bakirtzis Nikolaos Christodoulou Dimitrios Ioannou Konstantinos Manetas Theodoros Manetas Aristeidis Moraitinis Neokosmos Grigoriadis Napoleon Zervas Ptolemaios Sarigiannis Politicians: Themistoklis Sophoulis Nikolaos Politis Georgios Papandreou Leonidas Embirikos Andreas Michalakopoulos Konstantinos Angelakis Alexandros Zannas Military support Army of National Defence Serres Division Archipelago Division Crete Division Cretan Gendarmerie Allied Army of the Orient Armée d'Orient (1915–1919) Maurice Sarrail British Salonika Army Macedonian Mule Corps Democratic Battalions Events National Defence coup d'état National Schism Noemvriana Anathema to Venizelos French occupation of Thessaly Accession of Alexander of Greece Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Venizelism&oldid=1292100076 " Categories : Greek nationalism History of modern Greece Political movements Political movements in Greece Eleftherios Venizelos Liberalism in Greece Eponymous political ideologies Political history of Greece 20th century in Greece Megali Idea Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles containing Greek-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 05:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Venizelism 11 languages Add topic

