Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History until 1945 2 History from 1945 3 Today 4 Liberal political parties in Austria Toggle Liberal political parties in Austria subsection 4.1 Habsburg monarchy and Austro-Hungarian Empire 4.2 First Austrian Republic 4.3 Second Austrian Republic 5 Liberal leaders 6 Liberal thinkers 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Austria Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism in Austria" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Overview of liberalism in Austria Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism in Austria . It is limited to liberal parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having had representation in parliament. For inclusion in this scheme it is not necessary that parties labeled themselves as a liberal party.

History until 1945 [ edit ] In the Austrian Empire a national liberal current evolved in the 19th century. Liberalism in Austria reached its peak at the time of the 1848 revolution , when civil liberty and a written constitution for the Austrian Empire were key demands of the revolutionary movement. At some time afterwards, Liberals gained some influence on the policy of the government; for example, Anton von Schmerling became Minister for Justice. The liberal Constitutional Party , also known as the "German-Liberal Party", had a majority in the Austrian parliament from 1867 to 1879. It supported the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 which transformed the Empire of Austria into the Austro-Hungarian Dual monarchy and the 1867 December Constitution . The panic of 1873 and the Long Depression led to strongly anti-capitalist and anti-liberal sentiments and the liberal movement in Austria began to decline, with pan-German nationalistic ideas and parties gaining strength at the same time. Later attempts to reorganize liberalism were unsuccessful, with its remnants mostly joining forces with pan-German nationalists.

This traditional association with Pan-Germanism was inherited from Austria-Hungary into the Austrian Republic; the Greater German People's Party and the Landbund represented national liberal, anti-clerical and pan-German voters. Both parties lost ground with the rise of Nazism in the 1930s and were later dissolved by the regime of Engelbert Dollfuss .

History from 1945 [ edit ] With the foundation of the Federation of Independents in 1949, a predominantly liberal party once again existed in Austria, but it was soon overtaken by nationalist elements and later merged into the Freedom Party of Austria , which was founded in 1955 by former Nazis . The attraction of the party to some of its voters lay in its opposition to both the Catholic clericalism of the Austrian People's Party and to the Marxism of the Social Democratic Party of Austria . Liberal politicians gained control over the Freedom Party during the years from 1980 to 1986, when it was led by Norbert Steger . However, its participation in a coalition under socialist Chancellor Fred Sinowatz brought it to the verge of extinction, which allowed Jörg Haider to take control of the party in 1986.

With the support of the remaining Pan-Germans (the appeal of whose own views has an equally small appeal to the Austrian electorate today), he transformed it into a right-wing populist , frequently immigration-sceptic party. The Freedom Party was subsequently expelled from the Liberal International , and the remaining liberals seceded to found the Liberal Forum (Liberales Forum, member LI , ELDR ) in 1993. However, when the Liberal Forum lost its seats in parliament in 1999 and became a micro-party , liberalism effectively ceased to exist as a political force in Austria.
In 2012 the social-liberal media, especially Der Standard , states that the Pirate Party Austria could become the new Liberal Forum.

Today [ edit ] The conservative Austrian People's Party labels itself the party of open society in its manifesto. The Austrian Green Party , however, holds the most liberal views on social issues. The Alliance for the Future of Austria which was founded in 2005 as a split-off from the Freedom Party, sometimes considered itself right-libertarian ("rechtsliberal").

[ citation needed ] Other small parties on the liberal spectrum include the Democrats and the Social Liberals .

However, liberalism today is best represented by NEOS – The New Austria . The party calls itself a movement from the center of the people . It has been founded in October 2012 and moved into the national parliament less than one year later. In early 2014 – right before starting the election campaigns – they unified with the Liberal Forum and JuLis (Junge Liberale, Young Liberals ) and form NEOS – The New Austria and Liberal Forum .

Liberal political parties in Austria [ edit ] Habsburg monarchy and Austro-Hungarian Empire [ edit ] 1861: Liberals from various parliamentary factions united in the Constitutional Party ( Verfassungspartei ), also known as the German-Liberal Party (Deutschliberale Partei) .

1860s: The large landowners' party split into a feudally conservative wing and a relatively liberal and constitutionalist one, the latter was called the "Constitutionally Loyal Large Landowners" or "Constitutional Landowners" ( Verfassungstreuer Großgrundbesitz ) group.

1873: A radical faction of the Constitutional Party formed the liberal-nationalist Progressive Club ( Fortschrittsklub ).

1881: Pro-government members led by Franz Coronini von Cronberg (the speaker of the House of Representatives) left the Constitutional Party to form the Liberal Center (Liberales Zentrum) .

1881: The Constitutional Party merged with the Progressive Club to form the United Left ( Vereinigte Linke ).

1885: The United Left fractured into a liberal German-Austrian Club ( Deutsch-Österreichischer Klub ) and a nationalist German Club ( Deutscher Klub ).

1888: The remnants of the United Left merged with the moderate parts of the German Club into the United German Left ( Vereinigte Deutsche Linke ); a little later the Constitutional Landowners joined the group, too.

1896/97: The United German Left broke apart, its Bohemian members left, the Constitutional Landowners re-established their own parliamentary group. The remainder formed the German Progressive Party ( Deutsche Fortschrittspartei ).

1911: Various liberal and nationalist elements merged into the German National League ( Deutscher Nationalverband ).

1917: The German National League broke into many small factions.

First Austrian Republic [ edit ] 1919/20–1934 The agrarian Landbund and the German-nationalist Greater German People's Party each comprised national-liberal factions and ideas.

1920: The minor liberal Civic Workers' Party (led by Ottokar Czernin ) won a single parliamentary seat. It merged with the equally tiny "Democrats" to form the Civic-Democratic Workers' Party, but remained electorally unsuccessful until it vanished around 1927.

Second Austrian Republic [ edit ] 1949: With the formation of the Federation of Independents , many liberals became active in this party, but were soon marginalized by the nationalist factions.

1955: The Federation of Independents merged into the Freedom Party of Austria ( Freiheitliche Partei Österreichs , FPÖ) in which the dominance of a larger nationalist over a smaller liberal faction continued. However, the liberal wing (organized in the "Attersee circle") grew and the FPÖ was admitted to the Liberal International in 1979. After 1986, the FPÖ leadership shifted to right-wing populism and the liberals were marginalized again.

[ 1 ] 1991: Some liberal members split from the FPÖ to form The Democrats (initially called FDP Austria , modelled on the Free Democratic Party of Germany).

1993: Liberal dissidents from the Freedom Party of Austria formed the Liberal Forum ( Liberales Forum ). The FPÖ was pressured to leave the Liberal International and the Liberal Forum "inherited" its membership.

2009: The Young Liberals, previously the Liberal Forum's youth organisation, separated from the mother party and ran in the European Parliament election on their own.

2012: A group of disappointed voters of different parties formed a new party called the NEOS – The New Austria , taking a broadly liberal platform. Less than one year later they entered the national parliament.

2014: The Liberal Forum and NEOS – The New Austria merged to form NEOS – The New Austria and Liberal Forum. Also the Young Liberals joined the party and renamed to JUNOS – Young liberal NEOS .

Liberal leaders [ edit ] Anton von Schmerling (1805–1893) Baron Ignaz von Plener (1810–1908) Prince Karl of Auersperg (1814–1890) Adolf Fischhof (1816–1893) Eduard Herbst (1820–1892) Karl Ritter von Stremayr (1832–1904) Ottokar Czernin (1872–1932) Herbert Alois Kraus (1911–2008) Norbert Steger (1944–) Heide Schmidt (1948–) Angelika Mlinar (1970–) Matthias Strolz (1973–) Liberal thinkers [ edit ] In the Contributions to liberal theory the following Austrian thinkers are included: Carl Menger (1840–1921) Ludwig Edler von Mises (1881–1973) Joseph Schumpeter (1883–1950) Friedrich von Hayek (1899–1992) Karl Raimund Popper (1902–1994) See also [ edit ] History of Austria Politics of Austria List of political parties in Austria Austrian School Liberalism in Germany Liberalism in Switzerland References [ edit ] ^ Luther, K.R. (1988-11-03).

"The Freiheitliche Partei Österreichs: protest party or governing party?" . In Kirchner, Emil J. (ed.).

Liberal Parties in Western Europe (1 ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

213– 251.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511521843.012 .

ISBN 978-0-521-32394-9 .

Website of Liberal Forum (in German) Malachi Haim Hacohen. Karl Popper - The Formative Years, 1902-1945: Politics and Philosophy in Interwar Vienna. Cambridge University Press, 2002 .

ISBN 9780521890557 v t e Austria articles History Hallstatt culture Celts Kingdom of Noricum Roman Era Noricum Pannonia Raetia Germanic tribes Rugiland Ostrogothic Kingdom East Francia Margraviate of Austria Duchy of Austria Archduchy of Austria Habsburg monarchy Siege of Vienna (1529) Austrian Empire March Constitution Congress of Vienna Austria-Hungary German Austria First Austrian Republic Austrian Civil War Federal State of Austria Austrofascism Anschluss Ostmark Allied-administered Austria History of Vienna Military history of Austria Geography Administrative divisions Alps conifer and mixed forests Cities Districts Ecoregions Lakes Mountains Pannonian mixed forests Rivers States Western European broadleaf forests World Heritage Sites Politics Climate change Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Law enforcement LGBT rights Legal system Military Parliament Political parties Economy Agriculture Banking Companies Energy Mining Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Rail Society Abortion Austrian people Crime Demographics Education Ethnic groups Health care Languages Pornography Prostitution Religion ( freedom of religion ) Women Culture Architecture Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine ( wine ) Flag Literature Media Museums Music National anthem Public holidays Sport Outline Index Category Portal v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Austria&oldid=1225141329 " Categories : Liberalism in Austria Liberalism by country Politics of Austria Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2012 This page was last edited on 22 May 2024, at 16:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Austria Add languages Add topic

