Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable works 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Pseudo-Aristotle 14 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Italiano پښتو Português Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cognomen for authors of works falsely attributed to Aristotle Pseudo-Aristotle is a general cognomen for authors of philosophical or medical treatises who attributed their works to the Greek philosopher Aristotle , or whose work was later attributed to him by others. Such falsely attributed works are known as pseudepigrapha . The term Corpus Aristotelicum covers both the authentic and spurious works of Aristotle.

History [ edit ] The first Pseudo-Aristotelian works were produced by the members of the Peripatetic school , which was founded by Aristotle. However, many more works were written much later, during the Middle Ages .

[ 1 ] Because Aristotle had produced so many works on such a variety of subjects, it was possible for writers in many different contexts—notably medieval Europeans , North Africans and Arabs —to write a work and ascribe it to Aristotle. Attaching his name to such a work guaranteed it a certain amount of respect and acceptance, since Aristotle was regarded as one of the most authoritative ancient writers for the learned men of both Christian Europe and the Muslim Arab lands .

[ 2 ] It is generally not clear whether the attribution to Aristotle of a later work was done by its own author or by others who sought to popularize such works by using his name.

In the Middle Ages , more than a hundred Pseudo-Aristotelian works were in circulation. These can be separated into three groups based on the original language used for the work, namely Latin , Greek or Arabic . The category of Latin works is the smallest, [ 3 ] while the Arabic works are most numerous. Many Arabic works were translated to Latin in the Middle Ages. The majority of these cover occult subjects, such as alchemy , astrology , chiromancy and physiognomy . Others treated Greek philosophical subjects, more often the Platonic and neoplatonic schools rather than the thought of Aristotle. The Arabic Secretum Secretorum was by far the most popular Pseudo-Aristotelian work and was even more widely diffused than any of the authentic works of Aristotle.

[ 1 ] The release of Pseudo-Aristotelian works continued for long after the Middle Ages.

Aristotle's Masterpiece was a sex manual which published first in 1684 and became very popular in England . It was still being sold in the early twentieth century and was probably the most widely reprinted book on a medical subject in the eighteenth and early nineteenth century.

[ 4 ] Notable works [ edit ] Aristotle's Masterpiece (1684) De Proprietatibus Elementorum (9th or 10th century) Liber de Causis On Marvellous Things Heard On the Universe ( De Mundo , 4th or 3rd century BC) Rhetoric to Alexander Secretum Secretorum The Theology of Aristotle Physiognomonics (circa 300 BCE) On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias Mechanics References [ edit ] ^ a b Glick, Livesey & Wallis 2005 , p.

423–424 .

^ Kieckhefer 2000 , p.

27 .

^ Charles B. Schmitt, Dilwyn Knox (Eds.): Pseudo-Aristoteles Latinus. A Guide to Latin works falsely attributed to Aristotle before 1500 . London: The Warburg Institute,  1985, ISBN 0-85481-066-8 (Warburg Institute Surveys and Texts 12).

^ Bullough 1973 .

Sources [ edit ] Alwishah, Ahmed; Hayes, Josh (2015).

Aristotle and the Arabic Tradition .

ISBN 1107101735 . Cambridge University Press.

Bullough, Vern L. (1973). "An Early American Sex Manual, or, Aristotle Who?".

Early American Literature .

7 (3): 236– 246.

JSTOR 25070583 .

Glick, Thomas; Livesey, Steven J.; Wallis, Faith, eds. (2005).

Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia . New York City, New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-96930-7 .

Kieckhefer, Richard (2000).

Magic in the Middle Ages . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-78576-1 .

Charles B. Schmitt, Dilwyn Knox (Eds.): Pseudo-Aristoteles Latinus. A Guide to Latin works falsely attributed to Aristotle before 1500 . London: The Warburg Institute,  1985, ISBN 0-85481-066-8 (Warburg Institute Surveys and Texts 12) External links [ edit ] Works by Pseudo-Aristotle at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Israel 2 Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pseudo-Aristotle&oldid=1301373459 " Categories : Pseudoaristotelian works Ancient alchemists Ancient Greek pseudepigrapha Neoplatonists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pseudo-Aristotle 14 languages Add topic

