Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Description 3 Evolution Toggle Evolution subsection 3.1 Differences from European bison 3.2 Crossbreeding with cattle 4 Range and population Toggle Range and population subsection 4.1 Habitat and trails 4.2 Mexico 4.3 Introductions to Siberia 5 Behavior and ecology Toggle Behavior and ecology subsection 5.1 Social behavior and reproduction 5.2 Horning 5.3 Wallowing behavior 5.4 Predation 5.5 Dangers to humans 6 Genetics 7 Population bottleneck and near extinction Toggle Population bottleneck and near extinction subsection 7.1 Texas State Bison Herd 7.2 Yellowstone National Park Bison Herd 7.3 Population recovery 8 Hunting 9 As livestock Toggle As livestock subsection 9.1 Domestication 10 As a symbol Toggle As a symbol subsection 10.1 Native Americans 10.2 North America 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents American bison 89 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Diné bizaad Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kotava Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Tsetsêhestâhese Türkçe Тыва дыл Удмурт Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of bovid artiodactyl mammal "American Buffalo" redirects here. For other uses, see American Buffalo (disambiguation) .

American bison Temporal range: 0.01–0 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N ↓ Early Holocene – present Plains bison ( Bison bison bison ) Wood bison ( Bison bison athabascae ) Conservation status Near Threatened ( IUCN 3.1 ) [ 1 ] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Artiodactyla Family: Bovidae Subfamily: Bovinae Subtribe: Bovina Genus: Bison Species: B. bison Binomial name Bison bison ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) Subspecies B. b. athabascae (wood bison) B. b. bison (plains bison) IUCN range of the two American bison subspecies.

Plains bison ( Bison bison subsp. bison ) Wood bison ( Bison bison subsp. athabascae ) Synonyms Bos americanus Gmelin, 1788 Bos bison Linnaeus, 1758 Bison americanus (Gmelin, 1788) Bison bison montanae Krumbiegel, 1980 The American bison ( Bison bison ; pl.

: bison ), commonly known as the American buffalo , or simply buffalo (not to be confused with true buffalo ), is a species of bison that is endemic (or native)  to North America . It is one of two extant species of bison, along with the European bison . Its historical range circa 9000 BC is referred to as the great bison belt , a tract of rich grassland spanning from Alaska south to the Gulf of Mexico , and east to the Atlantic Seaboard (nearly to the Atlantic tidewater in some areas), as far north as New York , south to Georgia , and according to some sources, further south to northern Florida , with sightings in North Carolina near Buffalo Ford on the Catawba River as late as 1750.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Two subspecies or ecotypes have been described: the plains bison ( B. b. bison ), smaller and with a more rounded hump; and the wood bison ( B. b. athabascae ), the larger of the two and having a taller, square hump.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Furthermore, the plains bison has been suggested to consist of a northern plains ( B. b. montanae ) and a southern plains ( B. b. bison ) subspecies, bringing the total to three.

[ 7 ] However, this is generally not supported. The wood bison is one of the largest wild species of extant bovid in the world, surpassed only by the Asian gaur .

[ 10 ] Among extant land animals in North America, the bison is the heaviest and the longest, and the second tallest after the moose .

Once roaming in vast herds , the species nearly became extinct by a combination of commercial hunting and slaughter in the 19th century and introduction of bovine diseases from domestic cattle. With an estimated population of 60 million in the late 18th century, the species was culled down to just 541 animals by 1889 as part of the subjugation of the Native Americans, because the American bison was a major resource for their traditional way of life (food source, hides for clothing and shelter, and horns and bones for tools).

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Recovery efforts expanded in the mid-20th century, with a resurgence to roughly 31,000 wild bison as of March 2019.

[ 1 ] For many years, the population was primarily found in a few national parks and reserves. Through multiple reintroductions , the species now freely roams wild in several regions in the United States , Canada and Mexico , others are kept in smaller natural areas as conservation herds, while some are also kept in private commercial herds. The American bison has also been introduced to Yakutia in Russia .

[ 13 ] Spanning back millennia , Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains have had cultural and spiritual connections to the American bison. It is the national mammal of the United States .

Etymology [ edit ] Adult male (behind) and adult female (in front), in Yellowstone National Park In American English, both buffalo and bison are considered correct terms for the American bison.

[ 14 ] However, in British English, the word buffalo is reserved for the African buffalo and water buffalo and not used for the bison.

[ 15 ] In English usage, the term buffalo was used to refer to the American mammal as early as 1625.

[ 16 ] The word bison was applied in the 1690s.

[ 17 ] Buffalo was applied to the American bison by Samuel de Champlain as the French word buffles in 1616 (published 1619), after seeing skins and a drawing. These were shown to him by members of the Nipissing First Nation , who said they traveled forty days (from east of Lake Huron) to trade with another nation who hunted the animals.

[ 18 ] Buffel in turn comes from Portuguese bufalo (water buffalo), which comes from Latin bufalus (an antelope, gazelle, or wild ox), from Greek boubalos .

[ 19 ] The same Greek word boubalos is also the origin for the Bubal hartebeest .

Bison was borrowed from French bison in the early 17th century, from Latin bison ( aurochs ), from a Proto-Germanic word similar to wisent and, per Etymonline, first applied to American buffalo in the 1690s.

[ 17 ] [ 20 ] In Plains Indian languages in general, male and female bison are distinguished, with each having a different designation rather than there being a single generic word covering both sexes. Thus: in Arapaho : bii (bison cow), henéécee (bison bull) in Lakota : pté (bison cow), tȟatȟáŋka (bison bull) Such a distinction is not a general feature of the language (for example, Arapaho possesses gender-neutral terms for other large mammals such as elk, mule deer, etc.), and so presumably is due to the special significance of the bison in Plains Indian life and culture.

[ citation needed ] Description [ edit ] Male plains bison in the Wichita Mountains of Oklahoma Skeleton of plains bison Plains bison galloping, photos by Eadweard Muybridge , first published in 1887 in Animal Locomotion A bison has a shaggy, long, dark-brown winter coat, and a lighter-weight, lighter-brown summer coat. Male bison are significantly larger and heavier than females.

[ 21 ] Plains bison are often in the smaller range of sizes, and wood bison in the larger range. Head-rump lengths at maximum up to 3.5 m (11 ft 6 in) for males and 2.85 m (9 ft 4 in) for females long and the tail adding 30 to 95 cm (1 ft 0 in to 3 ft 1 in).

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Heights at withers in the species can reach up to 186 to 201 cm (6 ft 1 in to 6 ft 7 in) for B. b. bison and B. b. athabascae respectively.

[ 23 ] Typically weights can range from 318 to 1,179 kg (701 to 2,599 lb), [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] 460 to 988 kg (1,014 to 2,178 lb) with medians of 730 to 792.5 kg (1,609 to 1,747 lb) ( B.b. bison ) and 943.6 kg (2,080 lb) ( B.b.athabascae ) in males, and 360 to 640 kg (790 to 1,410 lb) with medians of 450 to 497.6 kg (992 to 1,097 lb) in females, [ 21 ] although the lowest weights probably representing typical weight around the age of sexual maturity at 2 to 3 years of age.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 21 ] The heaviest wild bull for B.b.bison ever recorded weighed 1,270 kg (2,800 lb) [ 32 ] while there had been bulls estimated to be 1,400 kg (3,000 lb).

[ 33 ] B.b.athabascae is significantly larger and heavier on average than B.b.bison while the number of recorded samples for the former was limited after the rediscovery of a relatively pure herd.

[ 21 ] Elk Island National Park, which has wild populations of both wood and plains bison, has recorded maximum weights for bull bison of 1186 kg (plains) and 1099 kg (wood), but noted that 3/4 of all bison over 1000 kg were wood bison. When raised in captivity and farmed for meat, the bison can grow unnaturally heavy and the largest semidomestic bison weighed 1,724 kg (3,801 lb).

[ 24 ] The heads and forequarters are massive, and both sexes have short, curved horns that can grow up to 60 cm (2 ft) long with 90 cm (3 ft) to 124 cm (4 ft) width, [ 34 ] [ 33 ] which they use in fighting for status within the herd and for defense.

Bison are herbivores , grazing on the grasses and sedges of the North American prairies . Their daily schedule involves two-hour periods of grazing, resting, and cud chewing, then moving to a new location to graze again. Sexually mature young bulls may try to start mating with cows by the age of two or three years, but if more mature bulls are present, they may not be able to compete until they reach five years of age.

For the first two months of life, calves are lighter in color than mature bison. Though extremely rare, white buffalos exist.

Evolution [ edit ] Bison are members of the tribe Bovini . Genetic evidence from nuclear DNA indicates that the closest living relatives of bison are yaks , with bison being nested within the genus Bos , rendering Bos without including bison paraphyletic . While nuclear DNA indicates that the two living bison species are each other's closest living relatives, the mitochondrial DNA of European bison is more closely related to that of domestic cattle and aurochs , which is suggested to be the result of either incomplete lineage sorting or ancient introgression .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Bison first appeared in Asia during the Early Pleistocene , around 2.6 million years ago.

[ 37 ] Bison only arrived in North America 195,000 to 135,000 years ago, during the late Middle Pleistocene , descending from the widespread Siberian steppe bison ( Bison priscus ), which had migrated through Beringia . Following their first appearance in North America, the bison rapidly differentiated into new species , such as the largest of all bison, the long-horned Bison latifrons , along with Bison antiquus . The first appearance of bison in North America is considered to define the regional Rancholabrean faunal stage, due to its major impact on the ecology of the continent.

[ 38 ] Modern American bison are thought to have evolved from B. antiquus at the end of the Late Pleistocene - beginning of the Holocene , with likely intermediates between the species referred to as Bison "occidentalis" .

[ 39 ] The North American bison population experienced demographic stability during the Middle Holocene but began a slow decline in the Late Holocene beginning about 2,700 BP.

[ 40 ] Differences from European bison [ edit ] An adult European bison Although they are superficially similar, the American and European bison exhibit a number of physical and behavioral differences. Adult American bison are slightly heavier on average because of their less rangy build and have shorter legs, which render them slightly shorter at the shoulder.

[ 41 ] American bison tend to graze more and browse less than their European relatives because their necks are set differently. Compared to the nose of the American bison, that of the European species is set farther forward than the forehead when the neck is in a neutral position. The body of the American bison is hairier, though its tail has less hair than that of the European bison. The horns of the European bison point forward through the plane of its face, making it more adept at fighting through the interlocking of horns in the same manner as domestic cattle, unlike the American bison, which favors charging.

[ 42 ] American bison are more easily tamed than the European and breed more readily with domestic cattle.

[ 43 ] Crossbreeding with cattle [ edit ] During the population bottleneck, after the great slaughter of American bison during the 19th century, the number of bison remaining alive in North America declined to as low as 541. During that period, a handful of ranchers gathered remnants of the existing herds to save the species from extinction. These ranchers bred some of the bison with cattle in an effort to produce "cattalo" or " beefalo ".

[ 44 ] Accidental crossings were also known to occur. Generally, male domestic bulls were crossed with bison cows, producing offspring of which only the females were fertile. The crossbred animals did not demonstrate any form of hybrid vigor , so the practice was abandoned. The proportion of cattle DNA that has been measured in introgressed individuals and bison herds today is typically quite low, ranging from 0.56 to 1.8%.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Many claimed "beefalo", even those regarded as pedigree, have no detectable bison ancestry.

[ 46 ] In the United States , many ranchers are now using DNA testing to cull the residual cattle genetics from their bison herds. The U.S. National Bison Association has adopted a code of ethics which prohibits its members from deliberately crossbreeding bison with any other species.

[ 47 ] Range and population [ edit ] Further information: Conservation of American bison Bison herd grazing at the CSKT Bison Range in Montana.

Population estimates in 2010 ranged from 400,000 to 500,000, with approximately 20,500 animals in 62 conservation herds and the remainder in approximately 6,400 commercial herds.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] According to the IUCN , roughly 15,000 bison are considered wild, free-range bison not primarily confined by fencing.

The Nature Conservancy (TNC) has reintroduced bison to over a dozen nature preserves around the United States. In October 2016, TNC established its easternmost bison herd in the country, at Kankakee Sands nature preserve in Morocco , Newton County, Indiana .

[ 50 ] In 2014, U.S. Tribes and Canadian First Nations signed a treaty to help with the restoration of bison, the first to be signed in nearly 150 years.

[ 51 ] Habitat and trails [ edit ] See also: Great bison belt Bison sparring in Grand Teton National Park in Moose, Wyoming .

American bison live in river valleys, and on prairies and plains. Typical habitat is open or semiopen grasslands, as well as sagebrush, semiarid lands, and scrublands. Some lightly wooded areas are also known historically to have supported bison. Bison also graze in hilly or mountainous areas where the slopes are not steep. Though not particularly known as high-altitude animals, bison in the Yellowstone Park bison herd are frequently found at elevations above 2,400 m (8,000 ft), and the Henry Mountains bison herd is found on the plains around the Henry Mountains , Utah, as well as in mountain valleys of the Henry Mountains to an altitude of 3,000 m (10,000 ft). Reintroduced plains bison in Banff National Park have been observed to roam mountainous areas, including high ridges and steep drainages. Archaeological finds indicate some bison to spent their lives within mountain ranges while others may have migrated in and out.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Those in Yukon, Canada, typically summer in alpine plateaus above treeline.

[ 54 ] The first thoroughfares of North America, except for the time-obliterated paths of mastodon or muskox and the routes of the mound builders , were the traces made by bison and deer in seasonal migration and between feeding grounds and salt licks . Many of these routes, hammered by countless hoofs instinctively following watersheds and the crests of ridges in avoidance of lower places' summer muck and winter snowdrifts, and often following the routes of least resistance across rolling terrain, were followed by the aboriginal North Americans as routes to hunting grounds and as warriors' paths. They were invaluable to explorers and were adopted by pioneers .

Bison traces were characteristically north and south along seasonal migration routes, but several key east–west buffalo trails were used later as routes for railways. Some of these include the Cumberland Gap through the Blue Ridge Mountains to upper Kentucky . A heavily used trace crossed the Ohio River at the Falls of the Ohio and ran west, crossing the Wabash River near Vincennes, Indiana . In Senator Thomas Hart Benton 's phrase saluting these sagacious path-makers, the bison paved the way for the railroads to the Pacific.

[ 55 ] Mexico [ edit ] Bison herd grazing in Chihuahua , Mexico.

The southern extent of the historic range of the American bison includes northern Mexico and adjoining areas in the United States as documented by archeological records and historical accounts from Mexican archives from 700 CE to the 19th century. The Janos-Hidalgo bison herd has ranged between Chihuahua, Mexico, and New Mexico, United States, since at least the 1920s.

[ 56 ] The persistence of this herd suggests that habitat for bison is suitable in northern Mexico. In 2009, genetically pure bison were reintroduced to the Janos Biosphere Reserve in northern Chihuahua adding to the Mexican bison population.

[ 57 ] In 2020, the second herd was formed in Maderas del Carmen .

[ 58 ] A private reserve named Jagüey de Ferniza has kept bison since before the above-mentioned reintroductions in Coahuila.

[ 59 ] Introductions to Siberia [ edit ] Main article: ru:Реинтродукция бизонов в Сибири Wood bison introduction program in Sakha Republic.

Since 2006, an outherd of wood bison sent from Alberta's Elk Island National Park was established in Yakutia , Russia [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] as a practice of pleistocene rewilding ; wood bison are the most similar to the extinct steppe bison species ( Bison priscus sp.

). The bison are adapting well to the cold climate, [ 63 ] and Yakutia's Red List officially registered the species in 2019; a second herd was formed in 2020.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Plains bison were also translocated into the Pleistocene Park , as more-favored wood bison could not be acquired.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Behavior and ecology [ edit ] Grazing in winter, Yellowstone National Park: Bison use their heads to clear out snow for the grass Bison are migratory and herd migrations can be directional as well as altitudinal in some areas.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Bison have usual daily movements between foraging sites during the summer. In the Hayden Valley, Wyoming, bison have been recorded traveling, on average, 3 km (2 mi) per day.

[ 70 ] The summer ranges of bison appear to be influenced by seasonal vegetation changes, interspersion and size of foraging sites, the rut , and the number of biting insects.

[ 68 ] The size of preserve and availability of water may also be a factor.

[ 70 ] Bison are largely grazers, eating primarily grasses and sedges. On shortgrass pasture, bison predominately consume warm-season grasses.

[ 71 ] On mixed prairie, cool-season grasses, including some sedges, apparently compose 79–96% of their diet.

[ 72 ] In montane and northern areas, sedges are selected throughout the year.

[ 68 ] Bison also drink water or consume snow on a daily basis.

[ 70 ] Social behavior and reproduction [ edit ] A herd of American bison grazing at Tall Grass Prairie Preserve in Osage County , Oklahoma Female bison live in maternal herds which include other females and their offspring. Male offspring leave their maternal herd when around three years old and either live alone or join other males in bachelor herds. Male and female herds usually do not mingle until the breeding season, which can occur from July through September.

[ 73 ] However, female herds may also contain a few older males. During the breeding season, dominant bulls maintain a small harem of females for mating. Individual bulls "tend" cows until allowed to mate, by following them around and chasing away rival males. The tending bull shields the female's vision with his body so she will not see any other challenging males. A challenging bull may bellow or roar to get a female's attention, and the tending bull has to bellow or roar back.

[ 74 ] The most dominant bulls mate in the first 2–3 weeks of the season.

[ 74 ] More subordinate bulls mate with any remaining estrous cow that has not mated yet. Male bison play no part in raising the young.

Calf A cow suckling calf at the Cologne Zoological Garden in Cologne , Germany Bison herds have dominance hierarchies that exist for both males and females. A bison's dominance is related to its birth date.

[ 75 ] Bison born earlier in the breeding season are more likely to be larger and more dominant as adults.

[ 75 ] Thus, bison are able to pass on their dominance to their offspring as dominant bison breed earlier in the season. In addition to dominance, the older bison of a generation also have a higher fertility rate than the younger ones.

[ 75 ] Bison mate in August and September; gestation is 285 days. A single reddish-brown calf nurses until the next calf is born. If the cow is not pregnant, a calf will nurse for 18 months. Cows nurse their calves for at least 7 or 8 months, but most calves seem to be weaned before the end of their first year.

[ 70 ] At three years of age, bison cows are mature enough to produce a calf. The birthing period for bison in boreal biomes is protracted compared to that of other northern ungulates, such as moose and caribou.

[ 76 ] Bison have a life expectancy around 15 years in the wild and up to 25 years in captivity. However, males and females from a hunted population also subject to wolf predation in northern Canada have been reported to live to 22 and 25 years of age, respectively.

[ 77 ] Bison have been observed to display homosexual behaviors , males much more so than females. In the case of males, it is unlikely to be related to dominance , but rather to social bonding or gaining sexual experience.

[ 78 ] Horning [ edit ] Bison mate in late spring and summer in more open plain areas. During fall and winter, bison tend to gather in more wooded areas. During this time, bison partake in horning behaviors. They rub their horns against trees, young saplings, and even utility poles. Aromatic trees like cedars and pine seem to be preferred. Horning appears to be associated with insect defense, as it occurs most often in the fall when the insect population is at its highest.

[ 79 ] Cedar and pines emit an aroma after bison horn them and this seems to be used as a deterrent for insects.

[ 79 ] Wallowing behavior [ edit ] A bison wallowing on dirt near Lamar River Canyon A bison wallow is a shallow depression in the soil, which bison use either wet or dry. Bison roll in these depressions, covering themselves with dust or mud. Past and current hypotheses to explain the purpose of wallowing include grooming associated with shedding, male-male interaction (typically rutting ), social behavior for group cohesion, play, relief from skin irritation due to biting insects, reduction of ectoparasite ( tick and lice ) load, and thermoregulation .

[ 80 ] Bison wallowing has important ecosystem engineering effects and enhances plant and animal diversity on prairies.

[ 81 ] Predation [ edit ] American bison standing its ground against a wolf pack A grizzly bear feeding on an American bison carcass.

While often secure from predation because of their size and strength, in some areas, vulnerable individuals are regularly preyed upon by wolves . Wolf predation typically peaks in late winter, when elk migrates south and bison are distressed with heavy snows and shortages of food sources, [ 82 ] with attacks usually being concentrated on weakened and injured cows and calves.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Wolves more actively target herds with calves than those without. The length of a predation episode varies, ranging from a few minutes to over nine hours.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Bison calves use five apparent defense strategies in protecting themselves from wolves: running to a cow, running to a herd, running to the nearest bull, running in the front or center of a stampeding herd, and entering a lake or river or other body of water. When fleeing wolves in open areas, cows with young calves take the lead, while bulls take to the rear of the herds to guard the cows' escape. Bison typically ignore wolves not displaying hunting behavior.

[ 87 ] Wolf packs specializing in bison tend to have more males because their larger size than females allows them to wrestle prey to the ground more effectively.

[ 88 ] Healthy, mature bulls in herds rarely fall prey.

Grizzly bears are known to feed on carcass and may steal wolves' kills. Grizzlies can sometimes kill calves as well as old, injured, or sick adult bison, but direct killing of adult bison is rare even when grizzlies target lone and injured young individuals.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Attacking a healthy bison is risky for a bear, who itself may be killed instead.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Dangers to humans [ edit ] Bison are among the most dangerous animals encountered by visitors to the various North American national parks and will attack humans if provoked. They appear slow because of their lethargic movements but can easily outrun humans; bison have been observed running as fast as 65 to 70 km/h (40 to 45 mph).

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] Bison may approach people for curiosity. Close encounters, including to touch the animals, can be dangerous, and gunshots do not startle them.

[ 98 ] Tourists approach dangerously close to a wild herd of American bison to take a photograph in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming Between 1980 and 1999, more than three times as many people in Yellowstone National Park were injured by bison than by bears. During this period, bison charged and injured 79 people, with injuries ranging from goring puncture wounds and broken bones to bruises and abrasions. Bears injured 24 people during the same time. Three people died from the injuries inflicted—one person by bison in 1983, and two people by bears in 1984 and 1986.

[ 99 ] Genetics [ edit ] Map from 1889 by William Temple Hornaday , illustrating his book, The Extermination of the American Bison A major problem that bison face today is a lack of genetic diversity due to the population bottleneck the species experienced during its near-extinction in the late 1800s. Another genetic issue is the entry of genes from domestic cattle into the bison population, through hybridization.

[ 100 ] Officially, the "American buffalo" is classified by the United States government as a type of cattle, and the government allows private herds to be managed as such. This is a reflection of the characteristics that bison share with cattle. Though the American bison is a separate species and usually regarded as being in a separate genus from domestic cattle ( Bos taurus ), they have a lot of genetic compatibility with cattle. American bison can interbreed with cattle, although only the female offspring are fertile in the first generation. These female hybrids can be bred back to either bison or domestic bulls, resulting in either 1/4 or 3/4 bison young. Female offspring from this cross are also fertile, but males are not reliably fertile unless they are either 7 ⁄ 8 bison or 7 ⁄ 8 domestic.

[ 101 ] Moreover, when they do interbreed, crossbreed animals in the first generation tend to look very much like purebred bison, so appearance is completely unreliable as a means of determining which is a purebred bison, a crossbred cow and a crossbred bison. Many ranchers have deliberately crossbred their cattle with bison, and some natural hybridization could be expected in areas where cattle and bison occur in the same range. Since cattle and bison eat similar food and tolerate similar conditions, they have often been in the same range together in the past, and opportunity for crossbreeding may sometimes have been common.

In recent decades, tests were developed to determine the source of mitochondrial DNA in cattle and bison, and most private "buffalo" herds were actually crossbred with cattle, and even most state and federal buffalo herds had some cattle DNA. With the advent of nuclear microsatellite DNA testing, the number of herds known to contain cattle genes has increased. As of 2011, though about 500,000 bison existed on private ranches and in public herds, perhaps only 15,000 to 25,000 of these bison were pure and not actually bison-cattle hybrids. DNA from domestic cattle ( Bos taurus ) has been found in almost all examined bison herds.

[ 102 ] Significant public bison herds that do not appear to have hybridized domestic cattle genes are the Yellowstone Park bison herd, the Henry Mountains bison herd, which was started with bison taken from Yellowstone Park, the Wind Cave bison herd, and the Wood Buffalo National Park bison herd and subsidiary herds started from it, in Canada.

A landmark study of bison genetics performed by James Derr of Texas A&M University corroborated this.

[ 103 ] The Derr study was undertaken in an attempt to determine what genetic problems bison might face as they repopulate former areas, and it noted that bison seem to be adapting successfully, despite their apparent genetic bottleneck. One possible explanation for this might be the small amount of domestic cattle genes that are now in most bison populations, though this is not the only possible explanation for bison success.

A wood bison around the Coal River in Canada In the study, cattle genes were also found in small amounts throughout most national, state, and private herds. "The hybridization experiments conducted by some of the owners of the five foundation herds of the late 1800s, have left a legacy of a small amount of cattle genetics in many of our existing bison herds," said Derr. "All of the state owned bison herds tested (except for possibly one) contain animals with domestic cattle mtDNA." [ 103 ] It appears that the one state herd that had no cattle genes was the Henry Mountains bison herd; the Henry Mountain herd was started initially with transplanted animals from Yellowstone Park. However, the extension of this herd into the Book Cliffs of central Utah involved mixing the founders with additional bison from another source, so it is not known if the Book Cliffs extension of the herd is also free of cattle hybridization.

A separate study by Wilson and Strobeck, published in Genome , was done to define the relationships between different herds of bison in the United States and Canada, and to determine whether the bison at Wood Buffalo National Park in Canada and the Yellowstone Park bison herd were possibly separate subspecies. The Wood Buffalo Park bison were determined to actually be crossbreeds between plains and wood bison, but their predominant genetic makeup was that of the expected "wood buffalo".

[ 8 ] However, the Yellowstone Park bison herd was pure plains bison, and not any of the other previously suggested subspecies. Another finding was that the bison in the Antelope Island herd in Utah appeared to be more distantly related to other plains bison in general than any other plains bison group that was tested, though this might be due to genetic drift caused by the small size of only 12 individuals in the founder population. A side finding of this was that the Antelope Island bison herd appears to be most closely related to the Wood Buffalo National Park bison herd, though the Antelope Island bison are actually plains bison.

Range history of bison in North America Original distribution of plains bison and wood bison in North America along the " great bison belt ".

Holocene bison ( Bison occidentalis ) is an earlier species at the origin of plains bison and wood bison.

Holocene bison Wood bison Plains bison Map of the extermination of the bison to 1889. This map based on William Temple Hornaday 's late-19th century research.

Original range Range as of 1870 Range as of 1889 Distribution of public herds of plains bison and of free-ranging or captive breeding wood bison in North America as of 2003.

Wood bison Plains bison In order to bolster the genetic diversity of the American bison, the National Park Service alongside the Department of the Interior announced the 2020 Bison Conservation Initiative on May 7, 2020. This initiative focuses on maintaining the genetic diversity of the metapopulation rather than individual herds. Small populations of bison are at considerably larger risk due to their decreased gene pool and are susceptible to catastrophic events more so than larger herds. The 2020 Bison Conservation Initiative aims to translocate up to three bison every five to ten years between the Department of the Interior's herds. Specific smaller herds will require a more intense management plan. Translocated bison will also be screened for any health defects such as infection of brucellosis bacteria as to not put the larger herd at risk.

[ 104 ] Population bottleneck and near extinction [ edit ] Bison went from numbering an estimated 60 million individuals [ a ] before the 1870s to becoming nearly extinct in the 1880s. This was due to the mass slaughtering of bison during the 1870s, which caused the plains bison population to undergo a population bottleneck . The bottleneck resulted in a founding population of around 100 individuals, split into six herds, five of which were managed by private ranchers and one managed by the New York Zoological Park (now the Bronx Zoo ). Additionally, a wild herd consisting of 25 individuals in Yellowstone National Park survived the bottleneck.

[ 105 ] Each of the privately ranched herds had an initial effective population size (N e ) of an estimated 5 to 7 individuals, for a total combined effective population size of between 30 and 50 individuals, from which all of the modern plains bison descend. While these herds have remained mostly isolated, some more than others, there has been some interbreeding between the herds over the past 150 years.

[ 105 ] The conservation efforts and copious amounts of data taken on American bison populations allow for American bison to serve as a useful study case of population bottlenecking and its effects. This is especially true of the Texas State Bison Herd, which underwent very extreme genetic bottlenecking, with a founding population of only 5 individuals.

[ 105 ] Texas State Bison Herd [ edit ] The Texas State Bison Herd (TSBH), also known as the Goodnight herd, was established by Charles Goodnight in the mid-1880s with five wild-caught calves. In 1887, the herd consisted of 13 individuals; in 1910, the population consisted of 125 individuals; and in the 1920s, the population ranged from 200 to 250 individuals. In 1929, Goodnight died and the herd switched hands multiple times, leaving the population of the herd unknown from 1930 until the herd was donated to the State of Texas in 1997, with a population of 36 individuals, solely descended from the original five calves.

[ 105 ] By 2002, the population of the TSBH consisted of 40 individuals and had concerningly low birth rates and high rates of calf mortality. This led to extra attention being given to this herd by conservationists who then performed significant amounts of genetic testing.

Goodnight was an advocate for the hybridization of bison with cattle, in the hopes of creating a stronger and healthier breed. When the herd was donated to the State of Texas, genetic testing revealed that 6 out of 36 individuals still carried cattle mitochondrial DNA.

[ 7 ] Researchers found that the average number of alleles per locus and the heterozygosity levels (a measure of genetic diversity , where high heterozygosity is representative of high genetic diversity) for the TSBH were significantly lower than that of the Yellowstone National Park bison population and the Theodore Roosevelt National Park bison population.

[ 7 ] Additionally, of the 54 nuclear microsatellites that were examined, the TSBH had 8 monomorphic loci (i.e., each loci had only one allele), whereas in both the Yellowstone and Theodore Roosevelt herds there was only one monomorphic locus, indicating a much lower level of genetic diversity in the TSBH.

[ 7 ] The Yellowstone herd had an average number of alleles per locus of 4.75, the Theodore Roosevelt National Park herd had an average of 4.15 alleles per locus, but the TSBH only had an average of 2.54 alleles per locus, statistically significantly lower than the others.

[ 7 ] The heterozygosity level of the Yellowstone, Theodore Roosevelt, and TSBH populations were 0.63, 0.57, and 0.38 respectively, with the TSBH again having a statistically significantly lower value.

[ 7 ] This low genetic diversity found in TSBH is likely due to the critically low starting population, several additional bottlenecks throughout the herd's history–leading to inbreeding depression –, [ 7 ] and a continuously low population allowing for genetic drift to have a large effect. Before any addition of new individuals, the rate of loss of genetic diversity was estimated to be between 30 and 40% over the proceeding 50 years.

[ 7 ] The inbreeding depression resulting from the multiple extreme population bottlenecks in the TSBH led to a coefficient of inbreeding of 0.367, equal to the level of inbreeding that results from two generations of full-siblings mating.

[ 105 ] The Texas State Bison Herd is also a useful example of the deleterious effects of extreme population bottlenecking, with an average natality rate of 0.376 offspring per female and a 1st-year mortality rate of 52.6% from 1997 to 2002, compared to an average natality rate of 0.560 offspring per female and a 1st-year mortality rate of 4.2% for the other bison herds.

[ 7 ] Additionally, if it were not for the intervention of conservationists, the Texas State Bison Herd would have most likely gone extinct, as the population bottleneck would have proven to be too severe. Multiple population models based on the genetics of the TSBH in the early 2000s predicted a 99% chance of extinction of the TSBH in less than 50 years, with an estimation in 2004 giving the TSBH a 99% chance of extinction in 41 years without the introduction of any outside individuals (Halbert et al. 2004). Importantly for conservation, another simulation predicted that the addition of multiple (3–9) outside male bison into the herd would increase genetic diversity enough to give the herd a 100% chance of surviving for another 100 years.

[ 106 ] Conservation efforts have led the current TSBH population to be at the carrying capacity of their habitat, at around 300 individuals.

Yellowstone National Park Bison Herd [ edit ] Bison in winter in Hayden Valley .

The Yellowstone National Park Bison herd started with only 25 individuals, and there was evidence of two population bottlenecking events from 1896 to 1912, with a population ranging between 25 and 50 individuals during this time. In 1902, 18 female and 3 male bison from outside herds–the Pablo-Allard herd and Goodnight (TSBH) herds respectively–were introduced to the Yellowstone herd. After the addition of those individuals, the effective population size is estimated to have been N e =7.2 individuals. The Yellowstone herd was kept completely isolated from 1902 to around 1920, and these previously mentioned founders contributed between 60 and 70% of the genetics of the current bison population at Yellowstone.

[ 105 ] Similar to the Texas State Bison Herd, the introduction of new individuals into the population in 1902 likely was the savior of this herd, which now numbers around 5,900 individuals as of summer 2022.

[ 107 ] Population recovery [ edit ] From the late 19th century onwards, the bison population gradually rose from 325 in 1884 to 500,000 in 2017, as a result of careful preservation and a general population boom. Although they are no longer classified as endangered, there are still conservation efforts in order to prevent population crashes down the line.

[ 108 ] Hunting [ edit ] Main article: Bison hunting Year American bison (est) Pre-1800 60,000,000 [ 109 ] 1830 40,000,000 [ 109 ] 1840 35,650,000 [ 110 ] 1870 5,500,000 [ 109 ] 1880 395,000 [ 110 ] 1889 541 (U.S.) [ 111 ] 1900 300 (U.S.) [ 109 ] 1944–47 5,000 (U.S.) [ 112 ] 15,000 (Canada) [ 110 ] 1951 23,340 [ 113 ] 2000 c.

30,000 [ 114 ] 2017 500,000 [ 108 ] Buffalo hunting, i.e. hunting of the American bison, was an activity fundamental to the Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains , providing more than 150 uses for all parts of the animal, including being a major food source, hides for clothing and shelter, bones and horns as tools as well as ceremonial and adornment uses.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] Bison hunting was later adopted by American professional hunters, as well as by the U.S. government, in an effort to sabotage the central resource of some American Indian Nations during the later portions of the American Indian Wars , leading to the near-extinction of the species around 1890.

[ 11 ] For many tribes the buffalo was an integral part of life—something guaranteed to them by the Creator. In fact, for some Plains indigenous peoples, bison are known as the first people.

[ 12 ] The concept of species extinction was foreign to many tribes.

[ 117 ] Thus, when the U.S. government began to massacre the buffalo, it was particularly harrowing to the Indigenous people. As Crow chief Plenty Coups described it: "When the buffalo went away the hearts of my people fell to the ground, and they could not lift them up again. After this nothing happened. There was little singing anywhere." [ 11 ] Spiritual loss was rampant; bison were an integral part of traditional tribal societies, and they would frequently take part in ceremonies for each bison they killed to honor its sacrifice. In order to boost morale during this time, Sioux and other tribes took part in the Ghost Dance , which consisted of hundreds of people dancing until 100 persons were lying unconscious.

[ 118 ] Many conservation measures have been taken by Native Americans , with the Inter Tribal Bison Council being one of the most significant. Formed in 1990, it comprises 56 tribes in 19 states.

[ 119 ] These tribes represent a collective herd of more than 15,000 bison and focus on reestablishing herds on tribal lands in order to promote culture, revitalize spiritual solidarity, and restore the ecosystem. Some Inter Tribal Bison Council members argue that the bison's economic value is one of the main factors driving its resurgence. Bison serve as a low-cost substitute for cattle, and they can withstand the winters in the Plains region far easier than cattle.

[ 119 ] Bison being chased off a cliff as painted by Alfred Jacob Miller Ulm Pishkun. Buffalo jump, SW of Great Falls, Montana. The Blackfoot drove bison over cliffs in the autumn to secure the winter supply. The Blackfoot used pishkuns as late as the 1850s.

[ 120 ] Bison hunt under the wolf-skin mask, 1832–33 A bison hunt depicted by George Catlin As livestock [ edit ] Canned bison meat for sale Bison are increasingly raised for meat , hide , wool , and dairy products. The majority of American bison in the world are raised for human consumption or fur clothing. Bison meat is generally considered to taste very similar to beef, but is lower in fat and cholesterol , yet higher in protein than beef, [ 121 ] which has led to the development of beefalo , a fertile hybrid of bison and domestic cattle.

[ 122 ] In 2005, about 35,000 bison were processed for meat in the U.S., with the National Bison Association and USDA providing a "Certified American Buffalo" program with birth-to-consumer tracking of bison via RFID ear tags. There is kosher bison meat; these bison are slaughtered at one of the few kosher mammal slaughterhouses in the U.S., and the meat is then distributed nationwide.

Bison are found in publicly and privately held herds.

Custer State Park in South Dakota is home to 1,500 bison, one of the largest publicly held herds in the world, but some question the genetic purity of the animals. Wildlife officials believe that free roaming herds with minimal cattle introgression on public lands in North America can be found only in: the Yellowstone Park bison herd ; [ 100 ] the Henry Mountains bison herd at the Book Cliffs and Henry Mountains in Utah; at Wind Cave National Park in South Dakota; Fort Peck Indian Reservation in Montana; Mackenzie Bison Sanctuary in the Northwest Territories ; Elk Island National Park and Wood Buffalo National Park in Alberta; Grasslands National Park and Prince Albert National Park in Saskatchewan.

Another population, the Antelope Island bison herd on Antelope Island in Utah, consisting of 550 to 700 bison, is also one of the largest and oldest public herds in the United States, but the bison in that herd are considered to be only semifree roaming, since they are confined to the Antelope Island. In addition, recent genetic studies indicate that, like most bison herds, the Antelope Island bison herd has a small number of genes from domestic cattle. In 2002, the United States government donated some bison calves from South Dakota and Colorado to the Mexican government. Their descendants live in the Mexican nature reserves El Uno Ranch at Janos and Santa Elena Canyon, Chihuahua , and Boquillas del Carmen, Coahuila , located near the southern banks of the Rio Grande , and around the grassland state line with Texas and New Mexico .

Recent genetic studies of privately owned herds of bison show that many of them include animals with genes from domestic cattle.

[ 100 ] For example, the herd on Santa Catalina Island, California , isolated since 1924 after being brought there for a movie shoot, were found to have cattle introgression.

[ 123 ] As few as 12,000 to 15,000 pure bison are estimated to remain in the world. The numbers are uncertain because the tests used to date— mitochondrial DNA analysis—indicate only if the maternal line (back from mother to mother) ever included domesticated bovines, thus say nothing about possible male input in the process. Most hybrids were found to look exactly like purebred bison; therefore, appearance is not a good indicator of genetics.

The size of the Canadian domesticated herd (genetic questions aside) grew dramatically through the 1990s and 2000s. The 2006 Census of Agriculture reported the Canadian herd at 195,728 head, a 34.9% increase since 2001.

[ 124 ] Of this total, over 95% were located in Western Canada , and less than 5% in Eastern Canada .

Alberta was the province with the largest herd, accounting for 49.7% of the herd and 45.8% of the farms. The next-largest herds were in Saskatchewan (23.9%), Manitoba (10%), and British Columbia (6%). The main producing regions were in the northern parts of the Canadian prairies , specifically in the parkland belt , with the Peace River region (shared between Alberta and British Columbia) being the most important cluster, accounting for 14.4% of the national herd.

[ 124 ] Canada also exports bison meat, totaling 2,075,253 kilograms (4,575,150 lb) in 2006.

[ 125 ] A proposal known as Buffalo Commons has been suggested by a handful of academics and policymakers to restore large parts of the drier portion of the Great Plains to native prairie grazed by bison. Proponents argue that current agricultural use of the shortgrass prairie is not sustainable , pointing to periodic disasters, including the Dust Bowl , and continuing significant human population loss over the last 60 years. However, this plan is opposed by some who live in the areas in question.

[ 100 ] Domestication [ edit ] Despite being the closest relatives of domestic cattle native to North America, bison were never domesticated by Native Americans. Later attempts of domestication by Europeans prior to the 20th century met with limited success. Bison were described as having a "wild and ungovernable temper"; [ 126 ] they can jump close to 1.8 m (6 ft) vertically, [ 127 ] and run 55–70 km/h (35–45 mph) [ 96 ] [ 95 ] when agitated. This agility and speed, combined with their great size and weight, makes bison herds difficult to confine, as they can easily escape or destroy most fencing systems, including most razor wire . The most successful systems involve large, 6-metre (20 ft) fences made from welded steel I beams sunk at least 1.8 m (6 ft) into concrete.

[ citation needed ] These fencing systems, while expensive, require very little maintenance. Furthermore, making the fence sections overlap so the grassy areas beyond are not visible prevents the bison from trying to get to new range.

It has been alleged that the Aztec emperor Moctezuma II kept a bison at his private zoo ( Totocalli ) in Tenochtitlan , observed by the first Spanish conquistadors in the region; this would provide proof of Native Americans keeping bison in captivity, serve as an extremely far range extension south, and be the very first observation of bison by European colonists. These claims originate from Juan Díaz de Solís 's interpretation of Bernal Diaz del Castillo 's accounts of the totocalli , in which de Solís claims the conquistadors observed " the Mexican Bull; a wonderful composition of divers Animals ." However, further analysis of del Castillo's account shows no such mention of such an animal, and the mention of this "Mexican Bull" was likely an embellishment by de Solís.

[ 2 ] [ 128 ] As a symbol [ edit ] Native Americans [ edit ] Big Medicine (1933–1959) was a sacred white buffalo that lived on the CSKT Bison Range (display at the Montana Historical Society) Among many Native American tribes, especially the Plains Indians , the bison is considered a sacred animal and religious symbol. According to University of Montana anthropology and Native American studies professor S. Neyooxet Greymorning, "The creation stories of where buffalo came from put them in a very spiritual place among many tribes. The buffalo crossed many different areas and functions, and it was utilized in many ways. It was used in ceremonies, as well as to make tipi covers that provided homes for people, utensils, shields, weapons and parts were used for sewing with the sinew." [ 129 ] The Sioux consider the birth of a white buffalo to be the return of White Buffalo Calf Woman , their primary cultural prophet and the bringer of their "Seven Sacred Rites". Among the Mandan and Hidatsa , the White Buffalo Cow Society was the most sacred of societies for women.

North America [ edit ] The American bison is often used in North America in official seals, flags, and logos. In 2016, the American bison became the national mammal of the United States .

[ 130 ] The bison is a popular symbol in the Great Plains states: Kansas, Oklahoma, and Wyoming have adopted the animal as their official state mammal , and many sports teams have chosen the bison as their mascot. In Canada, the bison is the official animal of the province of Manitoba and appears on the Manitoba flag. It is also used in the official coat of arms of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police .

Several American coins feature the bison, most famously on the reverse side of the " buffalo nickel " from 1913 to 1938. In 2005, the United States Mint coined a nickel with a new depiction of the bison as part of its "Westward Journey" series. The Kansas and North Dakota state quarters, part of the " 50 State Quarter " series, each feature bison. The Kansas state quarter has only the bison and does not feature any writing, while the North Dakota state quarter has two bison. The Montana state quarter prominently features a bison skull over a landscape. The Yellowstone National Park quarter also features a bison standing next to a geyser.

Other institutions which have adopted the bison as a symbol or mascot include: U.S. Department of the Interior Bethany College (West Virginia) Bucknell University and its athletic program, the Bucknell Bison Buffalo, New York Buffalo Bills Buffalo Bisons Buffalo Gap High School Buffalo Grove High School Buffalo Sabres University of Colorado and its athletic program, the Colorado Buffaloes Gallaudet University Harding University and its athletic program, the Harding Bisons Howard University and its athletic program, the Howard Bison Seal of the State of Indiana Lipscomb University and its athletic program, the Lipscomb Bisons Coat of arms of Manitoba Flag of Manitoba University of Manitoba and its athletic program, the Manitoba Bisons Marshall University and its athletic program, the Marshall Thundering Herd Milligan University Independence Party of Minnesota Ralph Nader (mascot for his 2008 campaign for president) [ 131 ] Nichols College North Dakota State University and its athletic program, the North Dakota State Bison Oklahoma Baptist University and its athletic program, the Oklahoma Baptist Bison Point Park University Royal Canadian Mounted Police Rumble the Bison (the official mascot of the Oklahoma City Thunder ) Smoky Hill High School Southwestern Law School Tooele High School (Utah) Utah Tech University and its athletic program, the Utah Tech Trailblazers CFB Wainwright West Texas A&M University and its athletic program, the West Texas A&M Buffaloes Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo Bloomington Bison Wyoming uses a bison in its state flag Skin effigy of a Buffalo used in the Lakota Sun Dance Manitoba uses a bison in its provincial flag , as seen inside the Manitoban coat of arms The 1935 Buffalo nickel —this style of coin featuring an American bison was produced from 1913 to 1938 Series 1901 $10 legal tender depicting an American bison First postage stamp with image of bison was issued US in 1898—4¢ "Indian Hunting Buffalo" See also [ edit ] American Bison Society Buffalo Commons — proposed multistate nature preserve of Great Plains habitat for American bison Buffalo Hunters' War Conservation of American bison Great Plains Ecoregion List of animals with humps Plains hide painting Notes [ edit ] ^ The 60 million estimation is based on an observation made by Colonel R.I. Dodge along the Arkansas River in Kansas in 1871.

[ 105 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Aune, K.; Jørgensen, D. & Gates, C. (2018) [errata version of 2017 assessment].

" Bison bison " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2017 : e.T2815A123789863.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2017-3.RLTS.T2815A45156541.en . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

Database entry includes a brief justification of why this species is "Near Threatened".

^ a b William T. Hornaday (February 10, 2006) [1889].

The Extermination of the American Bison .

Smithsonian Institution – via gutenberg.org.

^ "American Buffalo ( Bison bison ) species page" .

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . Retrieved February 24, 2013 .

^ Geist V. (1991).

"Phantom subspecies: the wood bison, Bison bison " athabascae " Rhoads 1897, is not a valid taxon, but an ecotype" .

Arctic .

44 (4): 283– 300.

doi : 10.14430/arctic1552 .

^ Kay, Charles E.; Clifford A. White (2001).

"Reintroduction of bison into the Rocky Mountain parks of Canada: historical and archaeological evidence" (PDF) .

Crossing Boundaries in Park Management: Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Research and Resource Management in Parks and on Public Lands . Hancock, Michigan: George Wright Soc. pp.

143– 51 . Retrieved December 2, 2009 .

^ Bork, A. M.; C. M. Strobeck; F. C. Yeh; R. J. Hudson & R. K. Salmon (1991).

"Genetic relationship of wood and plains bison based on restriction fragment length polymorphisms" (PDF) .

Can J Zool .

69 (1): 43– 48.

Bibcode : 1991CaJZ...69...43B .

doi : 10.1139/z91-007 . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 10, 2017 . Retrieved December 2, 2009 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Halbert, Natalie D.; Terje Raudsepp; Bhanu P. Chowdhary & James N. Derr (2004).

"Conservation Genetic Analysis of the Texas State Bison Herd" .

Journal of Mammalogy .

85 (5): 924– 931.

doi : 10.1644/BER-029 .

^ a b Wilson, G. A. & C. Strobeck (1999). "Genetic variation within and relatedness among wood and plains bison populations".

Genome .

42 (3): 483– 96.

doi : 10.1139/gen-42-3-483 .

PMID 10382295 .

^ Boyd, Delaney P. (April 2003).

Conservation of North American Bison: Status and Recommendations (PDF) .

University of Calgary .

doi : 10.11575/PRISM/22701 .

ISBN 9780494004128 .

OCLC 232117310 . Archived from the original (MS thesis) on September 28, 2007 . Retrieved February 23, 2010 .

^ Garrick, Dorian ; Ruvinsky, Anatoly (November 28, 2014).

The Genetics of Cattle, 2nd Edition .

ISBN 9781780642215 .

^ a b c Smits, David (Autumn 1994).

"The Frontier Army and the Destruction of the Buffalo: 1865–1883" (PDF) .

The Western Historical Quarterly .

25 (3): 312– 338.

doi : 10.2307/971110 .

JSTOR 971110 . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 6, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2015 .

^ a b Hubbard, Tasha (2014). "Buffalo Genocide in Nineteenth Century North America: 'Kill, Skin, Sell' ".

Colonial Genocide in Indigenous North America . Duke University Press. p. 294.

doi : 10.1215/9780822376149-014 .

ISBN 978-0-8223-5779-7 .

^ Pare, Sascha (August 9, 2023).

"Bison are being introduced to the Russian Arctic to replace extinct woolly mammoths. But why?" .

livescience.com . Retrieved July 19, 2024 .

^ "Buffalo Facts" .

Animal Facts Encyclopedia . Retrieved August 11, 2020 .

^ Tikkanen, Amy.

"What's the Difference Between Bison and Buffalo?" . Encyclopedia Britannica.

Archived from the original on August 2, 2020 . Retrieved January 14, 2022 .

^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language , Fifth Edition: ^ a b "bison (n.)" . Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved April 3, 2023 .

^ Champlain, Samuel, Henry P. Biggar. 1929. The Works of Samuel de Champlain, vol 3. Toronto: Champlain Society. p. 105.

^ "buffalo (n.)" . Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved April 3, 2023 .

^ "bison noun" . Merriam Webster. May 12, 2023.

^ a b c d e Van Zyll de Jong, C. G (1986).

A systematic study of recent bison, with particular consideration of the wood bison (Bison bison athabascae Rhoads 1898 . Publications in natural sciences. Vol. 6. National Museum of Natural Sciences. p. 37.

^ Halloran, F.A. (1960).

"American Bison Weights and Measurements from the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the Oklahoma Academy of Science : 212– 218.

^ a b c Boeskorov, Gennady G.; Potapova, Olga R.; Protopopov, Albert V.; Plotnikov, Valery V.; Agenbroad, Larry D.; Kirikov, Konstantin S.; Pavlov, Innokenty S.; Shchelchkova, Marina V.; Belolyubskii, Innocenty N.; Tomshin, Mikhail D.; Kowalczyk, Rafal; Davydov, Sergey P.; Kolesov, Stanislav D.; Tikhonov, Alexey N.; van der Plicht, Johannes (June 25, 2016).

"The Yukagir Bison: The exterior morphology of a complete frozen mummy of the extinct steppe bison, Bison priscus from the early Holocene of northern Yakutia, Russia" .

Quaternary International .

406 (Part B): 94– 110.

Bibcode : 2016QuInt.406...94B .

doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2015.11.084 .

^ a b Meagher, M. (1986).

"Bison bison" (PDF) .

Mammalian Species (266): 1– 8.

JSTOR 3504019 . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 29, 2011.

^ McDonald, J. (1981).

North American Bison: Their classification and Evolution . Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press.

^ "American Bison: The Animal Files" .

www.theanimalfiles.com .

^ Castelló, J.R. (2016).

Bovids of the World: Antelopes, Gazelles, Cattle, Goats, Sheep, and Relatives . Princeton University Press.

^ Berger, J.; Peacock, M. (August 30, 1988).

"Variability in Size-Weight Relationships of Bison bison" .

Journal of Mammalogy .

69 (3): 618– 624.

doi : 10.2307/1381357 .

ISSN 1545-1542 .

JSTOR 1381357 .

^ Rutberg, A. T. (August 24, 1984).

"Birth Synchrony in American Bison (Bison bison): Response to Predation or Season?" .

Journal of Mammalogy .

65 (3): 418– 423.

doi : 10.2307/1381088 .

ISSN 1545-1542 .

JSTOR 1381088 .

^ Rutberg, Allen T. (1986).

"Dominance and Its Fitness Consequences in American Bison Cows" .

Behaviour .

96 ( 1– 2): 62– 91.

doi : 10.1163/156853986X00225 .

ISSN 0005-7959 .

^ Roden, Catherine; Vervaecke, Hilde; Van Elsacker, Linda (July 2005).

"Dominance, age and weight in American bison males (Bison bison) during non-rut in semi-natural conditions" .

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

92 ( 1– 2): 169– 177.

doi : 10.1016/j.applanim.2004.10.005 .

^ Joel Berger; Carol Cunningham (June 1994).

Bison: mating and conservation in small populations . Columbia University Press. p. 162.

ISBN 978-0-231-08456-7 .

^ a b "Legendary Bison Bulls" .

allaboutbison.com .

^ William Henry Burt, 1976, A Field Guide to the Mammals: North America North of Mexico, p.224, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt ^ Wang, Kun; Lenstra, Johannes A.; Liu, Liang; Hu, Quanjun; Ma, Tao; Qiu, Qiang; Liu, Jianquan (October 19, 2018).

"Incomplete lineage sorting rather than hybridization explains the inconsistent phylogeny of the wisent" .

Communications Biology .

1 (1): 169.

doi : 10.1038/s42003-018-0176-6 .

ISSN 2399-3642 .

PMC 6195592 .

PMID 30374461 .

^ Grange, Thierry; Brugal, Jean-Philip; Flori, Laurence; Gautier, Mathieu; Uzunidis, Antigone; Geigl, Eva-Maria (September 2018).

"The Evolution and Population Diversity of Bison in Pleistocene and Holocene Eurasia: Sex Matters" .

Diversity .

10 (3): 65.

Bibcode : 2018Diver..10...65G .

doi : 10.3390/d10030065 .

^ Sorbelli, Leonardo; Alba, David M.; Cherin, Marco; Moullé, Pierre-Élie; Brugal, Jean-Philip; Madurell-Malapeira, Joan (June 1, 2021).

"A review on Bison schoetensacki and its closest relatives through the early-Middle Pleistocene transition: Insights from the Vallparadís Section (NE Iberian Peninsula) and other European localities" .

Quaternary Science Reviews .

261 106933.

Bibcode : 2021QSRv..26106933S .

doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2021.106933 .

ISSN 0277-3791 .

S2CID 235527116 .

^ Froese, Duane; Stiller, Mathias; Heintzman, Peter D.; Reyes, Alberto V.; Zazula, Grant D.; Soares, André E. R.; Meyer, Matthias; Hall, Elizabeth; Jensen, Britta J. L.; Arnold, Lee J.; MacPhee, Ross D. E. (March 28, 2017).

"Fossil and genomic evidence constrains the timing of bison arrival in North America" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

114 (13): 3457– 3462.

Bibcode : 2017PNAS..114.3457F .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1620754114 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 5380047 .

PMID 28289222 .

^ Wilson, M.C.; Hills, L.V.; Shapiro, B. (2008). "Late Pleistocene northward-dispersing Bison antiquus from the Bighill Creek Formation, Gallelli Gravel Pit, Alberta, Canada, and the fate of Bison occidentalis ".

Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences .

45 (7): 827– 59.

Bibcode : 2008CaJES..45..827W .

doi : 10.1139/E08-027 .

^ Ovchinnikov, Igor V.; McCann, Blake (July 14, 2023).

"Mitogenomes revealed the history of bison colonization of Northern Plains after the Last Glacial Maximum" .

Scientific Reports .

13 (1): 11417.

Bibcode : 2023NatSR..1311417O .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-023-37599-8 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 10349043 .

PMID 37452114 .

^ Trophy Bowhunting: Plan the Hunt of a Lifetime and Bag One for the Record Books , by Rick Sapp, Edition: illustrated, published by Stackpole Books, 2006, ISBN 0-8117-3315-7 , ISBN 978-0-8117-3315-1 ^ Lott, Dale F. (2002).

American bison: a natural history . Organisms and environments. Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-24062-9 .

^ Newman, Edward and James Edmund Harting (1859).

Zoologist: A Monthly Journal of Natural History Published by J. Van Voorst.

^ a b Halbert, N; Gogan, P; Hiebert, R; Derr, J (2007).

"Where the buffalo roam: The role of history and genetics in the conservation of bison on U.S. federal lands" .

Park Science .

24 (2): 22– 29.

Bibcode : 2007PaSci..24...22H .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2013 . Retrieved November 4, 2012 .

^ Polziehn, R; Strobeck, C; Sheraton, J; Beech, R (1995). "Bovine mtDNA Discovered in North American Bison Populations".

Conservation Biology .

9 (6): 1638–1643 (1642).

Bibcode : 1995ConBi...9.1638P .

doi : 10.1046/j.1523-1739.1995.09061638.x .

S2CID 85575841 .

^ Shapiro, Beth; et al. (2024).

"Most Beefalo cattle have no detectable bison genetic ancestry" .

eLife .

13 .

doi : 10.7554/elife.102750.1.sa3 .

^ "FAQ" .

National Bison Association . Retrieved March 18, 2022 .

^ This article incorporates public domain material from Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants: 90-Day Finding on a Petition To List the Wild Plains Bison or Each of Four Distinct Population Segments as Threatened .

United States Fish and Wildlife Service .

^ staff (March 3, 2010).

"Restoring North America's Wild Bison to Their Home on the Range" . Environment News Service . Retrieved February 19, 2011 .

^ "Bison Come to Kankakee Sands" .

The Nature Conservancy . August 29, 2017 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ Stallard, Brian (September 25, 2014).

"Tribe Treaty to Restore Wild Bison up North" .

Nature World News . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ Banff National Park, Bison blog , August 11, 2018: Bison are exploring Banff in new ways , April 30, 2019: This old bone - discovering the bison of Banff's past , Parks Canada ^ Zier-Vogel, Adam; Karsten, Heuer (September 1, 2022).

"The First 3 Years: Movements of Reintroduced Plains Bison (Bison bison bison) in Banff National Park" .

Diversity .

14 (10).

MDPI : 883.

Bibcode : 2022Diver..14..883Z .

doi : 10.3390/d14100883 – via ResearchGate.

^ Jung, Thomas S.; Stotyn, Shannon A.; Czetwertynski, Sophie M. (2015).

"Dietary overlap and potential competition in a dynamic ungulate community in Northwestern Canada" .

Journal of Wildlife Management .

79 (8): 1277– 1285.

Bibcode : 2015JWMan..79.1277J .

doi : 10.1002/jwmg.946 .

ISSN 1937-2817 .

^ Adams, James Truslow (1940).

Dictionary of American History . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons .

ISBN 978-0-8226-0349-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Rurik List; Gerardo Ceballos; Charles Curtin; Peter J.P. Gogan; Jesus Pacheco; Joe Truett (November 7, 2007). "Historic Distribution and Challenges to Bison Recovery in the Northern Chihuahuan Desert".

Conservation Biology .

21 (6): 1487– 1494.

Bibcode : 2007ConBi..21.1487L .

doi : 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2007.00810.x .

PMID 18173472 .

S2CID 30828514 .

^ Rurik List; Jesus Pacheco; Eduardo Ponce; Rodrigo Sierra-Corona; Gerardo Ceballos (August 2010).

"The Janos Biosphere Reserve, Northern Mexico" .

The Journal of International Wilderness .

16 (2) . Retrieved September 20, 2018 – via ResearchGate.

^ "Cemex aids reintroduction of American bison in Northern Mexico" .

Global Cement . March 4, 2020 . Retrieved August 11, 2020 .

^ "Fraccionamiento Campestre" . Archived from the original on May 13, 2021 . Retrieved May 13, 2021 .

^ CBC News, "Alberta bison bound for Russia" , February 14, 2011 ^ Edmonton Journal, "Elk Island wood bison big hit in Russia" Archived November 29, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Hanneke Brooymans, August 5, 2010 ^ Edmonton Journal, "Bison troubles" Archived November 10, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , CanWest MediaWorks Publications, October 5, 2006 ^ CBC News, "More Alberta bison to roam Russia" , September 23, 2013 ^ "Wood bison to be listed in Yakutia's Red Data Book" .

TASS .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on March 21, 2020 . Retrieved March 21, 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Pleistocene Park" .

Peace Magazine . Retrieved July 10, 2025 .

^ Pleistocene Park [@PleistocenePark] (September 30, 2018).

"Agreed. Canadian wood bison where always the best species for the Arctic. However they are extremely difficult to get. We will try to get wood bison again but the odds are not great so far. If you have any leads please pass them on. AKDFG will not give us any. Tried. Nor Parks CA" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ a b c Meagher M (1973).

"The bison of Yellowstone National Park" .

National Park Service Science Monographs .

1 : 1– 161. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011.

^ Van Vuren, D. (1983). "Group dynamics and summer home range of bison in southern Utah".

Journal of Mammalogy .

64 (2): 329– 332.

doi : 10.2307/1380570 .

JSTOR 1380570 .

^ a b c d e McHugh, T. (1958).

"Social behavior of the American buffalo ( Bison bison bison )" .

Zoologica .

43 : 1– 40.

^ Peden, D. G. Van Dyne; R. Rice; R. Hansen (1974). "The trophic ecology of Bison bison L. on shortgrass plains".

Journal of Applied Ecology .

11 (2): 489– 497.

Bibcode : 1974JApEc..11..489P .

doi : 10.2307/2402203 .

JSTOR 2402203 .

^ Popp, Jewel Kay. (1981). "Range Ecology of Bison on Mixed Grass Prairie at Wind Cave National Park". Unpubl. M.S. Thesis. Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa. 59 p.

^ "American Bison – Bison bison" . NatureWorks. Archived from the original on February 17, 2014 . Retrieved February 5, 2014 .

^ a b Wolff, J. O. (1998). "Breeding strategies, mate choice, and reproductive success in American bison".

Okios .

83 (2): 529– 544.

Bibcode : 1998Oikos..83..529W .

doi : 10.2307/3546680 .

JSTOR 3546680 .

^ a b c Green W. C. H. R., Aron (1993). "Persistent influences of birth date on dominance, growth and reproductive success in bison".

Journal of Zoology .

230 (2): 177– 185.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-7998.1993.tb02680.x .

^ Jung, Thomas S.; Larter, Nicholas C.; Powell, Todd (2018).

"Early and late births in high-latitude populations of free-ranging Bison (Bison bison)" .

Canadian Field-Naturalist .

132 (3): 219– 222.

doi : 10.22621/cfn.v132i3.1983 .

ISSN 0008-3550 .

^ Jung, Thomas S. (October 8, 2020).

"Longevity in a hunted population of reintroduced American bison (Bison bison)" .

Mammal Research .

66 : 237– 243.

doi : 10.1007/s13364-020-00540-9 .

ISSN 2199-241X .

S2CID 225126531 .

^ Vervaecke H, Roden C. (2006).

"Going with the herd: same-sex interaction and competition in American bison" . In: Sommer V, Vasey PL, (editors).

Homosexual behaviour in animals . Cambridge University Press. pp. 131–53 ISBN 0-521-86446-1 .

^ a b Coppedge, B. R.; Carter, T.S.; Shaw, J.H.; Hamilton, R.G. (1997). "Agonistic behavior associated with orphan bison ( Bison bison ) claves released into a mixed resident population".

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

55 ( 1– 2): 1– 10.

doi : 10.1016/S0168-1591(97)00035-X .

^ McMillan, Brock R.; Cottam, Michael R.; Kaufman, Donald W. (2000). "Wallowing Behavior of American Bison (Bos Bison) in Tallgrass Prairie: An Examination of Alternate Explanations".

American Midland Naturalist .

144 (1): 159– 67.

doi : 10.1674/0003-0031(2000)144[0159:WBOABB]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0003-0031 .

JSTOR 3083019 .

S2CID 86223655 .

^ Nickell, Zachary; Varriano, Sofia; Plemmons, Eric; Moran, Matthew D. (2018).

"Ecosystem engineering by bison (Bison bison) wallowing increases arthropod community heterogeneity in space and time" .

Ecosphere .

9 (9): e02436.

Bibcode : 2018Ecosp...9E2436N .

doi : 10.1002/ecs2.2436 .

^ "What do wolves do in the winter?" . Archived from the original on June 17, 2020 . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ Smith, Douglas W.; Mech, L. David; Meagher, Mary; Clark, Wendy E.; Jaffe, Rosemary; Phillips, Michael K.; Mack, John A. (November 1, 2000).

"Wolf–Bison Interactions in Yellowstone National Park" .

Journal of Mammalogy .

81 (4): 1128– 1135.

doi : 10.1644/1545-1542(2000)081<1128:WBIIYN>2.0.CO;2 – via Silverchair.

^ Jung, Thomas S. (2011).

"Gray wolf (Canis lupus) predation and scavenging of reintroduced American bison (Bison bison) in southwestern Yukon" .

Northwestern Naturalist .

92 (2): 126– 130.

doi : 10.1898/10-07.1 .

ISSN 1051-1733 .

S2CID 86100204 .

^ Mary Ann Franke (2005).

To save the wild bison: life on the edge in Yellowstone . University of Oklahoma Press. p.

199 .

ISBN 978-0-8061-3683-7 .

^ Douglas W. Smith; Gary Ferguson (November 1, 2006).

Decade of the Wolf: Returning the Wild to Yellowstone . Globe Pequot. p. 68.

ISBN 978-1-59228-886-1 .

^ Carbyn LN ; Trottier T (1988).

"Descriptions of Wolf Attacks on Bison Calves in Wood Buffalo National Park" (PDF) .

Arctic .

41 (4): 297– 302.

doi : 10.14430/arctic1736 . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2012 . Retrieved August 16, 2008 .

^ Smith, Doug (March 1, 2009).

"Bigger is better if you're a hungry wolf" .

Billings Gazette . Retrieved September 7, 2014 .

^ David Maccar, 2010, Amateur Photographer Captures a Grizzly Bear Chasing a Bison Down a Highway in Yellowstone ^ French, Brett (June 11, 2020).

"Yellowstone grizzly vs. bison video vaults Wyoming man to prominence" .

Billings Gazette .

^ Wyman, Travis (2002).

"Grizzly bear predation on a bull bison in Yellowstone National Park" (PDF) .

Ursus : 375– 377. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 11, 2017 . Retrieved June 16, 2020 .

^ Mary Ann Franke, 2005, To Save the Wild Bison: Life on the Edge in Yellowstone , p.201, University of Oklahoma Press ^ Tom McHugh, 1979, The Time of the Buffalo , p.213, University of Nebraska Press ^ "American Bison" .

National Geographic Society . May 10, 2011. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016.

^ a b "Bison Fact Sheet" (PDF) .

nationalforests.org .

^ a b Gildart, Bert; Gildart, Jane (2021).

Hiking the Black Hills Country .

Rowman & Littlefield . p. 5.

^ National Bison Association [@nationalbison] (March 2, 2021).

"~TEACHABLE TUESDAY~ Did you know...Bison may look big and cumbersome, but they're very agile and quick. Bison can run an impressive 30 to 45 mph and jump as high as six vertical feet" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ Teresa Scalzo, 2016, Field Guide to the American Bison , The Voice, Summer 2016, Carleton College ^ Tom Olliff; Jim Caslick (2003).

"Wildlife-Human Conflicts in Yellowstone: When Animals and People Get Too Close" (PDF) .

Yellowstone Science .

11 (1): 18– 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 26, 2011.

^ a b c d Staff (November 15, 2011).

"Restoring a Prairie Icon" .

National Wildlife .

50 (1): 20– 25.

^ Liberty Hyde Bailey (1908).

Cyclopedia of American Agriculture, Volume III: Animals . The MacMillan Company. p. 291.

^ Remove Threats to Irreplaceable Bison Herd at Wind Cave National Park (PDF) (Final Project Report). FY 2006 Challenge Cost Share Program. September 30, 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 23, 2011 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ a b Derr, James (October 24, 2006).

American Bison: The Ultimate Genetic Survivor (PDF) . The Ecological Future of North American Bison. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 25, 2011 . Retrieved July 27, 2011 .

^ "New Bison Conservation Initiative Focuses On Genetic Diversity" .

THE WILDLIFE SOCIETY . 2020 . Retrieved July 5, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g Hedrick, P. W. (July 1, 2009).

"Conservation Genetics and North American Bison (Bison bison)" .

Journal of Heredity .

100 (4): 411– 420.

doi : 10.1093/jhered/esp024 .

ISSN 0022-1503 .

PMID 19414501 .

^ Halbert, Natalie D.; Grant, William E.; Derr, James N. (January 20, 2005).

"Genetic and demographic consequences of importing animals into a small population: a simulation model of the Texas State Bison Herd (USA)" .

Ecological Modelling .

181 (2): 263– 276.

Bibcode : 2005EcMod.181..263H .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2004.02.022 .

ISSN 0304-3800 .

^ Park, Mailing Address: PO Box 168 Yellowstone National; Us, WY 82190-0168 Phone: 307-344-7381 Contact.

"Yellowstone Bison - Yellowstone National Park (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved April 24, 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Heath, Jessica (December 30, 2017).

"The Bison: from 30 million to 325 (1884) to 500,000 (today)" .

Flat Creek Inn . Retrieved October 11, 2023 .

^ a b c d Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife (January 1965). "The American Buffalo".

Conservation Note .

12 .

^ a b c Roe, Frank Gilbert (1951).

The North American Buffalo . Toronto Canada: University of Toronto Press.

^ Hornaday, William T. (1904).

The American Natural History . New York: C. Scribner's Sons.

^ Cahalane, Victor H. (1947).

Mammals of North America . New York: The MacMillan Company.

^ Collins, Henry H. (1959).

Complete Field Guide to American Wildlife . New York: Harper & Row.

^ Exploring Life Sciences . Vol. 6. Marshall Cavendish. 2000. pp.

474– 475.

ISBN 0-7614-7141-3 .

^ "Bison Bellows: A day to thank the bison (U.S. National Park Service)" .

NPS.gov Homepage (U.S. National Park Service) . November 6, 2017 . Retrieved June 16, 2023 .

^ "People and Bison" .

Bison (U.S. National Park Service) . November 1, 2018 . Retrieved June 16, 2023 .

^ Harjo, Suzan (2014).

Nation to Nation: Treaties Between the United States and American Indian Nations . Smithsonian Books. p. 101.

ISBN 978-1588344786 .

^ Parker, Z. A. (1890).

"The Ghost Dance Among the Lakota" .

PBS Archives of the West . PBS. Archived from the original on June 22, 2001 . Retrieved March 30, 2015 .

^ a b Patel, Moneil (June 1997).

"Restoration of Bison onto the American Prairie" .

UC Irving . Archived from the original on April 15, 2015 . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ Ewers, John C. (1988): "The last Bison Drive of the Blackfoot Indians". Indian Life On The Upper Missouri. Norman and London, pp. 157–168 ^ "| National Bison Association" . Bisoncentral.com.

Archived from the original on January 20, 2011 . Retrieved February 19, 2011 .

^ "Bison from Farm to Table" . USDA . Retrieved January 6, 2017 .

^ Chang, Alicia (September 21, 2007).

"Study: Catalina bison aren't purebred" .

USA Today . Associated Press . Retrieved March 14, 2008 .

^ a b "Canadian Agriculture at a Glance: Bison on the comeback trail" . Statcan.gc.ca. April 9, 2009 . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ "Table 1 Bison meat exports continue to climb, 2001 to 2006" . Statcan.gc.ca. April 3, 2009 . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ "Bison Domestication" .

Illinois State Museum . October 21, 2003.

^ "Species Spotlight: American Bison | Pages | WWF" .

World Wildlife Fund .

^ Haines, Francis D. (1940).

"The Western Limits of the Buffalo Range" .

The Pacific Northwest Quarterly .

31 (4): 389– 398.

ISSN 0030-8803 .

JSTOR 40486414 .

^ Jawort, Adrian (May 9, 2011).

"Genocide by Other Means: U.S. Army Slaughtered Buffalo in Plains Indian Wars" .

Indian Country Today . Archived from the original on July 2, 2016 . Retrieved April 3, 2014 .

^ Elahe Izadi (May 9, 2016).

"It's official: America's first national mammal is the bison" .

Washington Post .

^ Nader, The (October 18, 2008).

"Buffalo T-Shirt Sale – Ralph Nader for President in 2008" . Votenader.org. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010 . Retrieved February 19, 2011 .

Further reading [ edit ] Branch, E. Douglas. (1997) [1929].

The Hunting of the Buffalo (new ed.). University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 0-8032-6137-3 .

Dary, David A. (1974).

The Buffalo Book . Chicago: Swallow Press.

Flores Dan Louie (1991). "Bison Ecology and Bison Diplomacy: The Southern Plains from 1800 to 1850".

Journal of American History .

78 (2): 465– 85.

doi : 10.2307/2079530 .

JSTOR 2079530 .

Gard, Wayne (1954).

The Great Buffalo Hunt . University of Nebraska Press.

Isenberg, Andrew C. (2000).

The Destruction of the Bison: An Environmental History, 1750–1920 . Cambridge University press.

ISBN 978-0-521-00348-3 .

Lott, Dale F (2002).

American Bison: A Natural History . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-24062-9 .

McHugh, Tom (1972).

The Time of the Buffalo . University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 0-8032-8105-6 .

Meagher, Margaret Mary (1973).

The Bison of Yellowstone National Park . National Park Service Scientific Monograph Series. Vol. 1. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

LCCN 73-600221 . Archived from the original on June 29, 2011.

Rister Carl Coke (1929). "The Significance of the Destruction of the Buffalo in the Southwest".

Southwestern Historical Quarterly .

33 : 34– 49.

Roe, Frank Gilbert (December 31, 1951).

The North American Buffalo: A Critical Study of the Species in its Wild State (2nd ed.). University of Toronto Press.

doi : 10.3138/9781487575762 .

ISBN 978-1-4875-7576-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Shaw, James H. (1995).

"How Many Bison Originally Populated Western Rangelands?" (PDF) .

Rangelands .

17 (5). [Allen Press, Society for Range Management]: 148– 150.

ISSN 0190-0528 .

JSTOR 4001099 .

Smits, David D. (1994).

"The Frontier Army and the Destruction of the Buffalo: 1865-1883" (PDF) .

The Western Historical Quarterly .

25 (3): 313– 338.

doi : 10.2307/971110 .

JSTOR 971110 .

Zontek Ken (1995).

"Hunt, Capture, Raise, Increase: The People Who Saved the Bison" .

Great Plains Quarterly .

15 : 133– 49.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Bison bison ( category ) Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on Bison Buffalo Field Campaign Documentary The Great Buffalo Saga ，National Film Board of Canada Traditional use of Tatanka (buffalo) Bison skeletal structure and bones v t e Extant Artiodactyla species Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Infraclass: Eutheria Superorder: Laurasiatheria Suborder Ruminantia Antilocapridae Antilocapra Pronghorn ( A. americana ) Giraffidae Okapia Okapi ( O. johnstoni ) Giraffa Northern giraffe ( G. camelopardalis ) Southern giraffe ( G. giraffa ) Reticulated giraffe ( G. reticulata ) Masai giraffe ( G. tippelskirchi ) Moschidae Moschus Anhui musk deer ( M. anhuiensis ) Dwarf musk deer ( M. berezovskii ) Alpine musk deer ( M. chrysogaster ) Kashmir musk deer ( M. cupreus ) Black musk deer ( M. fuscus ) Himalayan musk deer ( M. leucogaster ) Siberian musk deer ( M. moschiferus ) Tragulidae Hyemoschus Water chevrotain ( H. aquaticus ) Moschiola Indian spotted chevrotain ( M. indica ) Yellow-striped chevrotain ( M. kathygre ) Sri Lankan spotted chevrotain ( M. meminna ) Tragulus Java mouse-deer ( T. javanicus ) Lesser mouse-deer ( T. kanchil ) Greater mouse-deer ( T. napu ) Philippine mouse-deer ( T. nigricans ) Vietnam mouse-deer ( T. versicolor ) Williamson's mouse-deer ( T. williamsoni ) Cervidae Large family listed below Bovidae Large family listed below Family Cervidae Cervinae Muntiacus Bornean yellow muntjac ( M. atherodes ) Hairy-fronted muntjac ( M. crinifrons ) Fea's muntjac ( M. feae ) Gongshan muntjac ( M. gongshanensis ) Sumatran muntjac ( M. montanus ) Southern red muntjac ( M. muntjak ) Pu Hoat muntjac ( M. puhoatensis ) Leaf muntjac ( M. putaoensis ) Reeves's muntjac ( M. reevesi ) Roosevelt's muntjac ( M. rooseveltorum ) Truong Son muntjac ( M. truongsonensis ) Northern red muntjac ( M. vaginalis ) Giant muntjac ( M. vuquangensis ) Elaphodus Tufted deer ( E. cephalophus ) Dama European fallow deer ( D. dama ) Persian fallow deer ( D. mesopotamica ) Axis Chital ( A. axis ) Calamian deer ( A. calamianensis ) Bawean deer ( A. kuhlii ) Hog deer ( A. porcinus ) Rucervus Barasingha ( R. duvaucelii ) Eld's deer ( R. eldii ) Elaphurus Père David's deer ( E. davidianus ) Rusa Visayan spotted deer ( R. alfredi ) Philippine sambar ( R. mariannus ) Rusa deer ( R. timorensis ) Sambar ( R. unicolor ) Cervus Thorold's deer ( C. albirostris ) Red deer ( C. elaphus ) Elk ( C. canadensis ) Central Asian red deer ( C. hanglu ) Sika deer ( C. nippon ) Capreolinae Alces Moose ( A. alces ) Hydropotes Water deer ( H. inermis ) Capreolus European roe deer ( C. capreolus ) Siberian roe deer ( C. pygargus ) Rangifer Reindeer ( R. tarandus ) Hippocamelus Taruca ( H. antisensis ) South Andean deer ( H. bisulcus ) Mazama Red brocket ( M. americana ) Small red brocket ( M. bororo ) Merida brocket ( M. bricenii ) Dwarf brocket ( M. chunyi ) Pygmy brocket ( M. nana ) Amazonian brown brocket ( M. nemorivaga ) Little red brocket ( M. rufina ) Central American red brocket ( M. temama ) Ozotoceros Pampas deer ( O. bezoarticus ) Blastocerus Marsh deer ( B. dichotomus ) Pudu Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) ?

Southern pudu ( P. pudu ) Pudella Peruvian Yungas pudu ( P. carlae ) Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) Odocoileus Mule deer ( O. hemionus ) Yucatan brown brocket ( O. pandora ) White-tailed deer ( O. virginianus ) Subulo Gray brocket ( S. gouazoubira ) Family Bovidae Hippotraginae Hippotragus Roan antelope ( H. equinus ) Sable antelope ( H. niger ) Oryx East African oryx ( O. beisa ) Scimitar oryx ( O. dammah ) Gemsbok ( O. gazella ) Arabian oryx ( O. leucoryx ) Addax Addax ( A. nasomaculatus ) Reduncinae Kobus Waterbuck ( K. ellipsiprymnus ) Kob ( K. kob ) Lechwe ( K. leche ) Nile lechwe ( K. megaceros ) Puku ( K. vardonii ) Redunca Southern reedbuck ( R. arundinum ) Mountain reedbuck ( R. fulvorufula ) Bohor reedbuck ( R. redunca ) Aepycerotinae Aepyceros Impala ( A. melampus ) Peleinae Pelea Grey rhebok ( P. capreolus ) Alcelaphinae Beatragus Hirola ( B. hunteri ) Damaliscus Common tsessebe ( D. lunatus ) Bontebok ( D. pygargus ) Alcelaphus Hartebeest ( A. buselaphus ) Connochaetes Black wildebeest ( C. gnou ) Blue wildebeest ( C. taurinus ) Pantholopinae Pantholops Tibetan antelope ( P. hodgsonii ) Caprinae Large subfamily listed below Bovinae Large subfamily listed below Antilopinae Large subfamily listed below Family Bovidae (subfamily Caprinae ) Ammotragus Barbary sheep ( A. lervia ) Arabitragus Arabian tahr ( A. jayakari ) Budorcas Takin ( B. taxicolor ) Capra Wild goat ( C. aegagrus ) West Caucasian tur ( C. caucasia ) East Caucasian tur ( C. cylindricornis ) Markhor ( C. falconeri ) Domestic goat ( C. hircus ) Alpine ibex ( C. ibex ) Nubian ibex ( C. nubiana ) Iberian ibex ( C. pyrenaica ) Siberian ibex ( C. sibirica ) Walia ibex ( C. walie ) Capricornis Japanese serow ( C. crispus ) Red serow ( C. rubidus ) Mainland serow ( C. sumatraensis ) Taiwan serow ( C. swinhoei ) Hemitragus Himalayan tahr ( H. jemlahicus ) Naemorhedus Red goral ( N. baileyi ) Long-tailed goral ( N. caudatus ) Himalayan goral ( N. goral ) Chinese goral ( N. griseus ) Oreamnos Mountain goat ( O. americanus ) Ovibos Muskox ( O. moschatus ) Nilgiritragus Nilgiri tahr ( N. hylocrius ) Ovis Argali ( O. ammon ) Domestic sheep ( O. aries ) Bighorn sheep ( O. canadensis ) Dall sheep ( O. dalli ) Mouflon ( O. gmelini ) Snow sheep ( O. nivicola ) Urial ( O. vignei ) Pseudois Bharal ( P. nayaur ) Rupicapra Pyrenean chamois ( R. pyrenaica ) Chamois ( R. rupicapra ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Bovinae ) Boselaphini Tetracerus Four-horned antelope ( T. quadricornis ) Boselaphus Nilgai ( B. tragocamelus ) Bovini Bubalus Wild water buffalo ( B. arnee ) Domestic water buffalo ( B. bubalis ) Lowland anoa ( B. depressicornis ) Tamaraw ( B. mindorensis ) Mountain anoa ( B. quarlesi ) Bos American bison ( B. bison ) European bison ( B. bonasus ) Bali cattle ( B. domesticus ) Gayal ( B. frontalis ) Gaur ( B. gaurus ) Domestic yak ( B. grunniens ) Zebu ( B. indicus ) Banteng ( B. javanicus ) Wild yak ( B. mutus ) Cattle ( B. taurus ) Pseudoryx Saola ( P. nghetinhensis ) Syncerus African buffalo ( S. caffer ) Tragelaphini Tragelaphus (including kudus ) Nyala ( T. angasii ) Mountain nyala ( T. buxtoni ) Bongo ( T. eurycerus ) Lesser kudu ( T. imberbis ) Harnessed bushbuck ( T. scriptus ) Sitatunga ( T. spekeii ) Greater kudu ( T. strepsiceros ) Cape bushbuck ( T. sylvaticus ) Taurotragus Giant eland ( T. derbianus ) Common eland ( T. oryx ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Antilopinae ) Antilopini Ammodorcas Dibatag ( A. clarkei ) Antidorcas Springbok ( A. marsupialis ) Antilope Blackbuck ( A. cervicapra ) Eudorcas Mongalla gazelle ( E. albonotata ) Red-fronted gazelle ( E. rufifrons ) Thomson's gazelle ( E. thomsonii ) Heuglin's gazelle ( E. tilonura ) Gazella Arabian gazelle ( G. arabica ) Chinkara ( G. bennettii ) Cuvier's gazelle ( G. cuvieri ) Dorcas gazelle ( G. dorcas ) Mountain gazelle ( G. gazella ) Rhim gazelle ( G. leptoceros ) Speke's gazelle ( G. spekei ) Goitered gazelle ( G. subgutturosa ) Litocranius Gerenuk ( L. walleri ) Nanger Dama gazelle ( N. dama ) Grant's gazelle ( N. granti ) Bright's gazelle ( N. notatus ) Peter's gazelle ( N. petersii ) Soemmerring's gazelle ( N. soemmerringii ) Procapra Mongolian gazelle ( P. gutturosa ) Goa ( P. picticaudata ) Przewalski's gazelle ( P. przewalskii ) Saigini Saiga Saiga antelope ( S. tatarica ) Neotragini Dorcatragus Beira ( D. megalotis ) Madoqua Günther's dik-dik ( M. guentheri ) Kirk's dik-dik ( M. kirkii ) Silver dik-dik ( M. piacentinii ) Salt's dik-dik ( M. saltiana ) Neotragus Royal antelope ( N. pygmaeus ) Nesotragus Bates' pygmy antelope ( N. batesi ) Suni ( N. moschatus ) Oreotragus Klipspringer ( O. oreotragus ) Ourebia Oribi ( O. ourebi ) Raphicerus Steenbok ( R. campestris ) Cape grysbok ( R. melanotis ) Sharpe's grysbok ( R. sharpei ) Cephalophini Cephalophus Aders's duiker ( C. adersi ) Brooke's duiker ( C. brookei ) Peters' duiker ( C. callipygus ) White-legged duiker ( C. crusalbum ) Bay duiker ( C. dorsalis ) Harvey's duiker ( C. harveyi ) Jentink's duiker ( C. jentinki ) White-bellied duiker ( C. leucogaster ) Red forest duiker ( C. natalensis ) Black duiker ( C. niger ) Black-fronted duiker ( C. nigrifrons ) Ogilby's duiker ( C. ogilbyi ) Ruwenzori duiker ( C. rubidis ) Red-flanked duiker ( C. rufilatus ) Yellow-backed duiker ( C. silvicultor ) Abbott's duiker ( C. spadix ) Weyns's duiker ( C. weynsi ) Zebra duiker ( C. zebra ) Philantomba Blue duiker ( P. monticola ) Maxwell's duiker ( P. maxwellii ) Walter's duiker ( P. walteri ) Sylvicapra Common duiker ( S. grimmia ) Suborder Suina Suidae Babyrousa Buru babirusa ( B. babyrussa ) North Sulawesi babirusa ( B. celebensis ) Togian babirusa ( B. togeanensis ) Hylochoerus Giant forest hog ( H. meinertzhageni ) Phacochoerus Desert warthog ( P. aethiopicus ) Common warthog ( P. africanus ) Porcula Pygmy hog ( P. salvania ) Potamochoerus Bushpig ( P. larvatus ) Red river hog ( P. porcus ) Sus Palawan bearded pig ( S. ahoenobarbus ) Bornean bearded pig ( S. barbatus ) Visayan warty pig ( S. cebifrons ) Celebes warty pig ( S. celebensis ) Domestic pig ( S. domesticus ) Flores warty pig ( S. heureni ) Oliver's warty pig ( S. oliveri ) Philippine warty pig ( S. philippensis ) Wild boar ( S. scrofa ) Timor warty pig ( S. timoriensis ) Javan warty pig ( S. verrucosus ) Tayassuidae Tayassu White-lipped peccary ( T. pecari ) Catagonus Chacoan peccary ( C. wagneri ) Dicotyles Collared peccary ( D. tajacu ) Suborder Tylopoda Camelidae Lama Llama ( L. glama ) Guanaco ( L. guanicoe ) Alpaca ( L. pacos ) Vicuña ( L. vicugna ) Camelus Domestic Bactrian camel ( C. bactrianus ) Dromedary/Arabian camel ( C. dromedarius ) Wild Bactrian camel ( C. ferus ) Suborder Whippomorpha Hippopotamidae Hippopotamus Hippopotamus ( H. amphibius ) Choeropsis Pygmy hippopotamus ( C. liberiensis ) Cetacea see Cetacea v t e National symbols of the United States Symbols Flag Great Seal Bald eagle Uncle Sam Columbia Phrygian cap General Grant Tree American Creed Pledge of Allegiance Rose Oak Bison Landmarks Statue of Liberty ( Liberty Enlightening the World ) Liberty Bell Mount Rushmore National Mall West Potomac Park Mottos In God We Trust E pluribus unum Novus ordo seclorum Annuit cœptis Songs " The Star-Spangled Banner " " Dixie " " America the Beautiful " " Columbia, the Gem of the Ocean " " The Stars and Stripes Forever " " Hail to the Chief " " Hail, Columbia " " America (My Country, 'Tis of Thee) " " God Bless America " " Lift Every Voice and Sing " " The Army Goes Rolling Along " " Anchors Aweigh " " Marines' Hymn " " Semper Fidelis " " The Air Force Song " " Semper Paratus " " Semper Supra " " National Emblem March " " The Washington Post March " " Battle Hymn of the Republic " " Yankee Doodle " " You're a Grand Old Flag " " When Johnny Comes Marching Home " " This Land Is Your Land " " Battle Cry of Freedom " " God Bless the U.S.A.

" v t e Game animals and shooting in North America Game birds Bobwhite quail Chukar Hungarian partridge Greater prairie-chicken Mourning dove Ring-necked pheasant Ptarmigan Ruffed grouse Sharp-tailed grouse Snipe (common snipe) Spruce grouse Turkey Woodcock Waterfowl hunters Waterfowl Black duck Canada goose Canvasback Gadwall Greater scaup Lesser scaup Mallard Northern pintail Redhead Ross's goose Snow goose Wood duck Big game Bighorn sheep Black bear Razorback Brown bear Bison (buffalo) Caribou Cougar (mountain lion) Elk Moose White-tailed deer Wolf Mountain goat Mule deer Pronghorn Muskox Dall sheep Polar bear Whales Other quarry American alligator Badger Bobcat Coyote Fox squirrel Gray fox Gray squirrel Opossum Rabbit Raccoon Red fox Snowshoe hare See also Bear hunting Big-game hunting Bison hunting Deer hunting Fox hunting Waterfowl hunting Whaling Fishing Wolf hunting Upland hunting v t e Meat Poultry Cassowary Chicken Duck Emu Goose Ostrich Pigeon Quail Rhea Turkey Livestock Alpaca Beef Beefalo Bison Buffalo Camel Cat Goat Dog Donkey Snails Frog Guinea pig Horse Lamb and mutton Llama Pork Veal Yak Żubroń Game Alligator Bat Bear Bushmeat Boar Crocodile Elephant Fox Iguana Kangaroo Monkey Mouse Pangolin Rat Hare Rabbit Snake Turtle Venison Dog Wolf Fish Anchovy Basa Bass Carp Catfish Cod Crappie Eel Flounder Grouper Haddock Halibut Herring Kingfish Mackerel Mahi Mahi Marlin Milkfish Orange roughy Pacific saury Perch Pike Pollock Salmon Sardine Shark Sole Swai Swordfish Tilapia Trout Tuna Walleye Shellfish and other seafood Abalone Calamari Chiton Clam Crab Crayfish Dolphin Lobster Mussel Octopus Oyster Scallop Seal Shrimp/prawn Sea cucumber Sea urchin Whale Sea squirt Jellyfish Insects Ants Black soldier fly maggots Cicada Crickets Flour Grasshoppers ( locust ) Mealworm Mezcal worm Silkworm Mopane worm Palm grub Cuts and preparation Aged Bacon Barbecued Biltong Braised Burger Charcuterie Chop Confit Corned Cured Cutlet Dried Dum Fermented Fillet / supreme Forcemeat Cretons Pâté Fried Frozen Ground Ham Jerky Kebab Kidney Liver Luncheon meat Marinated Meatball Meatloaf Offal Pickled Pemmican Poached Potted Rillettes Roasted Salt-cured Salumi Sausage Smoked Steak Stewed Tandoor Tartare List articles Meat dishes Beef Chicken Fish Goat Lamb Pork Ham Seafood Veal Steaks Meatball Smoked foods Sausage Other Countries by meat consumption Countries by meat production Food and drink prohibitions Meat substitutes Ethics and psychology Ethics of eating meat Carnism Animal rights Psychology of eating meat Meat paradox Alternatives Vegetarianism Semi-vegetarianism Pescetarianism Pollotarianism Plant-based diet Meat alternative Veganism Meat science Beef hormone controversy Drip loss Feed conversion ratio Preservation Tenderness Water holding capacity Meat industry Broker Branch house Butcher Cutter Environmental impact Factory farming Jobber Packing Slaughter Slaughterhouse Related subjects Arachnophagy Artificial marbling Cannibalism Case-ready meat Meat diaper Cultured meat Entomophagy Mystery meat Offal Non-vegetarian food in India Pink slime Raw meat Red meat Roadkill cuisine Warmed-over flavor White meat Food portal Category: Meat Taxon identifiers Bison bison Wikidata : Q82728 Wikispecies : Bison bison ADW : Bison_bison ARKive : bison-bison BioLib: 33791 CoL : LWY6 EoL : 328109 EPPO : BISOBI GBIF : 2441176 iNaturalist : 42408 IRMNG : 11059079 ITIS : 180706 IUCN : 2815 MSW : 14200669 NatureServe : 2.101908 NBN : NHMSYS0020975270 NCBI : 9901 Observation.org : 82057 Open Tree of Life : 907693 Paleobiology Database : 44511 TSA : 2699 Bos bison Wikidata : Q52175200 Wikispecies : Bos bison CoL : MLPS FEIS: bobi GBIF : 2441178 IRMNG : 10586647 ISC : 91401 ITIS : 203618 MDD : 1006256 Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vn5zx
Cached time: 20250817043550
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.393 seconds
Real time usage: 2.719 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 39376/1000000
Revision size: 107720/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 822315/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 134268/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 28/100
Expensive parser function count: 40/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 556103/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.488/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20884656/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 25/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2270.626      1 -total
 36.71%  833.602      2 Template:Reflist
 23.54%  534.561      1 Template:Speciesbox
 23.34%  530.042      1 Template:Taxobox/core
 14.54%  330.130     51 Template:Cite_journal
  8.49%  192.693     72 Template:Period_start
  7.78%  176.607      1 Template:Taxonbar
  7.29%  165.506     37 Template:Cite_web
  6.62%  150.245      1 Template:Geological_range
  6.52%  147.962      2 Template:Phanerozoic_220px Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:49725:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043550 and revision id 1306191559. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_bison&oldid=1306191559 " Categories : IUCN Red List near threatened species American bison Bison Conservation-reliant species Endemic fauna of North America Fauna of the Great Plains Mammals of Canada Mammals of the United States Fauna of the Plains-Midwest (United States) Fauna of the Rocky Mountains Fauna of the Western United States Cuisine of the Western United States Native American cuisine Pre-Columbian Great Plains cuisine Livestock American frontier National symbols of the United States Symbols of Wyoming Provincial symbols of Manitoba Animal taxa named by Carl Linnaeus Mammals described in 1758 Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2022 Articles with 'species' microformats Articles containing Arapaho-language text Articles containing Lakota-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Taxonbars with automatically added original combinations Taxonbars with 20–24 taxon IDs Articles containing video clips Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 12:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American bison 89 languages Add topic

