Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Religious fundamentalism Toggle Religious fundamentalism subsection 1.1 Buddhism 1.2 Christianity 1.3 Ethnic tribal religions 1.4 Hinduism 1.5 Islam 1.6 Judaism 1.7 New Atheism 2 Politics 3 Criticism 4 Use as a label 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Fundamentalism 110 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unwavering attachment to a set of irreducible beliefs For other uses, see Fundamentalism (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on the Philosophy of religion Religious concepts Afterlife Apophatism Cataphatism Eschatology Enlightenment Intelligent design Liberation Miracle Mysticism Religious belief Reincarnation Religious faith Scripture (religious text) Soul Spirit Theological veto God Conceptions Anthropopathism Brahman Demiurge Divinely simple Form of the Good Holy Spirit Maltheist Occasionalism Pandeist Personal Process-theological Summum bonum Supreme Being Unmoved mover Existence Arguments for Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Arguments against 747 gambit Atheist's wager Creator of God Evil Evil God Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hell Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistency Nonbelief Noncognitivism Omnipotence paradox Poor design Russell's teapot By religion Abrahamic Baháʼí Christianity Islam Judaism Mormonism Mandaeism Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Wicca Theories of religion Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism atheist Christian Feminist Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Christian religious secular Inclusivism Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism humanistic metaphysical religious New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Process Secular Shrine Theory Shendao shejiao Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Al-Ghazali Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 19th-century Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir Usman dan Fodio Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal Contemporary George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber Sergei Bulgakov René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Pavel Florensky Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J. L. Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I. Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew Kurt Gödel Graham Oppy J. L. Schellenberg Paul Draper William L. Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Cornel West Loyal Rue Herman Philipse Kai Nielsen Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Yujin Nagasawa Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Ethics in religion Exegesis Faith and rationality History of religions Natural theology Religion and science Religious philosophy Theology v t e Part of a series on History of religions Founding figures Jesus ( Christianity ) Muhammad ( Islam ) Abraham ( Judaism ) Siddhartha Gautama ( Buddhism ) Guru Nanak ( Sikhism ) Mahavira ( Jainism ) Zoroaster ( Zoroastrianism ) Hamza ibn Ali ( Druzism ) Laozi ( Taoism ) Confucius ( Confucianism ) Baháʼu'lláh ( Baháʼí Faith ) Religious studies Anthropology Comparative religion Neurotheology God gene Origins Psychology Timeline Prehistoric Ancient Near East Ancient Egypt Mesopotamia Semitic Chinese Indo-European Historical Vedic religion Ancient Greek religion Roman Celtic Germanic Axial Age Vedanta Śramaṇa Dharma Tao Hellenism Monism Dualism Monotheism Middle Ages Christianization Islamization Early modern era Renaissance Reformation Modern era Age of Reason New religious movements Great Awakening Fundamentalism New Age Postmodernism Religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Bahá'í Faith Indic Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism East Asian Taoism Confucianism Shinto Neopagan Wicca v t e Fundamentalism is a tendency among certain groups and individuals that are characterized by the application of a strict literal interpretation to scriptures , dogmas , or ideologies , along with a strong belief in the importance of distinguishing one's ingroup and outgroup , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] which leads to an emphasis on some conception of "purity", and a desire to return to a previous ideal from which advocates believe members have strayed. The term is usually used in the context of religion to indicate an unwavering attachment to a set of irreducible beliefs (the "fundamentals").

[ 5 ] The term "fundamentalism" is generally regarded by scholars of religion as referring to a largely modern religious phenomenon which, while itself a reinterpretation of religion as defined by the parameters of modernism , reifies religion in reaction against modernist , secularist , liberal and ecumenical tendencies developing in religion and society in general that it perceives to be foreign to a particular religious tradition.

[ 6 ] Depending upon the context, the label "fundamentalism" can be a pejorative rather than a neutral characterization , similar to the ways that calling political perspectives "right-wing" or "left-wing" can have negative connotations.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Religious fundamentalism [ edit ] Buddhism [ edit ] See also: Buddhism and violence Buddhist fundamentalism has targeted other religious and ethnic groups, as in Myanmar . A Buddhist-dominated country, Myanmar has seen tensions between Muslim minorities and the Buddhist majority , especially during the 2013 Burma anti-Muslim riots (possibly instigated by hardline groups such as the 969 Movement ).

[ 9 ] as well as during actions which are associated with the Rohingya genocide (2016 onwards).

Buddhist fundamentalism also features in Sri Lanka . Buddhist-dominated Sri Lanka has seen recent tensions between Muslim minorities and the Buddhist majority, especially during the 2014 anti-Muslim riots in Sri Lanka [ 10 ] and in the course of the 2018 anti-Muslim riots in Sri Lanka , [ 11 ] allegedly instigated by hardline groups such as the Bodu Bala Sena .

[ 12 ] Historic and contemporary examples of Buddhist fundamentalism occur in each of the three main branches of Buddhism : Theravada , Mahayana , and Vajrayana . In addition to the above examples of fundamentalism in Theravada-dominated societies, the reification of a protector deity , Dorje Shugden , by 19th-century Tibetan lama Pabongkhapa could be seen as an example of fundamentalism in the Vajrayana tradition. Dorje Shugden was a key tool in Pabongkhapa's persecution of the flourishing Rimé movement , an ecumenical movement which fused the teachings of the Sakya , Kagyu and Nyingma , [ 13 ] in response to the dominance of the Gelug school. While Pabongkhapa had an initially inclusive view early in his life, he received a number of signs that he had displeased Dorje Shugden by receiving teachings from non-Gelug schools, and thus initiated a revival movement that opposed the mixing of non-Gelug practices by Gelug practitioners.

[ 14 ] The main function of the deity was presented as "the protection of the Ge-luk tradition through violent means, even including the killing of its enemies." Crucially, however, these "‘enemies’ of the Gelug refers less to the members of rival
schools than to members of the Gelug tradition ‘who mix Dzong-ka-ba’s tradition with elements coming from other traditions, particularly the Nying-ma Dzok-chen ’." [ 14 ] In Japan, a prominent example has been the practice among some members of the Mahayana Nichiren sect of shakubuku – a method of proselytizing which involves the strident condemnation of other sects as deficient or evil .

Christianity [ edit ] Main articles: Christian fundamentalism , Christian nationalism , Christian terrorism , and Sectarian violence among Christians George Marsden has defined Christian fundamentalism as the demand for strict adherence to certain theological doctrines, in opposition to Modernist theology .

[ 15 ] Its supporters originally coined the term in order to describe what they claimed were five specific classic theological beliefs of Christianity, and the coinage of the term led to the development of a Christian fundamentalist movement within the Protestant community of the United States in the early part of the 20th century.

[ 16 ] Fundamentalism as a movement arose in the United States, starting among conservative Presbyterian theologians at Princeton Theological Seminary in the late 19th century. It soon spread to conservatives among the Baptists and other denominations around 1910 to 1920. The movement's purpose was to reaffirm key theological tenets and defend them against the challenges of liberal theology and higher criticism .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The concept of "fundamentalism" has roots in the Niagara Bible Conferences which were held annually between 1878 and 1897. During those conferences, the tenets widely considered to be fundamental Christian belief were identified.

"Fundamentalism" was prefigured by The Fundamentals: A Testimony To The Truth , a collection of twelve pamphlets published between 1910 and 1915 by brothers Milton and Lyman Stewart . It is widely considered to be the foundation of modern Christian fundamentalism.

In 1910, the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church identified what became known as the five fundamentals : [ 19 ] Biblical inspiration and the infallibility of scripture as a result of this Virgin birth of Jesus Belief that Christ's death was the atonement for sin Bodily resurrection of Jesus Historical reality of the miracles of Jesus In 1920, the word "fundamentalist" was first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws, editor of The Watchman Examiner , a Baptist newspaper.

[ 20 ] Laws proposed that those Christians who were fighting for the fundamentals of the faith should be called "fundamentalists".

[ 21 ] Theological conservatives who rallied around the five fundamentals came to be known as "fundamentalists". They rejected the existence of commonalities with theologically related religious traditions, such as the grouping of Christianity, Islam , and Judaism into one Abrahamic family of religions .

[ 2 ] By contrast, while Evangelical groups (such as the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association ) typically agree with the "fundamentals" as they are expressed in The Fundamentals , they are often willing to participate in events with religious groups that do not hold to the "essential" doctrines.

[ 22 ] Ethnic tribal religions [ edit ] See also: Indigenism and Ethnic religion A few scholars label some indigenist revitalization movements within ethnic and indigenous religions who reject the changes brought by the modern states and major religions in favor of a return to traditional ways as fundamentalists in contrast with syncretic reform movements. Thus, numerous new generally fundamentalist Native American religious movements include the Pueblo Revolt (1680s), the Shawnee Prophet Movement (1805–1811), the Cherokee Prophet Movement (1811–1813), the Red Stick War (1813–1814), White Path's Rebellion (1826), the Winnebago Prophet Movement (1830–1832), the first Ghost Dance (1869–1870) and the second Ghost Dance (1889–1890), and the Snake movements among the Cherokee, Choctaw , and Muscogee Creek peoples during the 1890s.

[ 23 ] Hinduism [ edit ] See also: Hindutva , Hindu nationalism , and Hindu terrorism The existence of fundamentalism in Hinduism is a complex and contradictory phenomenon. While some would argue that certain aspects of Gaudiya Vaishnavism manifest fundamentalist tendencies, these tendencies are more clearly displayed in Hindutva , the predominant form of Hindu nationalism in India today, and an increasingly powerful and influential voice within the religion. Hinduism includes a diversity of ideas on spirituality and traditions, but has no ecclesiastical order, no unquestionable religious authorities, no governing body, no prophet(s) nor any binding holy book; Hindus can choose to be polytheistic , pantheistic , panentheistic , pandeistic , henotheistic , monotheistic , monistic , agnostic , atheistic or humanist .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] According to Doniger, "ideas about all the major issues of faith and lifestyle – vegetarianism, nonviolence, belief in rebirth, even caste – are subjects of debate, not dogma ." [ 27 ] Some would argue that, because of the wide range of traditions and ideas covered by the term Hinduism, a lack of theological 'fundamentals' means that a dogmatic 'religious fundamentalism' per se is hard to find.

[ 28 ] Others point to the recent rise of Hindu nationalism in India as evidence to the contrary. The religion "defies our desire to define and categorize it." In India, the term “dharma” is preferred, which is broader than the Western term “religion.” [ 29 ] Hence, certain scholars argue that Hinduism lacks dogma and thus a specific notion of "fundamentalism," while other scholars identify several politically active Hindu movements as part of a "Hindu fundamentalist family." [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Islam [ edit ] Main articles: Islamic fundamentalism , Islamism , Islamofascism , Jihadism , Islamic terrorism , and Sectarian violence among Muslims Fundamentalism within Islam goes back to the early history of Islam in the 7th century, to the time of the Kharijites .

[ 32 ] From their essentially political position, they developed extreme doctrines that set them apart from both mainstream Shia and Sunni Muslims . The Kharijites were particularly noted for adopting a radical approach to takfir , whereby they declared other Muslims to be unbelievers and therefore deemed them worthy of death.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] The Shia and Sunni religious conflicts since the 7th century created an opening for radical ideologues, such as Ali Shariati (1933–77), to merge social revolution with Islamic fundamentalism, as exemplified by the Iranian Revolution in 1979.

[ 36 ] Islamic fundamentalism has appeared in many countries; [ 37 ] the Salafi - Wahhabi version is promoted worldwide and financed by Saudi Arabia , Qatar , and Pakistan .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] The Iran hostage crisis of 1979–80 marked a major turning point in the use of the term "fundamentalism". The media, in an attempt to explain the ideology of Ayatollah Khomeini and the Iranian Revolution to a Western audience described it as a "fundamentalist version of Islam" by way of analogy to the Christian fundamentalist movement in the U.S. Thus was born the term Islamic fundamentalist , which became a common use of the term in following years.

[ 44 ] Judaism [ edit ] Main articles: Jewish fundamentalism and Jewish extremist terrorism Jewish fundamentalism has been used to characterize militant religious Zionism , and both Ashkenazi and Sephardic versions of Haredi Judaism .

[ 45 ] Ian S. Lustik has characterized "Jewish fundamentalism" as "an ultranationalist, eschatologically based, irredentist ideology".

[ 46 ] New Atheism [ edit ] Main article: New Atheism The term New Atheism describes the positions of some atheist academics, writers, scientists, and philosophers of the 20th and 21st centuries.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Critics have described New Atheism as " secular fundamentalism ".

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Politics [ edit ] In modern politics, fundamentalism has been associated with right-wing conservative ideology, especially social conservatism . Social conservatives often support policies in line with religious fundamentalism, such as support for school prayer and opposition to LGBT rights and abortion .

[ 53 ] Conversely, secularism has been associated with left-wing or liberal ideology, as it takes the opposite stance to said policies, [ 6 ] however, various left-wing policies have likewise been deemed forms of fundamentalism, [ 54 ] notably stronger forms of wokeness .

[ 55 ] Political usage of the term "fundamentalism" has been criticized. It has been used by political groups to berate opponents, using the term flexibly depending on their political interests. According to Judith Nagata, a professor of Asia Research Institute in the National University of Singapore , "The Afghan mujahiddin , locked in combat with the Soviet enemy in the 1980s, could be praised as 'freedom fighters' by their American backers at the time, while the present Taliban, viewed, among other things, as protectors of American enemy Osama bin Laden, are unequivocally 'fundamentalist'." [ 56 ] "Fundamentalist" has been used pejoratively to refer to philosophies perceived as literal-minded or carrying a pretense of being the sole source of objective truth, regardless of whether it is usually called a religion . For instance, the Archbishop of Wales has criticized "atheistic fundamentalism" broadly [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] and said "Any kind of fundamentalism, be it Biblical, atheistic or Islamic, is dangerous".

[ 60 ] He also said, "the new fundamentalism of our age ... leads to the language of expulsion and exclusivity, of extremism and polarisation, and the claim that, because God is on our side, he is not on yours." [ 61 ] He claimed it led to situations such as councils calling Christmas " Winterval ", schools refusing to put on nativity plays and crosses being removed from chapels.  Others have countered that some of these attacks on Christmas are urban legends , not all schools do nativity plays because they choose to perform other traditional plays like A Christmas Carol or " The Snow Queen " and, because of rising tensions between various religions, opening up public spaces to alternate displays rather than the Nativity scene is an attempt to keep government religion-neutral.

[ 62 ] In The New Inquisition , Robert Anton Wilson lampoons the members of skeptical organizations such as the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal as fundamentalist materialists, alleging that they dogmatically dismiss any evidence that conflicts with materialism as hallucination or fraud.

[ 63 ] In France, during a protestation march against the imposition of restrictions on the wearing of headscarves in state-run schools, a banner labeled the ban as "secular fundamentalism".

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] In the United States, private or cultural intolerance of women wearing the hijab (Islamic headcovering) and political activism by Muslims also has been labeled "secular fundamentalism".

[ 66 ] The term "fundamentalism" is sometimes applied to signify a counter-cultural fidelity to a principle or set of principles, as in the pejorative term " market fundamentalism ", used to imply exaggerated religious-like faith in the ability of unfettered laissez-faire or free-market capitalist economic views or policies to solve economic and social problems. According to economist John Quiggin , the standard features of "economic fundamentalist rhetoric" are "dogmatic" assertions and the claim that anyone who holds contrary views is not a real economist. Retired professor in religious studies Roderick Hindery lists positive qualities attributed to political, economic, or other forms of cultural fundamentalism, including "vitality, enthusiasm, willingness to back up words with actions, and the avoidance of facile compromise" as well as negative aspects such as psychological attitudes, [ which?

] occasionally elitist and pessimistic perspectives, and in some cases literalism.

[ 67 ] Criticism [ edit ] A criticism by Elliot N. Dorff : In order to carry out the fundamentalist program in practice, one would need a perfect understanding of the ancient language of the original text, if indeed the true text can be discerned from among variants. Furthermore, human beings are the ones who transmit this understanding between generations. Even if one wanted to follow the literal word of God, the need for people first to understand that word necessitates human interpretation. Through that process human fallibility is inextricably mixed into the very meaning of the divine word. As a result, it is impossible to follow the indisputable word of God; one can only achieve a human understanding of God's will.

[ 68 ] Howard Thurman was interviewed in the late 1970s for a BBC feature on religion. He told the interviewer: I say that creeds, dogmas, and theologies are inventions of the mind. It is the nature of the mind to make sense out of experience, to reduce the conglomerates of experience to units of comprehension which we call principles, or ideologies, or concepts. Religious experience is dynamic, fluid, effervescent, yeasty. But the mind can't handle these so it has to imprison religious experience in some way, get it bottled up. Then, when the experience quiets down, the mind draws a bead on it and extracts concepts, notions, dogmas, so that religious experience can make sense to the mind. Meanwhile, religious experience goes on experiencing, so that by the time I get my dogma stated so that I can think about it, the religious experience becomes an object of thought.

[ 69 ] Influential criticisms of fundamentalism include James Barr 's books on Christian fundamentalism and Bassam Tibi 's analysis of Islamic fundamentalism.

[ citation needed ] [ 70 ] A study at the University of Edinburgh found that of its six measured dimensions of religiosity, "lower intelligence is most associated with higher levels of fundamentalism." [ 71 ] Use as a label [ edit ] The Associated Press ' AP Stylebook recommends that the term fundamentalist not be used for any group that does not apply the term to itself. Many scholars have adopted a similar position.

[ 72 ] Other scholars, however, use the term in the broader descriptive sense to refer to various groups in various religious traditions including those groups that would object to being classified as fundamentalists, such as in the Fundamentalism Project .

[ 73 ] Tex Sample asserts that it is a mistake to refer to a Muslim , Jewish , or Christian fundamentalist. Rather, a fundamentalist's fundamentalism is their primary concern, over and above other denominational or faith considerations.

[ 74 ] See also [ edit ] conservatism portal Religion portal History of science portal Philosophy portal Authoritarianism – Political system characterized by the rejection of political pluralism Biblical literalism – Approach to the interpretation of the Bible Christian identity – White supremacist interpretation of Christianity Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Christian Reconstructionism – Fundamentalist Calvinist theonomic movement Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Christian nationalism – Christianity-affiliated religious nationalism Creation science – Pseudoscientific form of Young Earth creationism Cult – Group controlled by a leader and/or an idea Dogmatism – Beliefs accepted by members of a group without question Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Dominionism – Ideology seeking Christian rule Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Evangelical atheism – Positions promoted by some atheists Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Evangelicalism – Protestant Christian movement Extremism – Possessing or advocating views well outside the mainstream Formalism (philosophy) – Concept of focusing on form over concept Fundamentalism (sculpture) – Sculpture by Jens Galschiot Historical-grammatical method – Christian hermeneutical method Independent Fundamental Baptist – Christian protestant denomination Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Indoctrination – Inculcating a person with certain ideas Integrism – Principle that the Catholic faith should be the basis of public law and policy Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Islamic extremism – Extreme or radical form of Islam Islamic State – Salafi jihadist militant organisation Islamism – Politico-religious ideology Legalism (theology) – Pejorative for performative Christianity Militant atheism – Soviet Russian organization Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Moral absolutism – Metaethical position that some actions are intrinsically right or wrong Mormon fundamentalism – Advocates of some early Mormon doctrines Pentecostalism – Denominational renewal movement of Protestant Christianity Political radicalism – Intent to transform or replace the fundamental principles of society Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Reactionary – Political view advocating return to a previous societal state Religious discrimination – Treating a person or group differently because of their religious beliefs Religious fanaticism – Fanaticism towards a religion Religious intolerance – Intolerance of another's religious beliefs or practices Religious nationalism – Relationship between national identity and religion Religious persecution – Persecution based on religious belief Religious segregation – Separation of people according to their religion Religious violence – Violence practiced in the name of religion Restorationism – Belief that Christianity should return to the form of the early apostolic church Ritualism in the Church of England – Emphasis on the rituals and liturgical ceremony of the church Sect – Subgroup of a particular religious or ideological doctrine Sectarianism – Conflict between groups related to the form of government they live under True Orthodox church – Movement within Eastern Orthodox Christianity Violence against Muslims in independent India Violence against Christians in India References [ edit ] ^ Altemeyer, B.; Hunsberger, B. (1992). "Authoritarianism, religious fundamentalism, quest, and prejudice".

International Journal for the Psychology of Religion .

2 (2): 113– 133.

doi : 10.1207/s15327582ijpr0202_5 .

^ a b Kunst, Jonas R.; Thomsen, Lotte; Sam, David L. (June 2014).

"Late Abrahamic reunion? Religious fundamentalism negatively predicts dual Abrahamic group categorization among Muslims and Christians: Late Abrahamic reunion" .

European Journal of Social Psychology .

44 (4): 337– 348.

doi : 10.1002/ejsp.2014 .

^ Kunst, J. R.; Thomsen, L. (2014).

"Prodigal sons: Dual Abrahamic categorization mediates the detrimental effects of religious fundamentalism on Christian-Muslim relations" .

The International Journal for the Psychology of Religion .

25 (4): 293– 306.

doi : 10.1080/10508619.2014.937965 .

hdl : 10852/43723 .

S2CID 53625066 .

^ Hunsberger, B (1995). "Religion and prejudice: The role of religious fundamentalism, quest, and right-wing authoritarianism".

Journal of Social Issues .

51 (2): 113– 129.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-4560.1995.tb01326.x .

... the fundamentalism and quest relationships with prejudice are especially meaningful in light of an association with right‐wing authoritarianism. ... In the end, it would seem that it is not religion per se, but rather the ways in which individuals hold their religious beliefs, which are associated with prejudice.

^ Nagata, Judith (June 2001). "Beyond Theology: Toward an Anthropology of "Fundamentalism" ".

American Anthropologist .

103 (2): 481– 498.

doi : 10.1525/aa.2001.103.2.481 .

Once considered exclusively a matter of religion, theology, or scriptural correctness, use of the term fundamentalism has recently undergone metaphorical expansion into other domains [...].

^ a b Armstrong, Karen (2004).

"Fundamentalism and the Secular Society" .

International Journal .

59 (4): 875– 877.

doi : 10.2307/40203988 .

JSTOR 40203988 .

^ Harris, Harriet (2008).

Fundamentalism and Evangelicals . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-953253-7 .

OCLC 182663241 .

^ Boer, Roland (2005).

"Fundamentalism" (PDF) . In Tony Bennett; Lawrence Grossberg; Meaghan Morris; Raymond Williams (eds.).

New keywords: a revised vocabulary of culture and society .

Cambridge, Massachusetts : Blackwell Publishing . pp.

134– 137.

ISBN 978-0-631-22568-3 .

OCLC 230674627 . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 10, 2008 . Retrieved July 27, 2008 .

Widely used as a pejorative term to designate one's fanatical opponents – usually religious and/or political – rather than oneself, fundamentalism began in Christian Protestant circles in the eC20. Originally restricted to debates within evangelical ('gospel-based') Protestantism, it is now employed to refer to any person or group that is characterized as unbending, rigorous, intolerant, and militant. The term has two usages, the prior one a positive self-description, which then developed into the later derogatory usage that is now widespread.

^ KYAW ZWA MOE (March 30, 2013).

"Root Out the Source of Meikhtila Unrest" . Archived from the original on August 27, 2013 . Retrieved November 4, 2013 .

^ Athas, Iqbal; Hume, Tim (June 24, 2014).

"Fear, shock among Sri Lankan Muslims in aftermath of Buddhist mob violence" .

CNN . Retrieved January 23, 2020 .

^ "Sri Lanka struggles to halt days of Buddhist riots" .

BBC News . March 7, 2018 . Retrieved January 23, 2020 .

^ Riza, M.

"Sri Lanka declares emergency amid communal riots" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved October 17, 2024 .

^ Schaik 2011 , p. 165-169.

^ a b Kay 2004 , p. 47.

^ As of 2023 [update] , Marsden's work has been cited over 3600 times, according to "Google Scholar" .

scholar.google.com . Retrieved January 2, 2023 .

^ Buescher, John.

"A History of Fundamentalism" .

teachinghistory.org . Archived from the original on July 14, 2010 . Retrieved January 2, 2023 .

^ Ammerman 1991 .

^ Mark A. Noll, A History of Christianity in the United States and Canada (1992), pp. 376-86.

^ George M. Marsden, "Fundamentalism and American Culture", (1980) p. 117 ^ "fundamentalist (adj.)" .

Etymonline . Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

^ Curtis Lee Laws, "Convention Side Lights," The Watchman-Examiner, 8, no. 27 (1 July 1920), p 834.

^ Carpenter, Revive us Again (1997) p 200 ^ Champagne 2005 .

^ Lipner 2009 , p. 8 quote: "... one need not be religious in the minimal sense described to be accepted as a Hindu by Hindus, or describe oneself perfectly validly as Hindu. One may be polytheistic or monotheistic, monistic or pantheistic, henotheistic, panentheistic, pandeistic, even an agnostic, humanist or atheist, and still be considered a Hindu." ^ Kurtz, Lester R. (2008).

Encyclopedia of violence, peace, & conflict . Amsterdam: Elsevier.

ISBN 978-1-84972-393-0 .

OCLC 436849045 .

^ MK Gandhi, The Essence of Hinduism Archived 24 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Editor: VB Kher, Navajivan Publishing, see page 3; According to Gandhi, "a man may not believe in God and still call himself a Hindu." ^ Doniger 2014 , p. 3.

^ Hinduism not a religion, there's no book, no papacy: Sadhguru , May 24, 2016 , retrieved December 4, 2021 ^ Sharma 2003 , pp. 12–13.

^ "On the Difference Between Hinduism and Hindutva" .

Association for Asian Studies . Retrieved December 4, 2021 .

^ Brekke (1991).

Fundamentalism: Prophecy and Protest in an Age of Globalization . Cambridge University Press. p. 127.

ISBN 9781139504294 .

^ a b Poljarevic, Emin (2021). "Theology of Violence-oriented Takfirism as a Political Theory: The Case of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)". In Cusack, Carole M.

; Upal, Muhammad Afzal (eds.).

Handbook of Islamic Sects and Movements . Brill Handbooks on Contemporary Religion. Vol. 21.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

485– 512.

doi : 10.1163/9789004435544_026 .

ISBN 978-90-04-43554-4 .

ISSN 1874-6691 .

^ "Another battle with Islam's 'true believers' " .

The Globe and Mail .

^ Mohamad Jebara More Mohamad Jebara (February 6, 2015).

"Imam Mohamad Jebara: Fruits of the tree of extremism" .

Ottawa Citizen .

^ Dr. Usama Hasan (2012).

"The Balance of in challenging extremism" (PDF) . Quilliam Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 2, 2014 . Retrieved 2015-11-17 .

^ Griffith, William E. (1979).

"The Revival of Islamic Fundamentalism: The Case of Iran" .

International Security .

4 (1): 132– 138.

doi : 10.2307/2626789 .

ISSN 0162-2889 .

JSTOR 2626789 .

S2CID 154146522 .

^ Lawrence Davidson, Islamic Fundamentalism (Greenwood, 2003) ^ "Terrorism: Growing Wahhabi Influence in the United States" .

www.govinfo.gov .

Washington, D.C.

: United States Government Publishing Office . June 26, 2003.

Archived from the original on December 15, 2018 . Retrieved June 26, 2021 .

Nearly 22 months have passed since the atrocity of September 11th . Since then, many questions have been asked about the role in that day's terrible events and in other challenges we face in the war against terror of Saudi Arabia and its official sect, a separatist, exclusionary and violent form of Islam known as Wahhabism. It is widely recognized that all of the 19 suicide pilots were Wahhabi followers. In addition, 15 of the 19 were Saudi subjects. Journalists and experts, as well as spokespeople of the world, have said that Wahhabism is the source of the overwhelming majority of terrorist atrocities in today's world , from Morocco to Indonesia , via Israel , Saudi Arabia, Chechnya . In addition, Saudi media sources have identified Wahhabi agents from Saudi Arabia as being responsible for terrorist attacks on U.S. troops in Iraq .

The Washington Post has confirmed Wahhabi involvement in attacks against U.S. forces in Fallujah . To examine the role of Wahhabism and terrorism is not to label all Muslims as extremists. Indeed, I want to make this point very, very clear. It is the exact opposite. Analyzing Wahhabism means identifying the extreme element that, although enjoying immense political and financial resources, thanks to support by a sector of the Saudi state, seeks to globally hijack Islam ... The problem we are looking at today is the State-sponsored doctrine and funding of an extremist ideology that provides the recruiting grounds, support infrastructure and monetary life blood of today's international terrorists. The extremist ideology is Wahhabism, a major force behind terrorist groups, like al Qaeda , a group that, according to the FBI , and I am quoting, is the 'number one terrorist threat to the U.S. today'.

^ DeLong-Bas, Natana J.

(2004).

Wahhabi Islam: From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad .

New York : Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0195169913 .

^ Armstrong, Karen (November 27, 2014).

"Wahhabism to ISIS: how Saudi Arabia exported the main source of global terrorism" .

New Statesman .

London .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2014 . Retrieved June 28, 2021 .

^ Crooke, Alastair (March 30, 2017) [First published 27 August 2014].

"You Can't Understand ISIS If You Don't Know the History of Wahhabism in Saudi Arabia" .

The Huffington Post .

New York .

Archived from the original on August 28, 2014 . Retrieved June 28, 2021 .

^ Sells, Michael (December 22, 2016).

"Wahhabist Ideology: What It Is And Why It's A Problem" .

The Huffington Post .

New York .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2020 . Retrieved June 28, 2021 .

^ Lindijer, Koert (August 24, 2013).

"How Islam from the north spreads once more into the Sahel" .

The Africanists . Retrieved November 24, 2014 .

Hundreds of years later, Islam again comes to the Sahel, this time with an unstoppable mission mentality and the way paved by money from Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Pakistan. Foreigners, and also Malians who received scholarships to study in Saudi Arabia, introduce this strict form of Islam, and condemn the sufi's [ sic ].

[ verification needed ] ^ "Google News Search: Chart shows spikes in '79 (Iran hostage crisis), after 9/11 and in '92 and '93 (Algerian elections, PLO)" . Retrieved December 9, 2008 .

[ original research?

] ^ "fundamentalism - religious movement" .

britannica.com . Retrieved October 22, 2017 .

^ Ian S. Lustik (Fall 1987).

"Israel's Dangerous Fundamentalists" .

Foreign Policy (68): 118– 139.

ISSN 0015-7228 . Archived from the original on October 21, 2009 . Retrieved November 4, 2013 .

^ Lee, Lois; Bullivant, Stephen (November 17, 2016).

A Dictionary of Atheism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-252013-5 .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2023 . Retrieved March 12, 2017 .

^ Wolf, Gary (November 1, 2006).

"The Church of the Non-Believers" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 .

Archived from the original on July 21, 2017 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

^ Hedges, Chris (2008).

When Atheism Becomes Religion: America's New Fundamentalists . Free Press.

ISBN 978-1-4165-7078-3 .

^ McAnulla, Stuart (2011).

"Secular fundamentalists? Characterising the new atheist approach to secularism, religion and politics" .

British Politics .

9 (2). Palgrave Macmillan: 124– 145.

doi : 10.1057/bp.2013.27 .

^ LeDrew, Stephen (2018).

"Scientism and Utopia: New Atheism as a Fundamentalist Reaction to Relativism" .

Relativism and Post-Truth in Contemporary Society . Springer. pp.

143– 155.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-96559-8_9 .

ISBN 978-3-319-96558-1 .

^ Stahl, William (2010).

"One-Dimensional Rage: The Social Epistemology Of The New Atheism And Fundamentalism" .

Religion and the New Atheism: A Critical Appraisal . Brill. pp.

95– 108.

ISBN 978-90-04-19053-5 .

^ Martin, William (1996).

With God on Our Side: The Rise of the Religious Right in America . New York: Broadway Books.

ISBN 978-0-553-06745-3 .

^ Graham, Peter (June 8, 2006), Lackey, Jennifer; Sosa, Ernest (eds.), "Liberal Fundamentalism and Its Rivals" , The Epistemology of Testimony , Oxford University Press, p. 0, ISBN 978-0-19-927601-1 , retrieved January 15, 2025 ^ Kaufmann, Eric (November 20, 2020).

"Liberal Fundamentalism: A Sociology of Wokeness" .

American Affairs Journal . Retrieved January 15, 2025 .

^ Nagata, Judith. 2001.

Toward an Anthropology of "Fundamentalism." Toronto: Blackwell Publishing, p.9.

^ Alister McGrath and Joanna Collicutt McGrath, The Dawkins Delusion? Atheist Fundamentalism and the Denial of the Divine , Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), February 15, 2007, ISBN 978-0-281-05927-0 ^ "Yr Eglwys yng Nghymru | The Church in Wales" . Archived from the original on March 16, 2008 . Retrieved December 30, 2007 .

^ " 'Atheistic fundamentalism' fears" .

BBC News . December 22, 2007 . Retrieved May 3, 2010 .

^ "Archbishop of Wales fears the rise of "Atheistic Fundamentalism" " . Archived from the original on December 27, 2007 . Retrieved November 4, 2013 .

^ "Atheistic fundamentalism" fears" .

BBC News . December 22, 2007 . Retrieved November 4, 2013 .

^ Toynbee, Polly (December 21, 2007).

"Sorry to disappoint, but it's nonsense to suggest we want to ban Christmas" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved May 3, 2010 .

^ Pope Robert Anton Wilson , The New Inquisition : Irrational Rationalism and the Citadel of Science . 1986. 240 pages.

ISBN 1-56184-002-5 ^ "Secular fundamentalism" , International Herald Tribune , December 19, 2003 ^ "Headscarf ban sparks new protests" . BBC News. January 17, 2004 . Retrieved January 2, 2023 .

^ Ahmad, Ayesha (April 22, 2002).

"Muslim Activists Reject Secular Fundamentalism" .

www.islamawareness.net . Retrieved January 2, 2023 .

Ahmad, Imad-ad-Dean.

"Minaret of Feedom 5th Annual Dinner Edited Transcript" (PDF) . Minaret of Feedom. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 15, 2003.

^ Hindery, Roderick (2008).

"Comparative Ethics, Ideologies, and Critical Thought" Archived January 28, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Dorff, Elliot N. and Rosett, Arthur, A Living Tree; The Roots and Growth of Jewish Law, SUNY Press, 1988.

^ "An Interview With Howard Thurman and Ronald Eyre" .

Theology Today . The Long Search. Vol. 38, no. 2. BBC. July 1981. Archived from the original on September 6, 2002 . Retrieved August 26, 2008 – via Princeton Theological Seminary.

^ Tibi, Bassam (2002).

The Challenge of Fundamentalism: Political Islam and the New World Disorder .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0520236905 .

^ Gary J. Lewis; Stuart J. Ritchie; Timothy C. Bates (September 3, 2011).

"The relationship between intelligence and multiple domains of religious belief: Evidence from a large adult US sample" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 21, 2013.

^ "Can anyone define 'fundamentalist'?" , Terry Mattingly, Ventura County Star , May 12, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011.

^ See, for example, Marty, M. and Appleby, R.S. eds. (1993).

Fundamentalisms and the State: Remaking Polities, Economies, and Militance . John H. Garvey, Timur Kuran, and David C. Rapoport, associate editors, Vol 3, The Fundamentalism Project. University of Chicago Press.

^ Tex Sample. Public Lecture, Faith and Reason Conference, San Antonio, TX. 2006.

Sources [ edit ] Ammerman, Nancy T.

(1991).

"North American Protestant Fundamentalism" . In Marty, Martin E.

; Appleby, R. Scott (eds.).

Fundamentalisms Observed .

The Fundamentalism Project , 1. Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press. pp.

1– 65.

ISBN 0-226-50878-1 .

Appleby, R. Scott , Gabriel Abraham Almond, and Emmanuel Sivan (2003).

Strong Religion . Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-01497-5 Armstrong, Karen (2001).

The Battle for God : A History of Fundamentalism . New York: Ballantine Books.

ISBN 0-345-39169-1 Brasher, Brenda E. (2001).

The Encyclopedia of Fundamentalism . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-92244-5 Champagne, Duane (2005).

"North American Indian Religions: New Religious Movements" . In Lindsay Jones (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Religion: 15-volume Set . Vol. 10 (2nd ed.). Farmington Hills, Mi: Macmillan Reference USA – via Encyclopedia.com .

Caplan, Lionel. (1987). "Studies in Religious Fundamentalism". London: The MacMillan Press Ltd.

Dorff, Elliot N. and Rosett, Arthur, A Living Tree; The Roots and Growth of Jewish Law , SUNY Press, 1988.

Gorenberg, Gershom. (2000).

The End of Days: Fundamentalism and the Struggle for the Temple Mount.

New York: The Free Press.

Heilman, Samuel C.

; Friedman, Menachem (1991).

"Religious Fundamentalism and Religious Jews: The Case of the Haredim" . In Marty, Martin E.

; Appleby, R. Scott (eds.).

Fundamentalisms Observed .

The Fundamentalism Project , 1. Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press. pp.

197– 264.

ISBN 0-226-50878-1 .

Hindery, Roderick. 2001.

Indoctrination and Self-deception or Free and Critical Thought?

Mellen Press: aspects of fundamentalism, pp. 69–74.

Kay, David N. (2004).

Tibetan and Zen Buddhism in Britain: Transplantation, Development and Adaptation . RoutledgeCurzon.

ISBN 978-0-415-29765-3 .

Keating, Karl (1988).

Catholicism and Fundamentalism . San Francisco: Ignatius.

ISBN 0-89870-177-5 .

Lawrence, Bruce B.

Defenders of God: The Fundamentalist Revolt against the Modern Age.

San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1989.

Marsden; George M. (1980).

Fundamentalism and American Culture: The Shaping of Twentieth Century Evangelicalism, 1870-1925 Oxford University Press.

Marty, Martin E.

; Appleby, R. Scott , eds. (1991).

Fundamentalisms Observed .

The Fundamentalism Project , 1. Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-50878-1 .

Marty, Martin E.

; Appleby, R. Scott , eds. (1993).

Fundamentalisms and Society: Reclaiming the Sciences, the Family, and Education .

The Fundamentalism Project , 2. Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-50880-3 .

Marty, Martin E.

; Appleby, R. Scott , eds. (1993).

Fundamentalisms and the State: Remaking Polities, Economies, and Militance .

The Fundamentalism Project , 3. Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-50883-8 .

Marty, Martin E.

; Appleby, R. Scott , eds. (1994).

Accounting for Fundamentalisms: The Dynamic Character of Movements .

The Fundamentalism Project , 4. Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-50885-4 .

Marty, Martin E.

; Appleby, R. Scott , eds. (1995).

Fundamentalisms Comprehended .

The Fundamentalism Project , 5. Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-50887-0 .

Noll, Mark A.

(1992).

A History of Christianity in the United States and Canada . Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.

Ruthven, Malise (2005). "Fundamentalism: The Search for Meaning". Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-280606-8 Schaik, Sam van (June 28, 2011).

Tibet: A History . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-15404-7 .

Schirrmacher, Thomas (2013).

Fundamentalism: When Religion becomes Dangerous . VKW.

ISBN 978-3-86269-054-1 .

Torrey, R.A. (ed.). (1909).

The Fundamentals . Los Angeles: The Bible Institute of Los Angeles (B.I.O.L.A. now Biola University ).

ISBN 0-8010-1264-3 "Religious movements: fundamentalist." In Goldstein, Norm (Ed.) (2003).

The Associated Press Stylebook and Briefing on Media Law 2003 (38th ed.), p. 218. New York: The Associated Press.

ISBN 0-917360-22-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Marty, Martin E.

; Appleby, R. Scott , eds. (1991–1995).

Fundamentalisms..

.

The Fundamentalism Project . Vol.

1– 5. Chicago, Il; London: University of Chicago Press.

External links [ edit ] Look up fundamentalism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Can Anyone Define Fundamentalist?

Article by Terry Mattingly via Scripps Howard News Service Fundamentalism on In Our Time at the BBC Q & A on Islamic Fundamentalism Roots of Fundamentalism Traced to 16th Century Bible Translations , Harvard University , November 7, 2007.

v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism v t e Religious slurs Buddhists General Butprast Dhimmi (non- Muslims ) Heathen Jahiliyyah Kafir Infidel Pagan Theravādins Hīnayāna Non- Mahāyānists Hīnayāna Christians General Giaour Jesus freak Nicodemite Kafir Catholics Creeping Jesus Dogan Fenian Mackerel snapper Papist Romanist Taig Whore of Babylon Protestants Fundie Holy Roller Other Mormon Great and abominable church ( Latter-Day Saint ) Quaker (Society of Friends) Shakers (United Society of Believers) Hindus Malaun Jains Tīrthika/Titthiya Jews General Kike Zhyd Żydokomuna Yid Reformers Self-hating Jew Misnagdim Cryptos Marrano Muslims Ahmadis Mirzai Qadiani Isma'ilis Batiniyya Sufis Grave worshipper Shias Rafida Sunnis Bakriyyah Salafis Takfiri Wahabi Non-believers General Pagan Infidel Non- Muslims Kafir Giaour Zindīq Dhimmi Jahiliyyah Non-Jewish Shegetz Shiksa Non-Buddhists Tīrthika/Titthiya Zoroastrians Gabr Majoos/Majus Atheists Fedora tipper Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fundamentalism&oldid=1297110541 " Categories : Fundamentalism Barriers to critical thinking Religious persecution Hidden categories: Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2014 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from November 2014 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2013 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 05:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fundamentalism 110 languages Add topic

