Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Example 3 Strategies Toggle Strategies subsection 3.1 Functional group strategies 3.2 Stereochemical strategies 3.3 Structure-goal strategies 3.4 Transform-based strategies 3.5 Topological strategies 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Retrosynthetic analysis 20 languages Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Technique for solving problems in the planning of organic syntheses Retrosynthetic analysis is a technique for solving problems in the planning of organic syntheses . This is achieved by transforming a target molecule into simpler precursor structures regardless of any potential reactivity/interaction with reagents. Each precursor material is examined using the same method. This procedure is repeated until simple or commercially available structures are reached. These simpler/commercially available compounds can be used to form a synthesis of the target molecule. Retrosynthetic analysis was used as early as 1917 in Robinson 's Tropinone total synthesis.

[ 1 ] Important conceptual work on retrosynthetic analysis was published by George Vladutz in 1963 .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] E.J. Corey formalized and popularized the concept from 1967 onwards in his article General methods for the construction of complex molecules and his book The Logic of Chemical Synthesis .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The power of retrosynthetic analysis becomes evident in the design of a synthesis. The goal of retrosynthetic analysis is a structural simplification. Often, a synthesis will have more than one possible synthetic route. Retrosynthesis is well suited for discovering different synthetic routes and comparing them in a logical and straightforward fashion.

[ 8 ] A database may be consulted at each stage of the analysis, to determine whether a component already exists in the literature. In that case, no further exploration of that compound would be required. If that compound exists, it can be a jumping point for further steps developed to reach a synthesis.

There are both academic and commercial groups developing retrosynthesis tools. With the growing application of machine learning and artificial intelligence in chemistry, many research groups, such as the Coley Group from MIT, and companies, such as Chemical.AI, Reaxys, etc., have started to integrate deep learning into the conventional rule-based approaches.

Definitions [ edit ] Disconnection A retrosynthetic step involving the breaking of a bond to form two (or more) synthons .

Retron A minimal molecular substructure that enables certain transformations.

Retrosynthetic tree A directed acyclic graph of several (or all) possible retrosyntheses of a single target.

Synthon A fragment of a compound that assists in the formation of a synthesis, derived from that target molecule. A synthon and the corresponding commercially available synthetic equivalent are shown below: Target The desired final compound.

Transform The reverse of a synthetic reaction; the formation of starting materials from a single product.

Example [ edit ] Shown below is a retrosynthetic analysis of phenylacetic acid : In planning the synthesis, two synthons are identified. A nucleophilic "-COOH" group, and an electrophilic "PhCH 2 + " group. Both synthons do not exist as written; synthetic equivalents corresponding to the synthons are reacted to produce the desired product. In this case, the cyanide anion is the synthetic equivalent for the − COOH synthon, while benzyl bromide is the synthetic equivalent for the benzyl synthon.

The synthesis of phenylacetic acid determined by retrosynthetic analysis is thus: PhCH 2 Br + NaCN → PhCH 2 CN + NaBr PhCH 2 CN + 2 H 2 O → PhCH 2 COOH + NH 3 In fact, phenylacetic acid has been synthesized from benzyl cyanide , [ 9 ] itself prepared by the analogous reaction of benzyl bromide with sodium cyanide .

[ 10 ] Strategies [ edit ] Functional group strategies [ edit ] Manipulation of functional groups can lead to significant reductions in molecular complexity.

Stereochemical strategies [ edit ] Numerous chemical targets have distinct stereochemical demands. Stereochemical transformations (such as the Claisen rearrangement and Mitsunobu reaction ) can remove or transfer the desired chirality thus simplifying the target.

Structure-goal strategies [ edit ] Directing a synthesis toward a desirable intermediate can greatly narrow the focus of analysis. This allows bidirectional search techniques.

Transform-based strategies [ edit ] The application of transformations to retrosynthetic analysis can lead to powerful reductions in molecular complexity. Unfortunately, powerful transform-based retrons are rarely present in complex molecules, and additional synthetic steps are often needed to establish their presence.

Topological strategies [ edit ] The identification of one or more key bond disconnections may lead to the identification of key substructures or difficult to identify rearrangement transformations in order to identify the key structures.

Disconnections that preserve ring structures are encouraged.

Disconnections that create rings larger than 7 members are discouraged.

Disconnection involves creativity.

See also [ edit ] Organic synthesis Total synthesis References [ edit ] ^ Robinson, R. (1917).

"LXIII. A Synthesis of Tropinone" .

Journal of the Chemical Society, Transactions .

111 : 762– 768.

doi : 10.1039/CT9171100762 .

^ Ugi, Ivar; Bauer, Johannes; Bley, Klemens; Dengler, Alf; Dietz, Andreas; Fontain, Eric; Gruber, Bernhard; Herges, Rainer; Knauer, Michael; Reitsam, Klaus; Stein, Natalie (1993).

"Computer-Assisted Solution of Chemical Problems—The Historical Development and the Present State of the Art of a New Discipline of Chemistry" .

Angewandte Chemie International Edition in English .

32 (2): 201– 227.

doi : 10.1002/anie.199302011 .

^ Vléduts, G.É. (1963).

"Concerning one system of classification and codification of organic reactions" .

Information Storage and Retrieval .

1 ( 2– 3): 117– 146.

doi : 10.1016/0020-0271(63)90013-5 .

^ Corey, E. J. (1967).

"General methods for the construction of complex molecules" .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

14 : 19– 38.

doi : 10.1351/pac196714010019 .

^ E. J. Corey, X-M. Cheng (1995).

The Logic of Chemical Synthesis . New York: Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-471-11594-6 .

^ E. J. Corey (1988). "Retrosynthetic Thinking – Essentials and Examples".

Chem. Soc. Rev.

17 : 111– 133.

doi : 10.1039/CS9881700111 .

^ E. J. Corey (1991).

"The Logic of Chemical Synthesis: Multistep Synthesis of Complex Carbogenic Molecules (Nobel Lecture)" (Reprint) .

Angewandte Chemie International Edition in English .

30 (5): 455– 465.

doi : 10.1002/anie.199104553 .

^ James Law et.al:"Route Designer: A Retrosynthetic Analysis Tool Utilizing Automated Retrosynthetic Rule Generation", Journal of Chemical Information and Modelling (ACS JCIM)
Publication Date (Web): February 6, 2009; doi : 10.1021/ci800228y , http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ci800228y ^ Wilhelm Wenner (1963).

"Phenylacetamide" .

Organic Syntheses ; Collected Volumes , vol. 4, p. 760 .

^ Roger Adams; A. F. Thal (1941).

"Benzyl Cyanide" .

Organic Syntheses {{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ; Collected Volumes , vol. 1, p. 107 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Retrosynthetic analysis .

ChemAIRS, AI-driven retrosynthesis tools by Chemical.AI Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics Presentation on ARChem Route Designer, ACS, Philadelphia, September 2008 for more info on ARChem see the SimBioSys pages.

Manifold, Software freely available for academic users developed by PostEra Retrosynthesis planning tool: ICSynth by InfoChem Spaya, Software freely available proposed by Iktos v t e Chemical synthesis Types Artificial gene synthesis Biomimetic synthesis Bioretrosynthesis Biosynthesis Chemosynthesis Convergent synthesis Custom peptide synthesis Direct process Divergent synthesis Electrosynthesis Enantioselective synthesis Fully automated synthesis Hydrothermal synthesis LASiS Mechanosynthesis One-pot synthesis Organic synthesis Peptide synthesis Radiosynthesis Retrosynthesis Semisynthesis Solid-phase synthesis Solvothermal synthesis Total synthesis Volume combustion synthesis Category Commons Portal v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Retrosynthetic_analysis&oldid=1291873529 " Categories : Chemical synthesis Organic chemistry Chemical reaction engineering Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 22:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Retrosynthetic analysis 20 languages Add topic

