Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Disappearance and presumed death 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Abdul Fattah Ismail 15 languages العربية Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Nederlands Português Русский Тоҷикӣ Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of South Yemen from 1969 to 1980 al-Rafīq Abdul Fattah Ismail عبد الفتاح إسماعيل Abdul Fattah Ismail in 1979 Chairman of the Presidium of Supreme People's Council (South Yemen) [ 2 ] In office August 1971 [ 1 ] – 21 April 1980 Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Ali Nasir Muhammad 1st General Secretary of the Yemeni Socialist Party In office 13 October 1978 – 21 April 1980 Preceded by Position established (himself as Secretary-General of the National Liberation Front) Succeeded by Ali Nasir Muhammad Secretary-General of the National Liberation Front [ 3 ] In office 22 June 1969 – 13 October 1978 President Salim Rubai Ali Preceded by Qahtan al-Shaabi Succeeded by Position abolished (himself as General Secretary of the Yemeni Socialist Party) Personal details Born 28 July 1939 Ta'izz , Kingdom of Yemen Died 13 January 1986 (aged 46) Aden , South Yemen Political party Yemeni Socialist Party Residence Aden Profession Oil refinery worker, teacher Awards Order of Friendship of Peoples Military service Allegiance NLF South Yemen Battles/wars Aden Emergency First Yemenite War Second Yemenite War Abdul Fattah Ismail ( Arabic : عبد الفتاح إسماعيل , romanized : ʿAbd al-Fattāḥ Ismāʿīl pronunciation ⓘ ; 28 July 1939 – 13 January 1986) was a Yemeni Marxist politician and revolutionary who was the de facto leader of South Yemen from 1978 to 1980 after the overthrow of President Salim Rubaya Ali . He served as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council (head of state) and founder, chief ideologue and first leader of the Yemeni Socialist Party from 21 December 1978 to 21 April 1980. He died under mysterious circumstances during the 1986 South Yemen Civil War and his body was never found.

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Abdel Fattah Ismail lays a wreath during his visit to the Soviet Union Abdul Fattah was born on 28 July 1939 in the Al-Hujariah district of the Taiz Governorate in North Yemen . Though his father was a faqīh (Islamic jurist), he had a poor and rural upbringing. He subsequently followed his elder brother to Aden (which was then a British protectorate ) where he was educated at the Ahliah School in Tawahi district. When he was approximately seventeen, Abdul Fattah enrolled in a British Petroleum workers’ training center and began working in an oil refinery from 1956 to 1959 as an apprentice. In this setting Abdul Fattah began to develop a political consciousness centered around union organizing and labour advocacy. As a co-founder of the Arab Nationalist Movement in South Yemen, he contributed to the formation of a number of Movement cells before he was arrested by the British colonial authorities in Aden for political incitement of workers.

Abdul Fattah Ismail in the early 1980s during his visit to Moscow In 1961, he became a school teacher at Al-Haswah School in Aden, and at the same time continued his involvement in political activity. He was a co-founder of the National Front for the Liberation of South Yemen (NLF). After the outbreak of the Aden Emergency where the NLF sought for the liberation of South Yemen from British colonial rule, Abdul Fattah became a full-time socialist revolutionary, whereby he undertook the leadership of the NLF underground military wing (fedayeen) in Aden, as well as political activity.

He was elected to the NLF executive in the first, second and third NLF congresses, 1965–67. After South Yemen gained independence in 1967 he was appointed Minister of Culture and Yemeni Unity. In the fourth NLF congress, he was instrumental in determining the progressive line of the revolution. But in March 1968,  he was arrested by the right-wing faction of the NLF and went into exile, where he drafted the program for Accomplishing National Democratic Liberation, a leftist manifesto. He undertook a leading role in the consolidation of left wing of NLF which subsequently regained power in the 22 June 1969 " Corrective Move ." Subsequent to the "Correction Step" Abdul Fattah was elected Secretary General of the NLF Central Committee, thus making him the country's de facto leader.  He was also elected a member of the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council. In 1970 he was elected Chairman of Presidium. He undertook a leading role in the dialogue between NLF and other left parties in south Yemen leading to the formation of the Yemeni Socialist Party (YSP). He was elected Secretary General of the YSP at the first party congress in October 1978. Ideologically, he is considered to have favored the Soviet model of socialist development (as opposed to Maoist alternatives). In October 1979, Abdul Fattah secured the 1979 Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the USSR. Similar treaties with East Germany and Ethiopia followed in 1981, following Abdul Fattah's resignation from office.

[ 5 ] In 1980, he resigned from all his posts for allegedly health reasons and was succeeded by Ali Nasir Muhammad . However, Abdul Fattah was appointed president of the party before he went to Moscow for medical treatment, until 1985, when he returned in the face of a mounting crisis between Muhammad and his opponents in the YSP.

In October 1985, he was elected to the YSP Politburo and as a Secretary of the Central Committee, but the crisis had erupted on 13 January 1986, into a violent struggle in Aden between Ali Nasir's supporters and Abdul Fattah's supporters (See South Yemen civil war ). Fighting lasted for more than a month and resulted in thousands of casualties and Ali Nasir's ouster.

[ 6 ] Disappearance and presumed death [ edit ] During the crisis, Abdul Fattah disappeared. He was last seen being evacuated from the YSP office along with his deputy Ali Salem al Beidh in a military armored vehicle. Unsubstantiated reports claim he was killed when naval forces loyal to Ali Nasir shelled his home in Aden, but his ultimate fate is unknown. His body was never found.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Russian Translation References [ edit ] ^ Halliday, Fred.

"Aspects of South Yemen's foreign policy 1967-1982" (PDF) .

University of London . Retrieved 9 August 2025 .

^ Under the October 1978 Constitution, the Presidential Council was abolished and Abdul Fattah's existing position as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council was redefined as the head of state of South Yemen.

^ "عبدالفتاح إسماعيل الرئيس الفدائي" .

خيوط . Retrieved 19 September 2023 .

^ "4 executed in S. Yemen coup plot" .

Chicago Sun-Times . 14 January 1986. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 19 September 2012 .

^ Lackner, Helen. P.D.R. Yemen: Outpost of Socialist Development in Arabia, 1985 p. 84 ^ a b Brehony, Noel, Yemen Divided: The Story of a Failed State in South Arabia , London: I.B. Tauris, 2011, p. 151 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Abdul Fattah Ismail .

Anaween Thaqafiya magazine Salah Abdul Fattah interview on 26 September, April 27, 2006 [ permanent dead link ] Political offices Preceded by Post Established Chairman of the Presidium of Supreme People's Council (South Yemen) 1970–1980 Succeeded by Ali Nasir Muhammad Preceded by Post Established General Secretary of the Yemeni Socialist Party 1978–1980 Succeeded by Ali Nasir Muhammad v t e Heads of state of Yemen North Yemen (1918–1990) Kingdom (1918–1962) Flag of the Kingdom of Yemen Yahya Ahmad Muhammad al-Badr Republic (1962–1990) Flag of North Yemen al-Sallal al-Eryani al-Hamadi al-Ghashmi al-Arashi Saleh South Yemen (1967–1990) Flag of South Yemen Shaabi Salmin Ali Nasir Ismail Ali Nasir Attas Republic of Yemen (1990–) Flag of Yemen Saleh Hadi al-Houthi § al-Sammad § al-Mashat § al-Alimi § Houthi –installed heads of state, in rebellion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abdul_Fattah_Ismail&oldid=1305188288 " Categories : Presidents of South Yemen Chairmen of the Presidium of the Supreme People's Council 1939 births 1986 deaths Arab communists Communism in Yemen Yemeni Arab nationalists Yemeni Marxists Yemeni Socialist Party politicians Yemeni socialists People granted political asylum in the Soviet Union South Yemen independence activists Muslim socialists Yemeni revolutionaries Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2024 Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages including recorded pronunciations Commons category link from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 15:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abdul Fattah Ismail 15 languages Add topic

