Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 International and regional human rights instruments Toggle International and regional human rights instruments subsection 1.1 International human rights instruments 1.2 Regional human rights instruments 2 Secondary legal sources 3 National constitutions 4 State responsibility 5 Monitoring, enforcement and implementation framework 6 Education as a human right 7 Advocacy 8 Theory of rights 9 See also 10 References 11 Sources Toggle the table of contents Economic, social and cultural rights 25 languages Anarâškielâ العربية Català Español فارسی 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол پښتو Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socio-economic human rights "Economic rights" redirects here; not to be confused with Economic freedom .

"Social rights" redirects here. For another sense, see Social rights (social contract theory) .

Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Economic, social and cultural rights ( ESCR ) are socio-economic human rights , such as the right to education , right to housing , right to an adequate standard of living , right to health , victims' rights and the right to science and culture . Economic, social and cultural rights are recognised and protected in international and regional human rights instruments. Member states have a legal obligation to respect, protect and fulfil economic, social and cultural rights and are expected to take " progressive action " towards their fulfilment.

The Universal Declaration on Human Rights recognises a number of economic, social and cultural rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) is the primary international legal source of economic, social and cultural rights.

[ 1 ] The Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women recognises and protects many of the economic, social and cultural rights recognised in the ICESCR in relation to children and women. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination prohibits discrimination on the basis of racial or ethnic origin in relation to a number of economic, social and cultural rights. The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities also prohibits all discrimination on the basis of the disability including refusal of the reasonable accommodation relating to full enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights.

International and regional human rights instruments [ edit ] Women's economic rights in 2011 [ 2 ] Economic, social and cultural rights are recognized and protected in a number of international and regional human rights instruments.

[ 3 ] International human rights instruments [ edit ] The Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR), adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1948, is one of the most important sources of economic, social and cultural rights. It recognizes the right to social security in Article 22, the right to work in Article 23, the right to rest and leisure in Article 24, the right to an adequate standard of living in Article 25, the right to education in Article 26, and the right to benefits of science and culture in Article 27.

[ 3 ] The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) is the primary international legal source of economic, social and cultural rights. The Covenant recognized and protects the right to work and to just and favorable working conditions in Article 6 and 7, the right to join trade unions and take collective labor action in Article 8, the right to social security in Article 9, the right to protection of the family, including protection for mothers and children, in Article 10, the right to an adequate standard of living , including the right to food and the right to housing , in Article 11, the right to health in Article 12, the right to education in Article 13, as well as the right to participate in cultural life and  the right to benefits of science and culture in Article 15. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , adopted at the same time as the ICESCR, recognizes and protects a number of core economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to join trade unions in Article 22, and the right of ethnic , religious or linguistic minorities to engage in their culture, practice their religion and use their language in Article 27.

[ 3 ] A number of other major international human rights instruments contain provisions relating to economic, social and cultural rights. The Convention on the Rights of the Child recognizes and protects many of the economic, social and cultural rights recognized in the ICESCR in relation to children. Including the right to health in Article 24, the right to social security in Article 25, the right to an adequate standard of living in Article 27, the right to education in Article 28, and the right to protection from economic exploitation (see child labour ) in Article 32.

[ 3 ] The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination prohibits discrimination on the basis of racial or ethnic origin in relation to a number of economic, social and cultural rights. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women affirms a range of economic, social and cultural rights to women. The ILO Conventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO) protect a range of work related economic, social and cultural rights.

[ 4 ] Common global standards were agreed by some 195 states in the Recommendation on Science and Scientific protect and reassert scientific freedoms, the rights of scientists, and rights of research subjects, and the right of everyone to science.

[ 5 ] Regional human rights instruments [ edit ] The African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights protects the right to work in Article 15, the right to health in Article 16, and the right to education in Article 17. The European Social Charter protects a wide range of economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to work , to favourable working conditions, the right to join trade unions and to take collective labour action in Article 1 to 10, the right to health in Article 11, the right to social security , including the right to medical assistance and the right to social welfare services, in Article 12 to 14, protection of especially vulnerable groups are enshrined in Article 15 to 17 and 19, and right to housing in Article 31. The Protocol of San Salvador protects a range of economic, social and cultural rights within the Inter-American human rights system.

[ 4 ] Secondary legal sources [ edit ] A range of secondary legal sources exist on economic, social and cultural rights which provide guidance on their normative definition. An important secondary legal source is the United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights which is overseeing the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). The Committee has been central in developing the normative definition of key economic, social and cultural rights, interpreting the role of State Parties to the ICESCR, and monitoring protection and violation of the ICESCR rights. The Committee issues guiding pronouncements in the form of general comments , and other human rights treaty bodies may also issue comments relevant to economic, social and cultural rights.

[ 4 ] Other important secondary legal sources on economic, social and cultural rights are the Limburg Principles on the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 1987 and the Maastricht Guidelines on Violations of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 1997. The Limburg Principles have been extensively used in national legal systems as an interpretive tool for establishing violations of economic, social and cultural rights. The Maastricht Guidelines build on the Limburg Principles and identify the legal implications of acts and omissions which are violations of economic, social and cultural rights.

[ 6 ] Various United Nations Special Rapporteurs have influenced the normative development of economic, social and cultural rights. Appointed by the Commission on Human Rights and its sub-commissions, key rapporteurs include the Special Rapporteur on the Realization of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Adequate Housing, the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Education , and the Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women.

[ 7 ] National constitutions [ edit ] A number of national constitutions recognize economic, social and cultural rights. For example, the 1996 Constitution of South Africa includes economic, social and cultural rights and the South African Constitutional Court has heard claims under these obligations (see Grootboom and Treatment Action Campaign cases). The Supreme Court of India has interpreted Article 21 of the Constitution to contain positive social rights.

Constitutional recognition of economic, social and cultural rights has long been thought to be counterproductive, given that courts might be tasked to adjudicate them, and hence disrupt the democratic chains of accountability of the so-called elected branches.

[ 8 ] Nonetheless, a growing literature from the Global South has tracked very different judicial responses.

[ 9 ] Sympathetic critics argue that socio-economic rights appear 'quite negligible' factors in terms of ensuring overall human development.

[ 10 ] Contemporary welfare states tend to emphasize decommodification , general welfare and the common good , not rights. Sweden, Finland, and Denmark, for example, adhere to a comparatively robust welfare effort, built primarily through social democratic parties and trade union mobilisation, without relying on judicial review of socio-economic rights.

[ 10 ] Nonetheless, majoritarian political arenas such as parliaments and trade union structures may remain unresponsive to minorities. The gains won through litigation, modest though they may be, can nonetheless be of value for those who benefit from them.

[ 11 ] Civil society movements have advanced alternative institutions, norms and practices for constitution-making and making socio-economic rights effective. Participants in recent constitution-making experiments in Iceland , Bolivia and Ecuador have all linked economic and social rights to new institutional arrangements such as participatory budgeting or technologically-enhanced direct democracy as well as to new norms and discourses, notably those concerning ecological stewardship and the commons as well as care and social reproduction . In Ireland , social movements such as the ' Right2Water ' and ' Repeal the 8th ' campaigns have demonstrated how highly networked individuals and communities can mobilise both alongside and outside of traditional institutions, act collectively, and advance economic, social and cultural rights.

[ 12 ] State responsibility [ edit ] Economic, social and cultural right enshrined in international and regional human rights instruments are legally binding. Member states have a legal obligation to respect, protect and fulfil these rights. The exact nature of states' obligations in this respect has been established principally in relation to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), [ 7 ] and further Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has been established in accordance with Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action .

[ 13 ] State parties to the ICESCR are required to take "progressive action" towards fulfilment of the ICESR rights. While immediate fulfilment may not be possible due to the economic situation of a country, postponement of proactive action is not permitted. State parties must show genuine efforts to secure the economic, social and cultural rights enshrined in the ICESCR. The burden of proof for progressive action is considered on be with the state party. The prohibition on discrimination in relation to economic, social and cultural rights is regarded as having immediate effect. State parties must abolish laws, policies and practices which affect the equal enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights and take action to prevent discrimination in public life. All state parties, regardless of the economic situation in the country or resource scarcity, are required to ensure respect for minimum subsistence rights for all. State parties must also ensure that available resources are accessed and used equitably. Therefore, government decisions on how to allocate resources should be subject to scrutiny. Legislative measures alone are not sufficient to ensure compliance with the ICESCR and state parties are expected to provide judicial remedies in addition to taking administrative, financial, educational and social measures.

[ 14 ] Monitoring, enforcement and implementation framework [ edit ] Intergovernmental organisations and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) have persistently neglected economic, social and cultural rights over the past 50 years.

[ 15 ] While all human rights are said to be "equal, indivisible, interrelated, and interdependent", the monitoring, enforcement and implementation framework for economic, social and cultural rights is less advanced than that for civil and political rights . International enforcement mechanisms are strongest for civil and political rights, and their violation is considered more serious than that of economic, social and cultural rights. There are few international NGOs that focus on economic, social and cultural rights and there are few lawyers who have the knowledge or experience to defend economic, social and cultural rights at a national or international level. Economic, social and cultural rights are less likely than civil and political rights to be protected in national constitutions.

[ 16 ] In 2008, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights , which gives the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights competence to receive and consider communications from individuals claiming that their rights under the Covenant have been violated by a state party. The Protocol entered into force on 5 May 2013.

In 2017, for the common global standards in the Recommendation on Science and Scientific Researchers relating to the right to science, states agreed at the UNESCO General Conference to adopt four-yearly reporting on implementation, and agreed that UNESCO's Executive Board is competent to manage monitoring, with the networks of UNESCO National Commissions and academic partners mobilized in countries to ensure implementation and monitoring at country level.

[ 17 ] For the other major international human rights conventions mentioned above there are various other treaty bodies to ensure some monitoring of implementation. And each may transmit to the Human Rights Council reports of individual cases when a state is the subject of a Universal Periodic Review.

Education as a human right [ edit ] Education is guaranteed as a human right in many human rights treaties , including: [ 18 ] The Convention against Discrimination in Education [ 19 ] (1960, CADE).

The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights [ 20 ] (1966, ICESCR).

The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women [ 21 ] (1979, CEDAW).

The Convention on the Rights of the Child [ 22 ] (1989, CRC).

The right to education places the individual at the centre of education frameworks.

Education as a human right has the following characteristics: [ 18 ] It is a right; Education is not a privilege or subject to political or charitable whims. It is a human right. It places mandatory demands on duty-bearers (particularly the state, but also parents, children, and other actors).

It is universal; Everyone has the right to education without discrimination . This includes children , adolescents , youths , adults , and older people .

It is high priority; Education is a key priority of the state.

Obligations to ensure the right to education cannot be dismissed.

It is a key right; Education is instrumental in ensuring all other human rights. It has economic , social , cultural , civil, and political dimensions.

[ 18 ] The right to education places legal obligations on states when they make decisions regarding education and the education system. It offers an internationally agreed normative framework for the standards that states must not fall beneath concerning the education of its citizens and non-citizens.

[ 18 ] Education as a multiplier right These standards define what states must do and avoid doing in order to ensure the dignity of the individual. The right to education is broad and covers many aspects of education. This means that for the specific areas related to education, states must act within the boundaries permitted under international human rights law (IHRL).

[ 18 ] The main aspects of education are: [ 18 ] The aims of education.

Non-discrimination and equality in the education system.

Free and compulsory universal primary education .

Available and accessible, free education at the secondary level, including vocational education .

Accessible (on the basis of capacity), free education at the tertiary level .

Fundamental education for those who have not received all or part of their primary education.

Maintenance of an education system at all levels.

Provision of a fellowship system.

The training of teachers , their status, and their working conditions.

Educational freedom, that is, the freedom of parents to have their children educated in accordance with their religious and moral convictions.

The freedom of individuals and organizations to set-up private schools.

quality education, including setting minimum standards regarding infrastructure and human rights education safe and non-violent learning environments the allocation of adequate resources academic freedom at all levels of education the settings and contents of the curriculum .

Transparent and accountable education systems.

[ 18 ] Advocacy [ edit ] Networking groups such as ESCR-Net are working to create online resources and spread information about effective cases, initiatives, and working groups promoting ideals and celebrating victories of human rights initiatives and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights . Currently, human rights advocacy groups are working diligently to fine-tune rules, regulations and implementation schemes; little news of complaint successes or failures is available.

[ 23 ] The Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions ( COHRE ) has helped to establish the Housing and Property Directorate (HPD/HPCC) in Kosovo.

[ 24 ] Theory of rights [ edit ] According to Karel Vasak 's theory of three generations of human rights , economic, social and cultural rights are considered second-generation rights, while civil and political rights , such as freedom of speech , right to a fair trial , and the right to vote , are considered first-generation rights.

[ 25 ] The theory of negative and positive rights considers economic, social and cultural rights positive rights .

[ citation needed ] Social rights are "rights to the meeting of basic needs that are essential for human welfare." [ 26 ] Examples of social rights include the right to healthcare and the right to decent working conditions.

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] Constitutional economics Constitutionalism Cultural rights Economic security Human right to water and sanitation Human rights inflation Human security International labour standard Millennium Development Goals Right to education Right to health Rule according to higher law Security of person Social pension Social protection floor Social rights Social safety net Three generations of human rights Universal health care Welfare rights References [ edit ] ^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" .

www.un.org . 2015-10-06 . Retrieved 2020-09-26 .

^ "Women's Economic Rights" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved 5 March 2020 .

^ a b c d Leckie, Scott; Gallanger, Anne (2006).

Economic, social and cultural rights: a legal resource guide . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. xiv.

ISBN 978-0-8122-3916-4 .

^ a b c Leckie, Scott; Gallanger, Anne (2006).

Economic, social and cultural rights: a legal resource guide . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. xv.

ISBN 978-0-8122-3916-4 .

^ "Recommendation on Science and Scientific Researchers" .

portal.unesco.org . Retrieved 2019-06-25 .

^ Leckie, Scott; Gallanger, Anne (2006).

Economic, social and cultural rights: a legal resource guide . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

xv– xvi.

ISBN 978-0-8122-3916-4 .

^ a b Leckie, Scott; Gallanger, Anne (2006).

Economic, social and cultural rights: a legal resource guide . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. xvi.

ISBN 978-0-8122-3916-4 .

^ Young, Katharine G., ed. (2019).

The Future of Economic and Social Rights (Globalization and Human Rights) . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1108418133 .

^ Langford, Malcolm, ed. (2009).

Social Rights Jurisprudence, Emerging Trends in International and Comparative Law . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780511815485 .

^ a b Hirschl, Ran and Evan Rosevear, 'Constitutional Law Meets Comparative Politics: Socio-economic Rights and Political Realities' in Tom Campbell, K. D. Ewing, and Adam Tomkins (eds.), 2011, The Legal Protection of Human Rights: Sceptical Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 207–28, pp. 213, 223.

^ Whyte, 2014, 'The Efficacy of Public Interest Litigation in Ireland' in Maluwa, Tiyanjana (ed.), Law, Politics and Human Rights: Essays in Memory of Kader Asmal. Leiden: Brill, pp. 252–86.

^ Murray, Thomas (2016).

Contesting Economic and Social Rights in Ireland: Constitution, State and Society, 1848–2016 . Cambridge Studies in Law and Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9781316652862 .

ISBN 978-1-107-15535-0 .

^ Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action , Part II paragraph 75 ^ Leckie, Scott; Gallanger, Anne (2006).

Economic, social and cultural rights: a legal resource guide . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

xvi– xvii.

ISBN 978-0-8122-3916-4 .

^ "Convention on the Rights of the Child text" .

www.unicef.org . Retrieved 2022-02-28 .

^ Leckie, Scott; Gallanger, Anne (2006).

Economic, social and cultural rights: a legal resource guide . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. xiii.

ISBN 978-0-8122-3916-4 .

^ "Records of the 39th UNESCO General Conference, Resolutions, at 39 C/resolution 85" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 6 June 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g Right to education handbook . UNESCO. 2019.

ISBN 978-92-3-100305-9 .

Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license.

^ "UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education" .

Equal Rights Trust . 2009-03-27 . Retrieved 2022-03-01 .

^ Refugees, United Nations High Commissioner for.

"Refworld | International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights" .

Refworld . Retrieved 2022-03-01 .

^ "United Nations Treaty Collection" .

treaties.un.org . Retrieved 2022-03-01 .

^ "OHCHR | Convention on the Rights of the Child" .

www.ohchr.org . Retrieved 2022-03-01 .

^ “Campaign for the Ratification and Implementation of the Optional Protocol to the ICESCR-Justice NOW! Ratify to protect all Human Rights.” ESCR-Net Newsletter December (2009) ^ K. Hassine, Regularizing Property Rights in Kosovo and Elsewhere, 2010, ISBN 978-3-86553-340-1 ^ Karel Vasak, "Human Rights: A Thirty-Year Struggle: the Sustained Efforts to give Force of law to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights", UNESCO Courier 30:11, Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization , November 1977.

^ a b Mantouvalou, Virginia (2010-04-12).

"The Case for Social Rights" . Rochester, NY.

SSRN 1588220 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO. Text taken from Right to education handbook​ , 276, UNESCO, Right to Education Initiative (UK), UNESCO. UNESCO.

v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality Authority control databases National United States 2 Israel 2 Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic,_social_and_cultural_rights&oldid=1276294586 " Category : Rights Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010 Free-content attribution Free content from UNESCO This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 00:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economic, social and cultural rights 25 languages Add topic

