Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early developments 2 Christianity 3 Modern developments 4 Psychology 5 In literature 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Justice (virtue) 12 languages Беларуская Български Español 한국어 Հայերեն Қазақша Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Саха тыла Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cardinal virtue Justizia, by Luca Giordano Justice is one of the four cardinal virtues in classical European philosophy and Roman Catholicism. It is the moderation or mean between selfishness and selflessness — between having more and having less than one's fair share.

[ 1 ] : V.3 Justice is closely related, in Christianity, to the practice of charity because it regulates relationships with others. It is a cardinal virtue, which is to say that it is "pivotal", because it regulates all such relationships. It is sometimes deemed the most important of the cardinal virtues.

[ citation needed ] Early developments [ edit ] According to Plato, "Justice consists in a certain equality by which the just and definite claim of another, neither more nor less, is satisfied." [ 2 ] [ 1 ] : V.4 This is equal insofar as each one receives what he is entitled to, but maybe unequal insofar as different people may have different rights: two children have different rights from a certain adult if that adult is the parent of one of them and not of the other. Aristotle developed the idea of equity ( epieikeia ) to cover irregular cases so that "the ordinance is framed to fit the circumstances".

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] : V.10 Cicero wrote that "[t]here are... two kinds of injustice: the one, on the part of those who inflict wrong, the other on the part of those who, when they can, do not shield from wrong those upon whom it is being inflicted." So "he who does not prevent or oppose wrong, if he can, is just as guilty of wrong as if he deserted his parents or his friends or his country".

[ 4 ] Macrobius saw Justice as existing on four different planes or levels, rising from the everyday political virtue at the lowest to the Archetypal Form of Justice at the highest.

[ 5 ] Christianity [ edit ] "The just man", often mentioned in Christian scriptures, is distinguished by habitual right thinking and the uprightness of his conduct toward his neighbor.

[ 6 ] In Colossians 4:1 St. Paul counsels "Masters, treat your slaves justly and fairly, realizing that you too have a Master in heaven." In Christian moral theology, justice is a quality or habit which perfects the will and inclines it to render to each and to all what belongs to them. The object of the virtue of justice is the other person's rights, whether natural or bestowed by church or state. Justice requires that all persons should be left in the free enjoyment of all their rights. The rights which belong to every human being are absolute and inalienable.

[ 2 ] In Aristotle 's wake, [ 1 ] Thomas Aquinas developed a theory of proportional reciprocity, whereby the just man renders to each and all that is due to them in due proportion: what it is their moral and legal rights to do, possess, or exact.

[ 7 ] Justice toward God is called the " virtue of religion ".

[ 6 ] Modern developments [ edit ] With the late modern rise in interest in virtue ethics , a new interest in articulating the virtue of justice has emerged.

John Rawls saw justice as the typical virtue of the institution; Irene van Staveren saw it as that of the state, marked by such indicators as votes, legitimacy, public fairness, and distributive rules.

[ 8 ] Psychology [ edit ] Moral justice has been linked to the sixth and highest of Kohlberg's stages of moral development .

[ 9 ] Freudians consider that in the unconscious the image of the Father embodies a stern but fair justice; [ 10 ] Jungians similarly see the archetype of the King as representing the right ordering of society.

[ 11 ] In literature [ edit ] Dante made Justice the virtue of his sixth heaven (the sphere of Jupiter), and illustrated it through such martial figures as Joshua and Roland .

[ 12 ] Sir Philip Sydney wrote of "justice the chief of virtues"; [ 13 ] Edmund Spenser devoted the fifth book of The Faerie Queene to the same theme.

[ 14 ] Wallace Stevens rejected what he called "galled Justicia/Trained to poise the tables of the law" as part of the obsolete images of the past, and favoured instead the modernist seeking out new ruling images – new "sovereigns of the soul".

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Aristides – Athenian general and statesman (530–468 BC) De Legibus – Philosophical legal dialogue by Cicero Fortitude – Ability to deal with fear Lady Justice – Personification of justice Plato – Greek philosopher (c. 427 – 348 BC) Prudence – Ability of a person to regulate themselves with the use of reason Temperance – Cardinal virtue of control over excess References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Aristotle .

Nicomachean Ethics .

^ a b Slater, Thomas (1910).

"Justice" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Aristotle .

Rhetoric . I.13.

^ Cicero, Marcus Tullius.

De Officiis . I.7.

^ Lewis, C.S.

(1976).

The Discarded Image . pp.

68– 69.

^ a b "The Human Virtues" .

Catechism of the Catholic Church . §1807.

^ Dy, Manuel Jr.

Contemporary Social Philosophy . p. 58.

[ clarification needed ] ^ McCloskey, Deidre (2007).

The Bourgeois Virtues . pp. 286 and 431.

^ Nucci, L. P. (2008).

Handbook of Moral and Character Education . p. 60.

^ Berne, Eric (1976).

A Layman's Guide to Psychiatry and Psychooanalysis . p. 45.

^ Bly, R.; Woodman, M. (1999).

The Maiden King . p. 155.

^ Dante Alighieri (1321).

Paradiso .

^ Sidney, Philip (1595).

A Defence of Poetry .

^ Frye, Northrop (1971).

Anatomy of Criticism . p. 201.

^ Stevens, Wallace (1984). "Lions in Sweden".

Collected Poems . p. 124.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Justice ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] LeBar, Mark (2020).

"Justice as a Virtue" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . The Metaphysics Research Lab.

Aquinas, Thomas.

"Secunda Secundæ" .

Summa Theologica . Questions 57 –122.

v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Latvia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Justice_(virtue)&oldid=1296651939 " Categories : Christian ethics Justice Virtue Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 10:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Justice (virtue) 12 languages Add topic

