Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Premises 2 Principles 3 Creation vs. the learning of knowledge 4 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 4.1 Premises 4.2 Principles 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Evolutionary educational psychology 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of study Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Evolutionary educational psychology is the study of the relation between inherent folk knowledge and abilities and accompanying inferential and attributional biases as these influence academic learning in evolutionarily novel cultural contexts, such as schools and the industrial workplace. The fundamental premises and principles of this discipline are presented below.

Premises [ edit ] The premises of evolutionary educational psychology state there are: (a) aspects of mind and brain that have evolved to draw the individuals attention to and facilitate the processing of social ( folk psychology ), biological ( folk biology ), physical ( folk physics ) information patterns that facilitated survival or reproductive outcomes during human evolution (Cosmides & Tooby, 1994; Geary, 2005; Gelman, 1990; Pinker, 1997; Shepard, 1994; Simon, 1956); (b) although plastic to some degree, these primary abilities are inherently constrained to the extent associated information patterns tended to be consistent across generations and within lifetimes (e.g., Caramazza & Shelton, 1998; Geary & Huffman, 2002); (c) other aspects of mind and brain evolved to enable the mental generation of potential future social, ecological, or climatic conditions and enable rehearsal of behaviors to cope with variation in these conditions, and are now known as general fluid intelligence , or gF (including skill at everyday reasoning/problem solving; Chiappe & MacDonald, 2005; Geary, 2005; Mithen, 1996); and (d) children are inherently motivated to learn in folk domains, with the associated attentional and behavioral biases resulting in experiences that automatically and implicitly flesh out and adapt these systems to local conditions (Gelman, 1990; Gelman & Williams, 1998; Gelman, 2003).

Principles [ edit ] The principles of evolutionary educational psychology represent the foundational assumptions for an evolutionary educational psychology. The gist is knowledge and expertise that is useful in the cultural milieu or ecology in which the group is situated will be transferred across generations in the form of cultural artifacts , such as books, or learning traditions, as in apprenticeships (e.g., Baumeister, 2005; Richerson & Boyd, 2005; Flinn, 1997; Mithen, 1996). Across generations, the store of cultural knowledge accumulates and creates a gap between this knowledge base and the forms of folk knowledge and abilities that epigenetically emerge with children's self-initiated activities.

There must of course be an evolved potential to learn evolutionarily novel information and an associated bias to seek novelty during the developmental period and indeed throughout the life span ; this may be related to the openness to experience dimension of personality (Geary, 1995, 2002, in press).

However, the cross-generational accumulation of knowledge across cultures, individuals, and domains (e.g., people vs. physics) has resulted in an exponential increase in the quantity of secondary knowledge available in modern societies today. For most people, the breadth and complexity of this knowledge will very likely exceed any biases to learn in evolutionary novel domains.

Creation vs. the learning of knowledge [ edit ] A related issue concerns the traits that enable the creation of biologically secondary knowledge and thus culture and the extent to which these traits overlap with the ability to learn knowledge created by others.

Stated differently, Is the goal of education to have children recreate the process of discovery, to learn the products of discovery, or some combination? Some educators have advocated a focus on the process of discovery without full consideration of the constellation of traits and opportunity that contribute to the creation of secondary knowledge (e.g., Cobb, Yackel, & Wood, 1992). In fact, research on creative-productive individuals suggests that the full constellation of traits that facilitate the discovery and creation of secondary knowledge is rare and not likely reproducible on a large scale (Simonton, 1999a, 1999b, 2003; Sternberg, 1999; Wai, Lubinski, & Benbow, 2005).

Summary [ edit ] Premises [ edit ] 1.) Natural selection has resulted in an evolved motivational disposition to attempt to gain access to and control of the resources that have covaried with survival and reproductive outcomes during human evolution.

2.) These resources fall into three broad categories: social, biological, and physical which correspond to the respective domains of folk psychology, folk biology, and folk physics.

3.) Attentional, perceptual , and cognitive systems, including inferential and attributional biases , have evolved to process information in these folk domains and to guide control-related behavioral strategies. These systems process restricted classes of information associated with these folk domains.

4.) To cope with variation in social, ecological, or climatic conditions, systems that enabled the mental generation of these potential future conditions and enabled rehearsals of behaviors to cope with this variation evolved and the supporting attentional and cognitive mechanisms are known as general fluid intelligence and everyday reasoning.

5.) Children are biologically biased to engage in activities that recreate the ecologies of human evolution; these are manifested as social play , and exploration of the environment and objects. The accompanying experiences interact with the inherent but skeletal folk systems and flesh out these systems such that they are adapted to the local social group and ecology.

Principles [ edit ] 1.) Scientific , technological , and academic advances initially emerged from the cognitive and motivational systems that support folk psychology, folk biology, and folk physics. Innovations that enabled better control of ecologies or social dynamics or resulted in a coherent (though not necessarily scientifically accurate) understanding of these dynamics are likely to be retained across generations as cultural artifacts (e.g., books) and traditions (e.g.

apprenticeships ). These advances result in an ever growing gap between folk knowledge and the theories and knowledge base of the associated sciences and other disciplines (e.g., literature ).

2.) Schools emerge in societies in which scientific, technological, and intellectual advances result in a gap between folk knowledge and the competencies needed for living in the society.

3.) The function of schools is to organize the activities of children such that they acquire the biologically secondary competencies that close the gap between folk knowledge and the occupational and social demands of the society .

4.) Biologically secondary competencies are built from primary folk systems and the components of fluid intelligence that evolved to enable individuals to cope with variation and novelty.

5.) Children's inherent motivational bias to engage in activities that will adapt folk knowledge to local conditions will often conflict with the need to engage in activities that will result in secondary learning.

6.) The need for explicit instruction will be a direct function of the degree to which the secondary competency differs from the supporting primary systems.

See also [ edit ] Dual inheritance theory Educational psychology Evolutionary developmental psychology Evolutionary psychology Human behavioral ecology Wikibook about educational psychology References [ edit ] Baumeister, R. F. (2005).

The cultural animal: Human nature, meaning, and social life . New York: Oxford University Press.

Bernhard, J. Gary (1988). Primates in the Classroom: An Evolutionary Perspective on Children's Education. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press .

Burman, J. T.  (in press).  Experimenting in relation to Piaget: Education is a Chaperoned Process of Adaptation.

Perspectives on Science, 16 (2).

Caramazza, A., & Shelton, J. R. (1998).

Domain-specific knowledge systems in the brain: The animate-inanimate distinction .

Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 10, 1-34.

Chiappe, D., & MacDonald, K. (2005).

The evolution of domain-general mechanisms in intelligence and learning .

Journal of General Psychology , 132, 5-40.

Cobb, P., Yackel, E., & Wood, T. (1992).  A constructivist alternative to the representational view of mind in mathematics education.

Journal for Research in Mathematics Education , 23, 2-33. ( Abstract ) Cosmides, L.

, & Tooby, J.

(1994). Origins of domain specificity: The evolution of functional organization. In L. A. Hirschfeld & S. A. Gelman (Eds.), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture (pp. 85–116). New York: Cambridge University Press. ( Abstract ) Flinn, M. V. (1997).

Culture and the evolution of social learning .

Evolution and Human Behavior , 18, 23–67.

Geary, D.C.

(2007).

Educating the Evolved Mind [ permanent dead link ] . In J.S. Carlson & J.R. Levin(Eds.), Psychological Perspectives on Contemporary Educational Issues (p. 28). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing. (Cited with permission by author) Geary, D. C. (2005).

The origin of mind: Evolution of brain, cognition, and general intelligence . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Geary, D. C. (2002).

Principles of evolutionary educational psychology .

Learning and Individual Differences , 12, 317–345.

Geary, D. C., & Huffman, K. J. (2002).

Brain and cognitive evolution: Forms of modularity and functions of mind .

Psychological Bulletin , 128, 667–698.

Geary, D. C. (1995).

Reflections of evolution and culture in children's cognition: Implications for mathematical development and instruction .

American Psychologist , 50, 24–37.

Gelman, R., & Williams, E. M. (1998).

Enabling constraints for cognitive development and learning: Domain-specificity and epigenesis . In D. Kuhl & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.), Cognition, perception, and language , Vol 2 (pp. 575–630). W. Damon (Gen. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology (Fifth Ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Gelman, R. (1990).

First principles organize attention to and learning about relevant data: Number and animate-inanimate distinction as examples .

Cognitive Science , 14, 79–106.

Gelman, S. A. (2003).

The essential child: Origins of essentialism in everyday thought . New York: Oxford University Press.

Mithen, S. (1996).

The prehistory of the mind:  The cognitive origins of art and science .  New York:  Thames and Hudson, Inc.

Pinker, S. (1997).

How the mind works . New York: W. W. Norton & Co.

Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2005).

Not by genes alone: How culture transformed human evolution . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Excerpt Shepard, R. N. (1994). Perceptual-cognitive universals as reflections of the world.

Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 1, 2-28. ( Abstract ) Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of the environment.

Psychological Review , 63, 129–138.

Simonton, D. K. (1999a). Talent and its development: An emergenic and epigenetic model.

Psychological Review , 106, 435–457. ( Abstract ) Simonton, D. K. (1999b).

Origins of genius: Darwinian perspective on creativity . New York: Oxford University Press.

Simonton, D. K. (2003). Scientific creativity as constrained stochastic behavior: The integration of product, person, and process perspectives.

Psychological Bulletin , 129, 475–494. ( Abstract ) Sternberg, R. J. (Ed.) (1999).

Handbook of creativity . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2005).

Creativity and occupational accomplishments among intellectually precocious youths: An age 13 to age 33 longitudinal study .

Journal of Educational Psychology , 97, 484–492.

Further reading [ edit ] Geary, D. C. (2006).

Evolutionary developmental psychology: Current status and future directions .

Developmental Review, 26 .

Geary, D. C. (2005).

Folk knowledge and academic learning.

In B. J. Ellis & D. F. Bjorklund (Eds.), Origins of the social mind (pp. 493–519). New York: Guilford Publications.

Geary, D. C. (2004).

Evolution and cognitive development.

In R. Burgess & K. MacDonald (Eds.), Evolutionary perspectives on human development (pp. 99–133). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Genovese, J.E.C. (2003).

Piaget, Pedagogy, and Evolutionary Psychology .

Evolutionary Psychology 1: 127–137.

J. Henrich and R. Boyd. (2002).

Culture and Cognition: Why Cultural Evolution Does Not Require Replication of Representations .

Culture and Cognition, 2: 87–112.

Zentall, T.R. (2006). Imitation: Definitions, evidence, and mechanisms.

Animal Cognition, 9, 335–353. (A thorough review of different types of social learning) Full text v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal v t e Education Overview General Glossary Index Outline By perspective Aims and objectives Learning standards Anthropology Assessment Evaluation Course evaluation Psychometrics Standards-based Standardized test Teacher quality Economics Spending Free education Tuition payments Education sciences Evidence-based History Inclusion Leadership Neuroscience Pedagogy Philosophy Policy Politics Psychology Research Rights Sociology Technology Instructional Instructional design By subject Agricultural Art Bilingual Business Chemistry Computer science Death Design Economics Engineering Environmental Euthenics Health Language Legal Mathematics Medical Military Music Nursing Peace Performing arts Philosophy Physical Physics Reading Religious Science Sex Teacher Technology Values Vocational Alternative Adult education Autodidacticism Democratic Education reform Gifted education Homeschooling Religious education Special education Concepts 21st century skills Accreditation Accreditation mill Bloom's taxonomy Board of education Cognitive load Classroom management Class arrangement Compulsory education Critical thinking Curriculum Bias Development Hidden Studies Theory Diploma mill Learning theory Desirable difficulty Spacing effect Testing effect Lesson plan Pedagogical pattern School choice School discipline Teacher look Teacher retention Teaching method Active learning Blended learning Contemplative Demonstration Dialogic learning Experiential Feedback Passive Peer instruction Personalized Phenomenon-based Problem-based Problem solving Project-based Student-centered Socratic Teaching philosophy Wikimedia Books Definitions Images Learning resources News Quotes Texts Stages Early childhood education Primary education Secondary education Tertiary education Preschool → Kindergarten → Primary school → Infant → Junior → Secondary school → Middle school → High school → Higher education Vocational Further ( Continuing ) Undergraduate → Postgraduate Portal Education by region Education in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Education in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Education in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Education in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Education in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Education in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Schools portal Category WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolutionary_educational_psychology&oldid=1295889217 " Categories : Educational psychology Evolutionary psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 13:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolutionary educational psychology 2 languages Add topic

