Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Related terminology 2 Role in open access 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Postprint 8 languages বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Français 한국어 Polski Română Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Postprints ) Electronic version of a scholarly manuscript after peer review Typical publishing workflow for an academic journal article ( preprint , postprint, and published ) with open access sharing rights per SHERPA/RoMEO .

Example of a page from an eNeuro accepted manuscript, 2019 A postprint is a digital draft of a research journal article after it has been peer reviewed and accepted for publication, but before it has been typeset and formatted by the journal.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Related terminology [ edit ] A digital draft before peer review is called a preprint .

Postprints are also sometimes called accepted author manuscripts ( AAMs ), because they are the version accepted by the journal after the author has addressed the peer reviewer comments.

[ 2 ] Jointly, postprints and preprints are called eprints .

[ 3 ] Postprints are variously referred to by different publishers as pre-proofs , author's original version and variations of these.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] After typesetting by a journal, authors will often be provided with proofs (the draft of the final formatting) and finally the version that is published is called the published/publisher's version .

[ 6 ] The term postprint used to also refer to the formatted publishers version, [ 7 ] however usage has narrowed to refer only to the current definition of accepted but unformatted.

[ 1 ] Role in open access [ edit ] Journal publication licenses typically claim copyright over the typeset and formatted version, but permit authors to release the postprint version as open access ( self-archiving ).

[ 8 ] This is often termed green open access , and enables access and reuse of material even in paywalled subscription journals (typically under a creative commons license ). Permission by the journal to release a postprint may be immediate or after an embargo period, with licensing terms for most journals collected in the Sherpa/Romeo database.

[ 1 ] Since the advent of the Open Archives Initiative , preprints and postprints have been deposited in institutional repositories , which are interoperable because they are compliant with the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting .

Eprints are at the heart of the open access initiative to make research freely accessible online. Eprints were first deposited or self-archived in arbitrary websites and then harvested by virtual archives such as CiteSeer (and, more recently, Google Scholar ), or they were deposited in central disciplinary archives such as arXiv or PubMed Central .

See also [ edit ] Ahead-of-print References [ edit ] ^ a b c "SHERPA RoMEO Colours, Pre-print, Post-print, Definitions and Terms" .

www.sherpa.ac.uk . Archived from the original on Feb 5, 2020 . Retrieved 2020-02-05 .

^ a b "What is pre-print, submitted version, post-print, accepted version, and publisher's PDF? - Library FAQs" .

libfaq.nus.edu.sg . Retrieved 2020-02-05 .

^ Harnad, Stevan (2003).

"Electronic Preprints and Postprints" .

Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science . Vol. LXVII.

Marcel Dekker .

^ Wendy, Thun (2020).

"What is a pre-print, submitted version, post-print, accepted version, and publisher's PDF?" .

nus.edu.sg . National University of Singapore . Retrieved 2021-01-18 .

^ Inefuku, Harrison (2013).

"Pre-Print, Post-Print or Offprint? A guide to publication versions, permissions and the digital repository" .

iastate.edu . Iowa State University . Retrieved 2021-01-18 .

^ Yates, Elizabeth.

"Research Guides: Scholarly Communication and Open Access: Pre-prints, post-prints and final articles: what's the difference" .

researchguides.library.brocku.ca . Retrieved 2020-02-05 .

^ "Publisher's glossary" .

crossref.org . 2011-08-30. Archived from the original on 2011-08-30.

^ Inefuku, Harrison (2013-01-14).

"Pre-Print, Post-Print or Offprint? A guide to publication versions, permissions and the digital repository" .

Digital Repository Outreach and Workshops . Iowa State University.

Further reading [ edit ] Danny Smith (23 October 2018).

"You say tomato, I say accepted manuscript" .

Open Access and Digital Scholarship Blog . Imperial College London.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Postprint .

v t e Open access History Timeline Concepts Gratis versus libre Subscription business model Subscribe to Open Paywall Copyright transfer agreement Academic journal Scientific journal Manuscript Preprint Postprint Article processing charge Predatory publishing Statements Budapest Open Access Initiative Berlin Declaration Bethesda Statement DORA Durham Statement Geneva Declaration NIH Public Access Policy Research Works Act Strategies Self-archiving Open-access mandate Open-access repository Hybrid open-access journal Delayed open-access journal Projects and organizations The Cost of Knowledge Creative Commons Directory of Open Access Books [ ca ; es ] Directory of Open Access Journals Initiative for Open Citations Open Access Scholarly Publishing Association OpenAIRE Open Archives Initiative Open Knowledge Foundation Open Society Foundations Plan S Public Library of Science Public Knowledge Project Registry of Open Access Repositories Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition SciELO Sci-Hub By country Australia Austria Belgium Canada Denmark France Germany Greece Hungary India Republic of Ireland Italy Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Spain Sweden Ukraine Other Access to Knowledge movement Access2Research List of open-access journals Open content Open data Open education Open government Open hardware Open knowledge Open science Open source Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postprint&oldid=1210104289 " Categories : Academic publishing Open access (publishing) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 February 2024, at 00:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postprint 8 languages Add topic

