Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background information Toggle Background information subsection 1.1 Obstacles and events before the Council's problem area 1.2 A general, free council in Germany 2 Occasion, sessions, and attendance Toggle Occasion, sessions, and attendance subsection 2.1 Sessions 2.1.1 Pre-council 2.1.2 First period 2.1.3 Second period 2.1.4 Third period 3 Objectives and overall results 4 Decrees Toggle Decrees subsection 4.1 Practical 4.2 Ratification and promulgation 5 Publication of documents 6 List of doctrinal decrees 7 Protestant response 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Council of Trent 71 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Nouormand Occitan Picard Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roman Catholic Church ecumenical council 1545–1563 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Council of Trent" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Council of Trent Council of Trent, painting in the Museo del Palazzo del Buonconsiglio, Trento Date 13 December 1545 – 4 December 1563 Accepted by Roman Catholic Church Previous council Fifth Council of the Lateran Next council First Vatican Council Convoked by Pope Paul III President Pope Paul III Pope Julius III Pope Pius IV Attendance About 255 during the final sessions Topics Protestantism , Counter-Reformation Documents and statements Seventeen dogmatic decrees covering then-disputed aspects of Catholic religion Chronological list of ecumenical councils Part of a series on the Counter-Reformation Faith, or The Church Triumphant (1665) by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo Catholic Reformation and Revival Councils and documents Council of Trent Exsurge Domine Decet Romanum Pontificem Confutatio Augustana Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Roman Catechism Nova ordinantia eclessiastica Defensio Tridentinæ fidei Regnans in Excelsis Ascendente Domino Immensa aeterni Dei Unigenitus Politics Diet of Worms Catholic League Augsburg Interim European wars of religion Dalecarlian rebellions German Peasants' War Wars of Kappel Tyrone's Rebellion Olav Engelbrektsson 's rebellion Pilgrimage of Grace Bigod's rebellion Dacke War Schmalkaldic War Prayer Book Rebellion French Wars of Religion Strasbourg Bishops' War Thirty Years' War Bohemian Revolt Rohan Wars Jacobite rising of 1689 Spirituality Confraternities Devotionalism French school of spirituality Gregorian chant Ignatian spirituality Interior life Mariology Popular piety Rosary Sacred Heart Spanish mysticism Tridentine Mass Transubstantiation Works of mercy Art Schools Mannerism Polyphony Baroque Flemish Baroque Spanish Golden Age Artists Federico Barocci Gian Lorenzo Bernini Caravaggio Annibale Carracci Ludovico Carracci Anthony van Dyck Domenico Fontana Artemisia Gentileschi Luca Giordano El Greco Jacobus de Kerle Giovanni Lanfranco Orlando di Lasso Bartolomé Esteban Murillo Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina Mattia Preti Andrea Pozzo Scipione Pulzone Guido Reni Jusepe de Ribera Peter Paul Rubens Vincenzo Ruffo Tintoretto Titian Georges de La Tour Juan de Valdés Leal Francisco de Zurbarán People People Teresa of Ávila Thomas More Clergy Robert Bellarmine Charles Borromeo Joseph Calasanz Peter Canisius Erasmus Ignatius of Loyola Johann Eckk John Fisher John of the Cross Lawrence of Brindisi Péter Pázmány Philip Neri Matteo Ricci Cardinal Richelieu Francis de Sales Francisco Suárez Francis Xavier Monarchs Charles V Ferdinand II Leopold I Louis XIV Mary I Maximilian I Catherine de' Medici Philip II Sigismund I Sigismund III William V Popes Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Pius III Paul III Julius III Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Inquisition Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith Excommunicable offences Index Librorum Prohibitorum Portuguese Inquisition Roman Inquisition Spanish Inquisition Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition Philosophy and education Collegium Germanicum et Hungaricum Pontifical Gregorian University Second scholasticism School of Salamanca Molinism Religious orders Augustinian Recollects Barnabites Capuchins Discalced Augustinians Discalced Carmelites Jesuits Oratorians Piarists Theatines Ursulines Related topics Catholic literary revival History of Germany Holy Roman Empire Nationalism in the Middle Ages Nation-building Proto-Protestantism Reformation Renaissance Catholic Church portal v t e Part of a series on the Ecumenical councils of the Catholic Church Renaissance depiction of the Council of Trent 4th–5th centuries Nicaea I (325) Constantinople I (381) Ephesus (431) Chalcedon (451) 6th–9th centuries Constantinople II (553) Constantinople III (680–681) Nicaea II (787) Constantinople IV (869–870) 12th–14th centuries Lateran I (1123) Lateran II (1139) Lateran III (1179) Lateran IV (1215) Lyon I (1245) Lyon II (1274) Vienne (1311–1312) 15th–16th centuries Constance (1414–1418) Basel-Ferrara-Florence (1431–1445) Lateran V (1512–1517) Trent (1545–1563) 19th–20th centuries Vatican I (1869–1870) Vatican II (1962–1965) Catholic Church portal v t e The Council of Trent ( Latin : Concilium Tridentinum ), held between 1545 and 1563 in Trent (or Trento), now in northern Italy , was the 19th ecumenical council of the Roman Catholic Church .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Prompted by the Protestant Reformation at the time, it has been described as the "most impressive embodiment of the ideals of the Counter-Reformation ." [ 3 ] It was the last time a Catholic ecumenical council was organized outside the city of Rome , & the second time to be convened in the territory of the Holy Roman Empire (the first being the Council of Constance ).

The Council issued key statements and clarifications of the Church's doctrine and teachings, including scripture , the biblical canon , sacred tradition , original sin , justification , salvation , the sacraments , the Mass , and the veneration of saints [ 4 ] and also issued condemnations of what it defined to be heresies committed by proponents of Protestantism . The consequences of the council were also significant with regard to the Church's liturgy and censorship.

The Council met for twenty-five sessions between 13 December 1545 and 4 December 1563.

[ 5 ] Pope Paul III , who convoked the council, oversaw the first eight sessions (1545–1547), while the twelfth to sixteenth sessions (1551–52) were overseen by Pope Julius III and the seventeenth to twenty-fifth sessions (1562–63) by Pope Pius IV . More than three hundred years passed until the next ecumenical council, the First Vatican Council , was convened in 1869.

Background information [ edit ] Obstacles and events before the Council's problem area [ edit ] Pope Paul III, convener of the Council of Trent, portrait by Titian (1543) On 15 March 1517, the Fifth Council of the Lateran closed its activities with a number of reform proposals (on the selection of bishops, taxation, censorship and preaching) but not on the new major problems that confronted the Church in Germany and other parts of Europe. A few months later, on 31 October 1517, Martin Luther issued his 95 Theses in Wittenberg .

A general, free council in Germany [ edit ] Luther's position on ecumenical councils shifted over time, [ 6 ] but in 1520 he appealed to the German princes to oppose the papal Church at the time, if necessary with a council in Germany, [ 7 ] open and free of the Papacy. After the Pope condemned in Exsurge Domine fifty-two of Luther's theses as heresy , German opinion considered a council the best method to reconcile existing differences. German Catholics, diminished in number, hoped for a council to clarify matters.

[ 8 ] It took a generation for the council to materialise, partly due to papal fears over potentially renewing a schism over conciliarism ; partly because Lutherans demanded the exclusion of the papacy from the council; partly because of ongoing political rivalries between France and the Holy Roman Empire ; and partly due to the Turkish dangers in the Mediterranean.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Under Pope Clement VII (1523–34), mutinous troops, many of whom were Lutheran belonging to the Catholic Holy Roman Emperor Charles V , sacked Papal Rome in 1527, "raping, killing, burning, stealing, the like had not been seen since the Vandals ".

Saint Peter's Basilica and the Sistine Chapel were used for horses.

[ 10 ] Pope Clement, fearful of the potential for more violence, delayed calling the council.

[ 9 ] Charles V strongly favoured a council but needed the support of King Francis I of France, who attacked him militarily. Francis I generally opposed a general council due to partial support of the Protestant cause within France. Charles' younger brother Ferdinand of Austria , who ruled a huge swath of territory in central Europe, agreed in 1532 to the Nuremberg Religious Peace granting religious liberty to the Protestants, and in 1533 he further complicated matters when suggesting a general council to include both Catholic and Protestant rulers of Europe that would devise a compromise between the two theological systems. This proposal met the opposition of the Pope, for it gave recognition to Protestants and also elevated the secular Princes of Europe above the clergy on church matters. Faced with a Turkish attack, Charles held the support of the Protestant German rulers, all of whom delayed the opening of the Council of Trent.

[ 11 ] Occasion, sessions, and attendance [ edit ] The Council of Trent , depicted by Pasquale Cati in 1588 (Cati da Iesi) In the to-and-fro of medieval politics , Pope Pius II , in his bull Execrabilis (1460) and his reply to the University of Cologne (1463), had set aside the theory of the supremacy of general councils laid down by the Council of Constance , [ 12 ] which had also called for frequent ecumenical councils every ten years to cope with the backlog of reform and heresies.

[ 13 ] Martin Luther had appealed for a general council, in response to the Papal bull Exsurge Domine of Pope Leo X (1520). In 1522 German diets joined in the appeal, with Charles V seconding and pressing for a council as a means of reunifying the Church and settling the Reformation controversies.

Pope Clement VII (1523–34) was vehemently against the idea of a council, agreeing with Francis I of France .

Sessions [ edit ] The history of the council is divided into three distinct periods: 1545–1549, 1551–1552 and 1562–1563.

The number of attending members in the three periods varied considerably.

[ 12 ] The council was small to begin with, opening with only about 30 bishops.

[ 14 ] It increased toward the close, but never reached the number of the First Council of Nicaea (which had 318 members) [ 12 ] nor of the First Vatican Council (which numbered 744). The decrees were signed in 1563 by 255 members, the highest attendance of the whole council, [ 14 ] including four papal legates, two cardinals, three patriarchs, twenty-five archbishops, and 168 bishops, two-thirds of whom were Italians. The Italian and Spanish prelates were vastly preponderant in power and numbers. At the passage of the most important decrees, not more than sixty prelates were present.

[ 12 ] Although most Protestants did not attend, ambassadors and theologians of Brandenburg, Württemberg, and Strasbourg attended having been granted an improved safe conduct .

[ 15 ] Pre-council [ edit ] Pope Paul III (1534–1549), seeing that the Protestant Reformation was no longer confined to a few preachers, but had won over various princes, especially in Germany, to its ideas, desired a council. Yet when he proposed the idea to his cardinals , it was almost unanimously opposed. Nonetheless, he sent nuncios throughout Europe to propose the idea. Paul III issued a decree for a general council to be held in Mantua , Italy, to begin on 23 May 1537.

[ 16 ] Martin Luther wrote the Smalcald Articles in preparation for the general council. The Smalcald Articles were designed to sharply define where the Lutherans could and could not compromise. The council was ordered by the Emperor and Pope Paul III to convene in Mantua on 23 May 1537.

It failed to convene after another war broke out between France and Charles V, resulting in a non-attendance of French prelates . Protestants refused to attend as well. Financial difficulties in Mantua led the Pope in the autumn of 1537 to move the council to Vicenza , where participation was poor. The council was postponed indefinitely on 21 May 1539.

Pope Paul III then initiated several internal Church reforms while Emperor Charles V convened with Protestants and Cardinal Gasparo Contarini at the Diet of Regensburg , to reconcile differences. Mediating and conciliatory formulations were developed on certain topics. In particular, a two-part doctrine of justification was formulated that would later be rejected at Trent.

[ 17 ] Unity failed between Catholic and Protestant representatives "because of different concepts of Church and Justification ".

[ 18 ] First period [ edit ] However, the council was delayed until 1545 and, as it happened, convened right before Luther's death. Unable, however, to resist the urging of Charles V, the pope, after proposing Mantua as the place of meeting, convened the council at Trent (at that time ruled by a prince-bishop under the Holy Roman Empire ), [ 12 ] on 13 December 1545; the Pope's decision to transfer it to Bologna in March 1547 on the pretext of avoiding a plague [ 3 ] failed to take effect and the council was indefinitely prorogued on 17 September 1549. None of the three popes reigning over the duration of the council ever attended, which had been a condition of Charles V.

Papal legates were appointed to represent the Papacy.

[ 19 ] Second period [ edit ] Reopened at Trent on 1 May 1551 by the convocation of Pope Julius III (1550–1555), it was broken up by the sudden victory of Maurice, Elector of Saxony over Emperor Charles V and his march into surrounding state of Tirol on 28 April 1552.

[ 20 ] There was no hope of reassembling the council while the very anti-Protestant Paul IV was Pope.

[ 3 ] During the second period, the Protestants present asked for a renewed discussion on points already defined and for bishops to be released from their oaths of allegiance to the Pope. When the last period began, all intentions of conciliating the Protestants was gone and the Jesuits had become a strong force.

[ 3 ] This last period was begun especially as an attempt to prevent the formation of a general council including Protestants , as had been demanded by some in France.

Third period [ edit ] The council was reconvened by Pope Pius IV (1559–1565) for the last time, meeting from 18 January 1562 at Santa Maria Maggiore , and continued until its final adjournment on 4 December 1563. It closed with a series of ritual acclamations honouring the reigning Pope, the Popes who had convoked the council, the emperor and the kings who had supported it, the papal legates, the cardinals, the ambassadors present, and the bishops, followed by acclamations of acceptance of the faith of the council and its decrees, and of anathema for all heretics.

[ 21 ] The French monarchy boycotted the entire council until the last minute when a delegation led by Charles de Guise, Cardinal of Lorraine finally arrived in November 1562. The first outbreak of the French Wars of Religion had occurred earlier in the year and the French Church, facing a significant and powerful Protestant minority in France, experienced iconoclasm violence regarding the use of sacred images.  Such concerns were not primary in the Italian and Spanish Churches.

[ 22 ] The last-minute inclusion of a decree on sacred images was a French initiative, and the text, never discussed on the floor of the council or referred to council theologians, was based on a French draft.

[ 23 ] Objectives and overall results [ edit ] Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e The main objectives of the council were twofold: To condemn the principles and doctrines of Protestantism and to clarify the doctrines of the Catholic Church on all disputed points. This had not been done formally since the 1530 Confutatio Augustana . It is true that the emperor intended it to be a strictly general or truly ecumenical council, at which the Protestants should have a fair hearing. He secured, during the council's second period, 1551–1553, an invitation, twice given, to the Protestants to be present and the council issued a letter of safe conduct (thirteenth session) and offered them the right of discussion, but denied them a vote.

Melanchthon and Johannes Brenz , with some other German Lutherans, actually started in 1552 on the journey to Trent. Brenz offered a confession and Melanchthon, who got no farther than Nuremberg , took with him the Confessio Saxonica . But the refusal to give the Protestants the vote and the consternation produced by the success of Maurice in his campaign against Charles V in 1552 effectually put an end to Protestant cooperation.

[ 12 ] To effect a reformation in discipline or administration . This object had been one of the causes calling forth the reformatory councils and had been lightly touched upon by the Fifth Council of the Lateran under Pope Julius II . The obvious corruption in the administration of the Church was one of the numerous causes of the Reformation. Twenty-five public sessions were held, but nearly half of them were spent in solemn formalities. The chief work was done in committees or congregations. The entire management was in the hands of the papal legate. The liberal elements lost out in the debates and voting. The council abolished some of the most notorious abuses and introduced or recommended disciplinary reforms affecting the sale of indulgences , the morals of convents, the education of the clergy, the non-residence of bishops (also bishops having plurality of benefices , which was fairly common), and the careless fulmination of censures , and forbade duelling. Although evangelical sentiments were uttered by some of the members in favour of the supreme authority of the Scriptures and justification by faith, no concession whatsoever was made to Protestantism, according to a Protestant source.

[ 12 ] Specific issues that were discussed included: The Church as the ultimate interpreter of Scripture.

[ 24 ] Also, the Bible and church tradition (the tradition that composed part of the Catholic faith) were equally and independently authoritative.

The relationship of faith and works in salvation was defined, following controversy over Martin Luther 's doctrine of " justification by faith alone ".

Other Catholic practices that had drawn the ire of reformers within the Church, such as indulgences , pilgrimages, the veneration of saints and relics , and the veneration of the Virgin Mary were strongly reaffirmed, though abuses of them were forbidden. Decrees concerning sacred music and religious art, though inexplicit, were subsequently amplified by theologians and writers to condemn many types of Renaissance and medieval styles and iconographies , impacting heavily on the development of these art forms.

The doctrinal decisions of the council were set forth in  decrees ( decreta ), which are divided into chapters ( capita ), which contain the positive statement of the conciliar dogmas , and into short canons ( canones ), which condemn incorrect views (often a Protestant-associated notion stated in an extreme form) with the concluding anathema sit ("let him be anathema " i.e., excluded from the society of the faithful).

[ 12 ] The consequences of the council were also significant with regard to the Church's liturgy and practices. In its decrees, the council made the Latin Vulgate the official biblical text of the Roman Church (without prejudice to the original texts in Hebrew and Greek, nor to other traditional translations of the Church, but favoring the Latin language over vernacular translations, such as the controversial English-language Tyndale Bible ).

[ 25 ] In doing so, they commissioned the creation of a revised and standardized Vulgate in light of textual criticism, although this was not achieved until the 1590s. The council also officially affirmed the traditional Catholic Canon of biblical books, which was identical to the canon of Scripture issued by the Council of Rome under Pope Damasus in 382.

[ 26 ] This was in response to the increasing Protestant exclusion of the deuterocanonical books .

[ 3 ] The former dogmatic affirmation of the Canonical books was at the Council of Florence in the 1441 bull Cantate Domino , as affirmed by Pope Leo XIII in his 1893 encyclical Providentissimus Deus (#20). In 1565, a year after the Council finished its work, Pius IV issued the Tridentine Creed (after Tridentum , Trent's Latin name) and his successor Pius V then issued the Roman Catechism and revisions of the Breviary and Missal in, respectively, 1566, 1568 and 1570. These, in turn, led to the codification of the Tridentine Mass , which remained the Church's primary form of the Mass for the next four hundred years.

Decrees [ edit ] The doctrinal acts are as follows: After reaffirming the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed (third session), the decree was passed (fourth session) confirming that the deuterocanonical books were on a par with the other books of the canon (against Luther's placement of these books in the Apocrypha of his edition ) and coordinating church tradition with the Scriptures as a rule of faith. The Vulgate translation was affirmed to be authoritative for the text of Scripture.

[ 12 ] Justification (sixth session) was declared to be offered upon the basis of human cooperation with divine grace [ 12 ] ( synergism ) as opposed to the typical Protestant doctrine of passive reception of grace ( monergism ). Understanding the Protestant " faith alone " doctrine to be one of simple human confidence in Divine Mercy , the Council rejected the " vain confidence " of the Protestants, stating that no one can know infallibly who has received the grace of final perseverance apart from receiving a special revelation.  Furthermore, the Council affirmed—against some Protestants—that the grace of God can be forfeited through mortal sin .

The greatest weight in the council's decrees is given to the sacraments . The seven sacraments were reaffirmed and the Eucharist pronounced to be a true propitiatory sacrifice as well as a sacrament, in which the bread and wine were consecrated into the Eucharist (thirteenth and twenty-second sessions). The term transubstantiation was used by the council, but the specific Aristotelian explanation given by Scholasticism was not cited as dogmatic. Instead, the decree states that Christ is "really, truly, substantially present" in the consecrated forms. The sacrifice of the Mass was to be offered for dead and living alike and in giving to the apostles the command "do this in remembrance of me," Christ conferred upon them a sacerdotal power. The practice of withholding the cup from the laity was confirmed (twenty-first session) as one which the Church Fathers had commanded for good and sufficient reasons; yet in certain cases the Pope was made the supreme arbiter as to whether the rule should be strictly maintained.

[ 12 ] Ordination (twenty-third session) was defined to imprint an indelible character on the soul. The priesthood of the New Testament takes the place of the Levitical priesthood. To the performance of its functions, the consent of the people is not necessary.

[ 12 ] In the decrees on marriage (twenty-fourth session) the excellence of the celibate state was reaffirmed, concubinage condemned and the validity of marriage made dependent upon the wedding taking place before a priest and two witnesses, although the lack of a requirement for parental consent ended a debate that had proceeded from the 12th century. In the case of a divorce , the right of the innocent party to marry again was denied so long as the other party was alive, [ 12 ] even if the other party had committed adultery. However the council "refused … to assert the necessity or usefulness of clerical celibacy ".

[ 27 ] [ dubious – discuss ] In the twenty-fifth and last session, [ 28 ] the doctrines of purgatory , the invocation of saints and the veneration of relics were reaffirmed, as was also the efficacy of indulgences as dispensed by the Church according to the power given her, but with some cautionary recommendations, [ 12 ] and a ban on the sale of indulgences. Short and rather inexplicit passages concerning religious images, were to have great impact on the development of Catholic Church art . Much more than the Second Council of Nicaea (787), the Council fathers of Trent stressed the pedagogical purpose of Christian images.

[ 29 ] Baroque Art is in part a consequence of the Council of Trent more specifically its twenty-fifth session where it emphasized that sacred art should educate the faithful, inspire devotion, and accurately represent biblical narratives. All this led to a renewed focus on emotional engagement and clarity in religious paintings. Due to these new directives, the Catholic Church began to promote baroque art characterized by dramatic compositions, chiaroscuro, and theatrical gestures. The churches adoption of the art style would help to increase its spread of influence.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Practical [ edit ] On the language of the Mass, "contrary to what is often said", the council condemned the insistence that only vernacular languages must be used, while affirming on the use of Latin for the Roman rite .

[ 27 ] However, elements of the Prône , the vernacular catechetical preaching service common in the medieval High Mass (and some extra-liturgical situations) [ 32 ] became mandatory for Sundays and feast days (fifth session, chapter 2).

[ 33 ] : 728 The council appointed, in 1562 (eighteenth session), a commission to prepare a list of forbidden books ( Index Librorum Prohibitorum ), but it later left the matter to the Pope. The preparation of a catechism and the revision of the Breviary and Missal were also left to the pope.

[ 12 ] The catechism embodied the council's far-reaching results, including reforms and definitions of the sacraments, the Scriptures, church dogma, and duties of the clergy.

[ 4 ] Ratification and promulgation [ edit ] On adjourning, the Council asked the supreme pontiff to ratify all its decrees and definitions. This petition was complied with by Pope Pius IV , on 26 January 1564, in the papal bull , Benedictus Deus , which enjoins strict obedience upon all Catholics and forbids, under pain of ex-communication , all unauthorised interpretation, reserving this to the Pope alone and threatens the disobedient with "the indignation of Almighty God and of his blessed apostles, Peter and Paul." Pope Pius appointed a commission of cardinals to assist him in interpreting and enforcing the decrees.

[ 12 ] The Index Librorum Prohibitorum was announced in 1564 and the following books were issued with the papal imprimatur : the Profession of the Tridentine Faith and the Tridentine Catechism (1566), the Breviary (1568), the Missal (1570) and the Vulgate (1590 and then 1592).

[ 12 ] The decrees of the council were acknowledged in Italy, Portugal, Poland and by the Catholic princes of Germany at the Diet of Augsburg in 1566.

Philip II of Spain accepted them for Spain, the Netherlands and Sicily inasmuch as they did not infringe the royal prerogative. In France, they were officially recognised by the king only in their doctrinal parts. Although the disciplinary or moral reformatory decrees were never published by the throne, they received official recognition at provincial synods and were enforced by the bishops. Holy Roman Emperors Ferdinand I and Maximilian II never recognized the existence of any of the decrees.

[ 34 ] No attempt was made to introduce it into England. Pius IV sent the decrees to Mary, Queen of Scots , with a letter dated 13 June 1564, requesting that she publish them in Scotland, but she dared not do it in the face of John Knox and the Reformation.

[ 12 ] These decrees were later supplemented by the First Vatican Council of 1870.

Publication of documents [ edit ] A comprehensive history is found in Hubert Jedin 's The History of the Council of Trent (Geschichte des Konzils von Trient) with about 2,500 pages in four volumes: The History of the Council of Trent: The fight for a Council (Vol I, 1951); The History of the Council of Trent: The first Sessions in Trent (1545–1547) (Vol II, 1957); The History of the Council of Trent: Sessions in Bologna 1547–1548 and Trento 1551–1552 (Vol III, 1970, 1998); The History of the Council of Trent: Third Period and Conclusion (Vol IV, 1976).

The canons and decrees of the council have been published very often and in many languages. The first issue was by Paulus Manutius (Rome, 1564). Commonly used Latin editions are by Judocus Le Plat (Antwerp, 1779) and by Johann Friedrich von Schulte and Aemilius Ludwig Richter (Leipzig, 1853). Other editions are in vol. vii. of the Acta et decreta conciliorum recentiorum. Collectio Lacensis (7 vols., Freiburg, 1870–90), reissued as independent volume (1892); Concilium Tridentinum: Diariorum, actorum, epistularum, … collectio , ed. Sebastianus Merkle (4 vols., Freiburg, 1901 sqq.); as well as Mansi , Concilia , xxxv. 345 sqq. Note also Carl Mirbt , Quellen , 2d ed, pp. 202–255. An English edition is by James Waterworth (London, 1848; With Essays on the External and Internal History of the Council ).

[ 12 ] The original acts and debates of the council, as prepared by its general secretary, Bishop Angelo Massarelli , in six large folio volumes, are deposited in the Vatican Library and remained there unpublished for more than 300 years and were brought to light, though only in part, by Augustin Theiner , priest of the oratory (d. 1874), in Acta genuina sancti et oecumenici Concilii Tridentini nunc primum integre edita (2 vols., Leipzig, 1874).

[ 12 ] Most of the official documents and private reports, however, which bear upon the council, were made known in the 16th century and since. The most complete collection of them is that of J. Le Plat, Monumentorum ad historicam Concilii Tridentini collectio (7 vols., Leuven, 1781–87). New materials (Vienna, 1872); by JJI von Döllinger ( Ungedruckte Berichte und Tagebücher zur Geschichte des Concilii von Trient , 2 parts, Nördlingen, 1876); and August von Druffel , Monumenta Tridentina (Munich, 1884–97).

[ 12 ] List of doctrinal decrees [ edit ] Decree Session Date Canons Chapters The Holy Scriptures 4 8 April 1546 none 1 Original sin 5 7 June 1546 5 4 Justification 6 13 January 1547 33 16 Sacraments 7 3 March 1547 13 1 Baptism 7 3 March 1547 14 none Confirmation 7 4 March 1547 3 none Holy Eucharist 13 11 October 1551 11 8 Penance 14 15 November 1551 15 15 Extreme Unction 14 4 November 1551 4 3 Matrimony 24 11 November 1563 12 10 Cults Saints Relics Images 25 4 December 1563 none 3 Indulgences 25 4 December 1563 none 1 Protestant response [ edit ] Andrada, a Catholic Chemnitz, a Lutheran Out of 87 books written between 1546 and 1564 attacking the Council of Trent, 41 were written by Pier Paolo Vergerio , a former papal nuncio turned Protestant Reformer.

[ 35 ] The 1565–73 Examen decretorum Concilii Tridentini [ 36 ] ( Examination of the Council of Trent ) by Martin Chemnitz was the main Lutheran response to the Council of Trent.

[ 37 ] Making extensive use of scripture and patristic sources, it was presented in response to a polemical writing which Diogo de Payva de Andrada had directed against Chemnitz.

[ 38 ] The Examen had four parts: Volume I examined sacred scripture, [ 39 ] free will, original sin, justification, and good works. Volume II examined the sacraments, [ 40 ] including baptism, confirmation, the sacrament of the Eucharist, [ 41 ] communion under both kinds, the Mass, penance, extreme unction, holy orders, and matrimony. Volume III examined virginity, celibacy, purgatory, and the invocation of saints.

[ 42 ] Volume IV examined the relics of the saints, images, indulgences, fasting, the distinction of foods, and festivals.

[ 43 ] In response, Andrada wrote the five-part Defensio Tridentinæ fidei , [ 44 ] which was published posthumously in 1578. However, the Defensio did not circulate as extensively as the Examen , nor were full translations initially published. A French translation of the Examen by Eduard Preuss was published in 1861. German translations were published in 1861, 1884, and 1972. In English, a complete translation by Fred Kramer drawing from the original Latin and the 1861 German was published beginning in 1971.

See also [ edit ] Nicolas Psaume , bishop of Verdun Black Legend (Spain) Popery Council of Jerusalem-Bethlehem Notes [ edit ] ^ Joseph Francis Kelly, The Ecumenical Councils of the Catholic Church: A History , (Liturgical Press, 2009), 126–148.

^ This would be the last time that an ecumenical council would be held outside of Rome and in the territory of the Holy Roman Empire .

^ a b c d e "Trent, Council of" in Cross, F. L. (ed.) The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church , Oxford University Press, 2005 ( ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 ).

^ a b Wetterau, Bruce.

World History . New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1994.

^ Hubert Jedin, Konciliengeschichte , Verlag Herder , Freiburg, [p.?] 138.

^ Jedin 1959 , p. 80.

^ An den Adel deutscher Nation (in German), 1520 ^ a b Jedin 1959 , p. 81.

^ a b "Clemente VII" .

Treccani.it (in Italian) . Retrieved 12 July 2021 .

Ma l'ostilità del papa alla convocazione di un concilio era grandissima e già allora ben conosciuta, tanto che l'ambasciatore di Carlo V, il duca di Sessa, non ebbe il coraggio di affrontare direttamente l'argomento. Concorrevano ad alimentare tale ostilità da un lato le ombre ancora vicine del conciliarismo e l'esperienza del contrasto coi "gallicani", dall'altro il timore che il concilio potesse trovare nella sua nascita illegittima un buon pretesto per deporlo (ancora durante il conclave di Adriano VI, Soderini lo aveva trattato pubblicamente da bastardo).

^ Hans Kühner Papstgeschichte, Fischer, Frankfurt 1960, 118 ^ Jedin 1959 , pp. 79–82.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication in the public domain : Jackson, Samuel Macauley, ed. (1914).

"Trent, Council of" .

New Schaff–Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge (third ed.). London and New York: Funk and Wagnalls.

^ Brookes, Andrew (15 June 2013).

"Councils of Faith: Constance (1414–18)" .

The Dominican Friars in Britain .

^ a b O'Malley, 29 ^ Erwin L. Lueker, Luther Poellot, Paul Jackson eds.

Trent, Council of Christian Cyclopedia, Concordia Publishing House: 2000 ^ Joseph Francis Kelly, The Ecumenical Councils of the Catholic Church: A History , 133.

^ Catholic OR Protestant? The Story of Contarini and the Reformation , fn. 7.

^ Jedin 85 ^ O'Malley, 29–30 ^ Trenkle, Franz Sales (3 March 2003).

"Council of Trent" . Retrieved 22 January 2008 .

^ "CT25" .

History Hanover .

^ Lindberg, Carter.

The European Reformations, 3rd Edition (3rd ed.). Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 27.

ISBN 9781119640745 .

^ O'Malley, 32–36 ^ Catechism of the Catholic Church Paragraph 85 ^ Lindberg, Carter (March 15, 2021).

The European Reformations (3rd ed.). Wiley-Blackwell. p. 305.

ISBN 978-1119640813 .

^ Cross, F. L.; Livingstone, E. A., eds. (2005-01-01). "canon of Scripture".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (3 ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 282.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780192802903.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ a b O'Malley, 31 ^ Council of Trent: Decree De invocatione, veneratione et reliquiis sanctorum, et de sacris imaginibus , 3 December 1563, Sessio 25.

^ Bühren 2008, p. 635f.; about the historical context of the decree on sacred images cf. Jedin 1935.

^ "1 | Music In The Baroque Era | Social and Cultural Influences" .

fraryguitar.com . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ "Biblical Narratives in the Baroque | Collections Online" .

artmuseum.indiana.edu . Retrieved 2025-03-20 .

^ "Prône | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com .

^ Lualdi, Katharine J. (2004).

"Persevering in the Faith: Catholic Worship and Communal Identity in the Wake of the Edict of Nantes" .

The Sixteenth Century Journal .

35 (3): 717– 734.

doi : 10.2307/20477042 .

ISSN 0361-0160 .

JSTOR 20477042 .

^ Meyer, Herbert T. (1962).

The Story of the Council of Trent . St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House. pp.

19– 20.

^ Lutheran Patristic Catholicity By Quentin D. Stewart, 2015 ^ Examen , Volumes I–II: Volume I begins on p. 46 of the pdf and Volume II begins on p. 311.

Examen Volumes III–IV: Volume III begins on p. 13 of the pdf and Volume IV begins on p. 298. All volumes free on Google Books ^ "This monumental work is to this day the classic Protestant answer to Trent." from page three of Martin Chemnitz on the Doctrine of Justification Archived 2017-04-01 at the Wayback Machine by Jacob A. O. Preus ^ Arthur Carl Piepkorn, 1966 Martin Chemnitz's views on Trent: the genesis and the genius of the Examen Concilii Tridentini .

^ Fred Kramer, Chemnitz on The Authority of The Sacred Scripture (An Examination) pp. 165–75 ^ Charles Henrickson, 2000 Chemnitz on Rites and Ceremonies Archived 2019-01-20 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Roland F. Ziegler Should Lutherans Reserve the Consecrated Elements for the Communion of the Sick?

, pp. 141ff.

^ Quentin D. Stewart, Lutheran Patristic Catholicity The Vincentian Canon and the Consensus Patrum in Lutheran Orthodoxy Series: Arbeiten zur Historischen und Systematischen Theologie, p. 82.

^ Mark Hanna, 2004 The Contribution of Martin Chemnitz to Our Lutheran Heritage , p. 9.

^ Defensio , 716 pp., free on Google Books.

References [ edit ] Bühren, Ralf van : Kunst und Kirche im 20. Jahrhundert. Die Rezeption des Zweiten Vatikanischen Konzils (Konziliengeschichte, Reihe B: Untersuchungen), Paderborn 2008, ISBN 978-3-506-76388-4 Jedin, Hubert (1959), Konziliengeschichte , Herder O'Malley, John W., in The Sensuous in the Counter-Reformation Church , Eds: Marcia B. Hall , Tracy E. Cooper, 2013, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1-107-01323-0 , google books James Waterworth (ed.), The Canons and Decrees of the Sacred and Oecumenical Council of Trent (1848) Further reading [ edit ] Dogmatic canons and decrees : authorized translations of the dogmatic decrees of the Council of Trent, the decree on the Immaculate Conception, the Syllabus of Pope Pius IX, and the decrees of the Vatican Council . New York: Devin-Adair Company. 1912.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2020 . Retrieved 6 October 2020 .

(with imprimatur of cardinal Farley ) Paolo Sarpi , Historia del Concilio Tridentino , London: John Bill,1619 ( History of the Council of Trent , English translation by Nathaniel Brent , London 1620, 1629 and 1676) Francesco Sforza Pallavicino , Istoria del concilio di Trento . In Roma, nella stamperia d'Angelo Bernabò dal Verme erede del Manelfi: per Giovanni Casoni libraro, 1656–57 John W. O'Malley: Trent: What Happened at the Council , Cambridge (Massachusetts), The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2013, ISBN 978-0-674-06697-7 Hubert Jedin : Entstehung und Tragweite des Trienter Dekrets über die Bilderverehrung , in: Tübinger Theologische Quartalschrift 116, 1935, pp. 143–88, 404–429 Hubert Jedin : Geschichte des Konzils von Trient , 4 vol., Freiburg im Breisgau 1949–1975 (A History of the Council of Trent, 2 vol., London 1957 and 1961) Hubert Jedin : Konziliengeschichte , Freiburg im Breisgau 1959 Mullett, Michael A. "The Council of Trent and the Catholic Reformation", in his The Catholic Reformation (London: Routledge, 1999, ISBN 0-415-18915-2 , pbk.), pp. 29–68.

N.B .: The author also mentions the Council elsewhere in his book.

Schroeder, H. J., ed. and trans.

The Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent: English Translation , trans. [and introduced] by H. J. Schroeder. Rockford, Ill.: TAN Books and Publishers, 1978.

N.B .: "The original 1941 edition contained [both] the Latin text and the English translation. This edition contains only the English translation..."; comprises only the council's dogmatic decrees, excluding the purely disciplinary ones.

Mathias Mütel: Mit den Kirchenvätern gegen Martin Luther? Die Debatten um Tradition und auctoritas patrum auf dem Konzil von Trient , Paderborn 2017 (= Konziliengeschichte . Reihe B., Untersuchungen) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Council of Trent .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Council of Trent .

Wikisource has original works on the topic: Council of Trent Listen to this article ( 29 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 21 August 2013 ( 2013-08-21 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Council of Trent" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

The text of the Council of Trent translated by J. Waterworth, 1848 ( also on Intratext ) Documents of the Council in Latin ZIP version of the documents of the Council of Trent (archived 9 October 2012) v t e Tridentine Mass of the Catholic Church Types Chapter and conventual Low Deutsche Singmesse Dialogue French Organ Missa cantata Missa Sicca Ritual Coronation Papal Requiem Nuptial Solemn Pontifical Papal Sine populo Votive Red Order Pre-Mass Vesting prayers Asperges me Vidi aquam in Eastertide Processional hymn Mass of the Catechumens Iudica me Confiteor mea culpa Introit Kyrie Gloria in excelsis Deo Collect Lection Gradual Alleluia or Tract Sequentia Gospel Homily Mass of the Faithful Credo Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed Offertory Lavabo Orate fratres Secret Preface Sursum corda Sanctus Hosanna Roman Canon Oblation Epiclesis Words of Institution Anamnesis Elevation Doxology Pater Noster Embolism Pax Agnus Dei Dona nobis pacem Fraction Holy Communion Communion antiphon Ablutions Postcommunio Dismissal Ite, missa est or Benedicamus Domino Last Gospel Post-Mass Leonine prayers Recessional hymn For funeral Mass Dies irae Lacrimosa Pie Iesu Libera Me Requiescant in pace Absolution of the dead In paradisum De profundis Participants Acolyte altar server Bishop Boat boy Cantor or schola Crucifer Deacon Laity Lector Master of ceremonies Porter Priest Subdeacon Altar Altar cards Altar crucifix Altar rails Ambo Antependium Credence table Kneeler Lavabo Misericord Piscina Sacristy Tabernacle Altar cloths Altar linens Antependium Burse Chalice veil Corporal Pall Purificator Illumination Altar (Catholic Church)#Candles and candlesticks Paschal candle Sanctuary lamp Triple candlestick Liturgical objects Altar bell Aspergillum Chalice Ciborium Collection basket Cruet Fistula Flabellum Funghellino Holy water Incense use Manuterge Paten Processional cross Pyx Sacramental bread wafer Sacramental wine (or must ) Thurible Literature Cæremoniale Episcoporum Missale Romanum Pontificale Romanum Rituale Romanum Vestments ( Pontifical / Papal ) Alb Amice Chasuble Cincture Cope Crosier Dalmatic Episcopal gloves Ecclesiastical ring Episcopal sandals Falda Humeral veil Liturgical lace Mitre Pallium Papal fanon Papal tiara Pectoral cross Stole Subcinctorium Superhumerale Surplice Tunicle Vimpa Music Antiphon Graduale Romanum Gregorian chant Hymn Kyriale Romanum Liber Usualis Music for the Requiem Mass Organ voluntary Organum Polyphony Reciting tone Accentus Recto tono Tra le sollecitudini Tonary Gregorian Antiphonary Liturgical year Calendar ( 1954 / 1955 / 1960 ) Advent Christmastide Epiphanytide Septuagesima Lent Passiontide Holy Week Paschal Triduum Eastertide Ascensiontide After Pentecost Calendar of saints Holy day of obligation Moveable feast Octaves Ranking of liturgical days : Solemnity Memorial Commemoration Feria Discipline Canonical digits Church etiquette Closed communion Canon 844 Canon 915 Communion and the developmentally disabled Communion under both kinds Eucharistic fast First Communion Genuflection Head cover Host desecration Infant communion Reserved sacrament Sign of the Cross Thanksgiving after Communion Viaticum Theology Blessed Sacrament Body and Blood of Christ Corpus Christi Epiousion Eucharistic miracle Grace ex opere operato In persona Christi History of Catholic eucharistic theology Koinonia Liturgical colours Origin of the Eucharist Last Supper Passion of Jesus and its salvific nature Priesthood of Melchizedek Pro multis Real presence Transubstantiation Concepts Ad orientem Canon law Code of Rubrics Concelebration Ecclesiastical Latin Intercession of saints Ordinary & propers ( common ) Sunday Lord's Day Text and rubrics of the Roman Canon Vulgate ( Sixto-Clementine ) Latin Psalters Related Agape feast Alternatim Anaphora Anima Christi Aspersion Catholic liturgy Coetus Internationalis Patrum Communities using the Tridentine Mass Indult Traditionalist Dicastery for Divine Worship Council of Trent Eucharistic adoration & benediction Holy Hour Forty Hours' Devotion Fourth Council of the Lateran Gospel Book History of the Roman Canon Latin liturgical rites Lex orandi, lex credendi Litany Liturgical Movement Liturgical reforms of Pope Pius XII Liturgical use of Latin Mass of Paul VI Missal Plenary indulgence Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei Pope Pius V Preces Pre-Tridentine Mass Quattuor abhinc annos Quo primum Catholic theology Sacramentary Sacraments of the Catholic Church Summorum Pontificum Traditionis custodes Western Rite Orthodoxy Catholic Church portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Ecumenical councils First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I (325) Constantinople I (381) Ephesus (431) Chalcedon (451) Constantinople II (553) Constantinople III (680–681) Nicaea II (787) Recognized by the Catholic Church First seven ecumenical councils Constantinople IV (869–870) Lateran I (1123) Lateran II (1139) Lateran III (1179) Lateran IV (1215) Lyon I (1245) Lyon II (1274) Vienne (1311–1312) Constance (1414–1418) Basel-Florence (Basel/Lausanne: 1431–1449; [ a ] Ferrara/Florence: 1438–1445) Lateran V (1512–1517) Trent (1545–1563) Vatican I (1869–1870) Vatican II (1962–1965) Recognized by the Eastern Orthodox Church First seven ecumenical councils Constantinople IV (879–880) * Constantinople V (1341–1351)* Recognized by the Oriental Orthodox Church Nicaea I (325) Constantinople I (381) Ephesus (431) Ephesus II (449) [ citation needed ] Ephesus III (475) [ citation needed ] Recognized by the Church of the East Nicaea I (325) Constantinople I (381) Seleucia-Ctesiphon (410) [ citation needed ] Synod of Beth Lapat (484) [ citation needed ] See also Ancient church councils (pre-ecumenical) ( 50 /155– 314 ) Great Church (180– 451 ) State church of the Roman Empire ( 380 – 451 ) Quinisext Council (692) Synod of Jassy (1642) Synod of Jerusalem (1672) Synod of Constantinople (1872) Conference of Addis Ababa (1965) Pan-Orthodox Council (2016) * Ecumenical status disputed within the Eastern Orthodox Church.

^ Even though the Council was moved to Ferrara in 1438 and later to Florence, some bishops refused to move and remained in a parallel Council at Basel.

v t e Society of Saint Pius X History Modernism Second Vatican Council ( Coetus Internationalis Patrum ) Novus Ordo Mass ( Ottaviani Intervention ) Traditionalist Catholicism Traditional Latin Mass International Seminary of Saint Pius X Saint-Nicolas-du-Chardonnet Écône consecrations Ecclesia Dei ( Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei ) Summorum Pontificum People Marcel Lefebvre Bernard Tissier de Mallerais Alfonso de Galarreta Bernard Fellay Richard Williamson Davide Pagliarani Franz Schmidberger Niklaus Pfluger François Ducaud-Bourget Basil Kovpak Robert Brucciani Paul Morgan Michel-Louis Guérard des Lauriers Josef Bisig Anthony Cekada Licínio Rangel Fernando Arêas Rifan Donald Sanborn Florian Abrahamowicz Paul Aulagnier David Bawden Daniel Dolan Juan María Fernández y Krohn Clarence Kelly Philippe Laguérie General The Angelus Superior General of the Society of Saint Pius X Dialogue between the Holy See and the Society of Saint Pius X Canonical situation of the Society of Saint Pius X Controversies surrounding the Society of Saint Pius X Apologia pro Marcel Lefebvre St. Marys, Kansas SSPX-affiliated religious orders Sisters of the Society of Saint Pius X Fraternity of the Transfiguration Priestly Society of Saint Josaphat Abbey of Saint-Joseph de Clairval (until 1988) Servants of the Holy Family (until 1989) Priestly Union of Saint Jean-Marie Vianney (until 2002) Transalpine Redemptorists (until 2008) Derivatives Society of Saint Pius V (1983) Istituto Mater Boni Consilii (1985) Priestly Fraternity of Saint Peter (1988) Institute of the Good Shepherd (2006) SSPX Resistance (2012) Related Council of Trent Quo primum Syllabus of Errors Pope Pius X 1917 Code of Canon Law François Charrière Michael Davies Antônio de Castro Mayer Salvador Lazo John Bosco Manat Chuabsamai Vitus Huonder Carlo Maria Viganò Personal Apostolic Administration of Saint John Mary Vianney Alleanza Cattolica (until 1981) Category Catholicism portal v t e Real presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist in the Catholic Church Dogma Transubstantiation Council of Trent First Vatican Council Words of institution Last Supper Bread of Life Discourse Manna Passover Heresy Transignification Consubstantiation Sacramental union Stercoranism Impanation Memorialism Corporal presence Spiritual presence Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Portugal Norway Greece Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7xpph
Cached time: 20250817044035
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.120 seconds
Real time usage: 1.379 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6214/1000000
Revision size: 45184/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 304683/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7710/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 179088/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.605/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21346978/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1010.639      1 -total
 21.34%  215.685      3 Template:Reflist
 10.84%  109.522      1 Template:Langx
 10.73%  108.436      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.72%   98.209      4 Template:Navbox
  9.02%   91.163      1 Template:Catholic_Counter-Reformation
  6.38%   64.478      5 Template:ISBN
  6.29%   63.521      1 Template:Short_description
  5.67%   57.288      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  5.40%   54.622      3 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6354:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044035 and revision id 1306106156. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Council_of_Trent&oldid=1306106156 " Categories : Council of Trent 1545 establishments in the Papal States 1563 disestablishments in Italy Counter-Reformation Catholic Church ecumenical councils Pope Julius III Pope Paul III Pope Pius IV Pope Pius V 16th-century Catholic Church councils Prince-Bishopric of Trent Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Schaff-Herzog with a title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Schaff-Herzog Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from February 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Council of Trent 71 languages Add topic

