Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Gorda plate 13 languages Deutsch Español Euskara Français Italiano עברית Nederlands Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°12′N 126°24′W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.2°N 126.4°W ﻿ / 41.2; -126.4 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of the northern remnants of the Farallon plate A map of the Gorda and neighboring Juan de Fuca plates subducting under the North American plate The Gorda plate , located beneath the Pacific Ocean off the coast of northern California , is one of the northern remnants of the Farallon plate . It is sometimes referred to (by, for example, publications from the USGS Earthquake Hazards Program) [ 1 ] as simply the southernmost portion of the neighboring Juan de Fuca plate , another Farallon remnant.

Unlike most tectonic plates , the Gorda plate experiences significant intraplate deformation inside its boundaries. Numerous faults have been mapped in both the sediments and basement of the Gorda Basin, which is in the interior of the plate south of 41.6°N.

[ 2 ] Stresses from the neighboring North American plate and Pacific plate cause frequent earthquakes in the interior of the plate, including the 1980 Eureka earthquake (also known as the Gorda Basin event).

[ 3 ] The easterly side is the Cascadia subduction zone where the plate subducts under the North American plate in northern California. The southerly side is a transform boundary with the Pacific plate along the Mendocino Fault . The westerly side is a divergent boundary with the Pacific plate forming the Gorda Ridge . This ridge provides morphological evidence of differing spreading rates, with the northern portion of the ridge being narrow, and the southern portion being wide.

[ 4 ] The northerly side is a transform boundary with the Juan de Fuca plate , the Blanco fracture zone .

The subducting Gorda plate is connected with the volcanoes in northern California, namely, Mount Shasta and Lassen Peak . Lassen Peak last erupted in 1914–1917.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Blanco fracture zone Cascadia subduction zone Mendocino triple junction References [ edit ] ^ "National Earthquake Information Center (NEIC)" . United States Geological Survey. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2014 .

^ Gulick, S., Meltzer, A., and S. Clarke (1998) Seismic structure of the southern Cascadia subduction zone and accretionary prism north of the Mendocino triple junction.

Journal of Geophysical Research-Solid Earth , 103(B11).

^ "Historic Earthquakes" . United States Geological Survey . Retrieved 12 December 2014 .

^ Riddihough, R. P. (1980). Gorda plate motions from magnetic anomaly analysis. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 51(1), 163–170.

^ Clynne Clynne, Michael; Christiansen, Daniel; Stauffer, Peter; Hendley, James (21 May 2015).

"Eruptions of Lassen Peak, California, 1914 to 1917 – A Centennial Commemoration" . United States Geological Survey. U.S. Department of the Interior.

Further reading [ edit ] McPherson, R. C.; Patton, J. R.; Hellweg, M.; Smith, S. W.; Dengler, L.; Lomax, A.; Dreger, D. S. (2025). "Large Repeating Gorda Intraplate Earthquakes Occurring Along an Inherited Weak Zone near the Mendocino Triple Junction".

Seismological Research Letters .

doi : 10.1785/0220250005 .

ISSN 0895-0695 .

External links [ edit ] Understanding plate motions Archived 7 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine – USGS Mendocino Triple Junction Offshore Northern California – USGS (David Oppenheimer) You live in Earthquake Country – Humboldt State University The Cascade Episode – Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture Gorda Plate Structure Archived 8 September 2013 at archive.today – Oregon State University v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons 41°12′N 126°24′W ﻿ / ﻿ 41.2°N 126.4°W ﻿ / 41.2; -126.4 This tectonics article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gorda_plate&oldid=1296217872 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geologic provinces of California Geology of the Pacific Ocean Tectonics stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2024 Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links Coordinates on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 16:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gorda plate 13 languages Add topic

