Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Location 2 Origin and myth 3 History 4 Archaeology 5 Archaeological finds 6 Footnotes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Krimisa 2 languages Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°23′47″N 17°08′48″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.3965°N 17.1467°E ﻿ / 39.3965; 17.1467 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia City in Magna Graecia Krimisa , Crimisa or Crimissa was an ancient town, probably originating in the 7th century BC, situated in modern Calabria in the region of Punta Alice . It was inhabited by an indigenous people assimilated by the Greeks.

The sanctuary of Apollo Aleus was closely associated with Crimissa and has been excavated.

[ 1 ] Location [ edit ] Even though the identification remains uncertain, scholars are inclined to believe that the city stood in Punta Alice, near the present Cirò Marina .

Origin and myth [ edit ] According to various mythographical accounts, not always uniform and coherent, of Strabo , Pseudo-Apollodorus , Lycophron and Pseudo-Aristotle , the Greek hero Philoctetes reached these places on his way back from the Trojan War , together with the Rhodians under Tlepolemus . He colonized the promontory of Crimisa and founded a city of the same name. Topographically, Krimisa was located in a lower area as compared to Chone, city of the Choni, now Cirò .

Philoctetes was believed to have also founded Petelia ( Strongoli ) and Macalla . He also had a sanctuary dedicated to Apollo Aleus, where he laid his bow and arrows received as a gift from Heracles . Then, rushing to the aid of his Rhodian allies, he died fighting against barbaric natives. On his tomb erected near the river Sybaris was subsequently built a temple where he was honoured with sacrifices.

History [ edit ] Sanctuary of Apollo Aleus The site dates to the 7th century BC. During the Classical period the city was thoroughly Hellenized and remained that way until the Roman era.

The sanctuary of Apollo Aleus had 4 phases, the oldest being "Greek-Italic" probably in wood, from 7th century until the end of the 6th century BC. The monumental rebuilding of the sanctuary using Greek architecture took place from the first half of the 6th century BC.

[ 2 ] The second phase dates from the mid-5th to the end of the 4th century BC, when the acrolith of Apollo (440-420 BC) was created and another Temple of Demeter, near the Alice crossroads, was built. It is represented most notably by architectural terracotta . This temple was very elongated (16.15 x 38.10 m stylobate) with 7 x 15 columns. The base of the wall of the cella and the bases of the central colonnade and the pillars inside the adyton are preserved. The construction technique was common to many archaic buildings: on a light foundation a plinth was made up of two rows of freshly rough-hewn limestone blocks, bound by clay and limestone flakes; the walls must have been made of mud bricks and wood, shown by the modest dimensions of the foundations and the absence of stone fragments.

The third, Hellenistic, phase of the mid-4th and 3rd centuries, coincides with the emergence of the Bruttii . In the first decades of the 3rd century BC the archaic temple was demolished and its most sacred relics (acrolith and votive offering) buried in the new foundations which incorporate the old structure and a larger Doric peripteral temple was erected by the Bruttii in limestone, surrounded by 8 x 19 columns. The temple was famous until the devastations of Pyrrhus [ 3 ] after which its decline began, which saw it sacked and destroyed perhaps already towards the end of the 3rd and 2nd c. BC.

The fourth phase from the end of the Second Punic War (202 BC) until the fall of the Roman Empire (476 AD) had a reduced attendance of visitors.

Archaeology [ edit ] The famous Italian archaeologist Paolo Orsi worked in the area where the ancient Krimisa is presumed to have been located, and made several discoveries during excavations carried out between 1924 and 1929.

[ citation needed ] Subsequent excavation campaigns at the temple of Apollo Aleo were carried out between 1970 and 1990.

Archaeological finds [ edit ] In the Museo Civico Archeologico of Cirò Marina, located in an 18th-century building of Palazzo Porti and in Castello Sabatini, are exhibited several artifacts found in the area of the sanctuary of Apollo Aleus: a capital , several architectural items, a terracotta mask, a pedestal, fragments of a bronze statue, fragments of a wig made of bronze, bronze coins, figurines.

In the Museo Archeologico Nazionale of Crotone finds from the sanctuary of Apollo Aleus at Cirò Punto Alice include: some Doric capitals of the temple, an antefix with a disc portraying a Gorgon from the acroterium , votive tablets, a matrix of an antefix, and fragments of an archaic statuette of a young man in limestone . There is no lack of captions illustrating the site and photos of the famous acrolith .

In the Museo Nazionale della Magna Grecia , more precious items include: A stupendous head, hands and feet of a marble statue of Apollo. The statue in question apparently was an acrolith (i.e. a statue of which only the head and limbs are made of marble, while the body was made of wood or simply a scaffold then covered at all points). The head, which shows the influence of Pheidias , is made of white marble and has holes around the forehead that originally supported a wig made of bronze or a metal crown. It is dated to 440 BC.

a small gold idol, which Paolo Orsi believed represented Apollo.

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ L'Apollonion di Crimisa https://www.gruppoarcheologicokr.it/l-apollonion-di-crimisa/ ^ Daniela Costanzo – Il tempio arcaico di Punta Alice (2012) in ANTROPOLOGIA E ARCHEOLOGIA A CONFRONTO: RAPPRESENTAZIONI E PRATICHE DEL SACRO, Atti dell'Incontro Internazionale di studi
ROMA, MUSEO NAZIONALE PREISTORICO ETNOGRAFICO "LUIGI PIGORINI" 20-21 MAGGIO 2011 ^ Livy, XXIII, 30, 6, XXVI, 3, 11 References [ edit ] Paolo Orsi, Templum Apollinis Alaei ad Crimisa promontorium, Roma, 1933 Antonino Terminelli, Krimisa, Cirò Marina, 1971 Mario Napoli, Civiltà della Magna Grecia, Roma, 1978 Emanuele Greco, Magna Grecia, Bari, 1980 v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline 39°23′47″N 17°08′48″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.3965°N 17.1467°E ﻿ / 39.3965; 17.1467 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Krimisa&oldid=1178185837 " Categories : Former populated places in Italy Archaeological sites in Calabria Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Italy Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 October 2023, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Krimisa 2 languages Add topic

