Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Soviet experience 2 "Degenerated" vs. "deformed" 3 Critics 4 Related terms 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Degenerated workers' state 10 languages Español Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Trotskyist view of state socialist bureaucracy, particularly under Stalin Not to be confused with Deformed workers' state .

This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Degenerated workers' state" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Trotskyism Concepts Anti-fascism Anti-Stalinism Bureaucratic collectivism Critique of political economy Cross-class alliance Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state Democratic centralism Decentralized economic planning Entryism Leninism Permanent revolution Political revolution Proletarian internationalism Social revolution Soviet democracy State capitalism Substitutionism Transitional demand Uneven and combined development Union democracy United front Vanguard party World communism World revolution Variants Orthodox Trotskyism Third camp Posadism Pabloism People Trotsky Abern Ali Antonov-Ovseenko Bensaïd Blanco Callinicos Cannon Deutscher Dowson Draper Duxiu Cliff Frank Grant Hallas Hansen Healy James Khan Lambert Maitan Mandel Moreno North Novack Pablo Posadas Preobrazhensky Rakovsky Sedov Shachtman Smirnov Tạ Thu Thâu Taaffe Woods Works 1905 (1908) Terrorism and Communism (1920) Trotsky's Military Writings (1923-1925) Literature and Revolution (1924) New Course (1924) Lessons of October (1924) Towards Socialism or Capitalism?

(1925) Leon Trotsky on China (1925) History of the Russian Revolution (1930) The Spanish Revolution, 1931-1939 (1931-1939) The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (1931-40) The Revolution Betrayed (1936) Their Morals and Ours (1938) Transitional Program (1938) In Defence of Marxism (1942) Thesis of Pulacayo (1946) The Stalinist Legacy (1984) The Dilemmas of Lenin (2017) History Russian Revolution October Revolution Joseph Stalin's rise to power The Declaration of 46 Left Opposition Lenin's Testament Bloc of Soviet Oppositions French Turn Minneapolis general strike of 1934 Great Purge Moscow trials Proletarian Military Policy New York Intellectuals May 68 1968–1969 Japanese university protests 1970s Hong Kong student protests Militant in Liverpool Parties Active Internationalist Workers' Left (Greece) Lanka Sama Samaja Party Lutte Ouvrière People Before Profit Socialist Action (Hong Kong) Socialist Alternative (Australia) Socialist Alternative (U.S.) Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party (England and Wales) Socialist Workers Party (UK) Solidarity The Struggle Pakistan Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition Workers' Cause Party Workers' Left Front Workers Revolutionary Party (UK) Defunct Bolshevik–Leninist Party of India, Ceylon and Burma Communist League of America International Marxist Group International Socialist Organization League for Socialist Action (Canada) Militant tendency Revolutionary Communist Party (UK, 1944) Socialist Appeal (UK, 1992) Socialist Workers Party (U.S.) Young Socialist Alliance Workers Party of the United States Internationals Current Committee for a Workers' International (refounded) Fourth International (post-reunification) International Committee of the Fourth International International Communist League International Revolutionary Left International Socialist Alternative International Socialist Tendency International Workers' League Internationalist Communist Union League for the Fourth International Revolutionary Communist International Trotskyist Fraction – Fourth International Historical Committee for a Workers' International (1974–2019) Fourth International Fourth International–Posadist Permanent Revolution Revolutionary Workers Ferment By country Argentina Australia China Denmark France Greece Ireland Japan Pakistan Russia Soviet Union United Kingdom United States Vietnam Related topics Betrayal thesis Campism Chavismo Democracy in Marxism Fifth International Johnson–Forest Tendency Leon Trotsky bibliography Maoism Marxism–Leninism Orthodox Marxism Shachtmanism Socialist economics Socialist Equality Party Socialist Worker Stalinism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e In Trotskyist political theory, a degenerated workers' state is a dictatorship of the proletariat in which the working class ' democratic control over the state has given way to control by a bureaucratic clique . The term was developed by Leon Trotsky in The Revolution Betrayed (1936) [ 1 ] and in other works.

[ 2 ] Soviet experience [ edit ] Trotsky argued that Russia was a genuine workers' state from the 1917 October Revolution until Joseph Stalin 's consolidation of power.

[ 3 ] The bourgeoisie had been politically overthrown by the working class and the economic basis of that state lay in collective ownership of the means of production . Contrary to the predictions of many socialists such as Lenin , the revolution failed to spread to Germany and other industrial Western European countries although there were massive upheavals of working people in some of those countries and so the Soviet state began to degenerate.

[ 4 ] That was worsened by the material and political degeneration of the Russian working class by the Civil War of 1917–1923.

After the death of Lenin in 1924, the ruling stratum of the Soviet Union, which consolidated around Stalin, was held to be a bureaucratic caste , not a new ruling class, because its political control did not also extend to economic ownership. The theory that the Soviet Union was a degenerated workers' state is closely connected to Trotsky's call for a political revolution in the Soviet Union, as well as Trotsky's call to defend the Soviets from capitalist restoration.

[ 5 ] Trotsky summarised the more optimistic arguments within the International Left Opposition : Perhaps this is a workers' state, in the last analysis, but there has not been left in it a vestige of the dictatorship of the proletariat . We have here a degenerated workers' state under the dictatorship of the bureaucracy.

[ 6 ] Trotsky always emphasised that the degenerated workers' state was not a new form of society but a transitional phase between capitalism and socialism (and closer to capitalism) that would inevitably collapse into one form or the other. He argued, however, that whether the downfall led to the restoration of workers' democracy or to capitalist restoration would depend on whether the movement to overthrow the dictatorship of the bureaucracy was led by the organised working class: The inevitable collapse of the Stalinist political regime will lead to the establishment of Soviet democracy only in the event that the removal of Bonapartism comes as the conscious act of the proletarian vanguard. In all other cases, in place of Stalinism there could only come the fascist-capitalist counter-revolution.

"Degenerated" vs. "deformed" [ edit ] The term "degenerated workers' state" commonly refers only to the Soviet Union. Trotskyists of the Fourth International (founded in 1938) coined the term " deformed workers' state " to describe states (like the Soviet satellite states of Eastern Europe as well as China) based upon collectivised means of production, but in which the working class never held direct political power. The two terms therefore label similar phenomena in that they both refer to states where the bourgeoisie no longer holds power, where the means of production has been socialised and where an unaccountable bureaucratic elite holds the political reins. They differ in the history of how their situation has arisen: through the bureaucratic degeneration of a genuine workers' democracy, as in the Soviet Union; or through the establishment of a deformed workers' state resulting from the overthrow of bourgeois rule and ownership by some force other than the mass action of the organised working class, such as by an invasion, a guerrilla army, or a military coup.

[ 7 ] Critics [ edit ] Besides the supporters of the Soviet Union holding the belief that the state was a workers' state, the theory has been criticised from within the Trotskyist movement, and by other socialists critical of the Soviet Union. Among the disputed issues are the relationships between a workers' state (of any type) and a planned economy . Some authorities tend to equate the two concepts, while others draw sharp distinctions between them.

[ citation needed ] Among Trotskyists, alternative but similar theories include state capitalism and bureaucratic collectivism .

Related terms [ edit ] Another theoretical term used by some Trotskyists, most notably Ted Grant , to describe the dictatorial rule of bureaucracies in such "degenerated" or "deformed" workers' states is proletarian bonapartism .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Bureaucracy in the Soviet Union New class State socialism References [ edit ] ^ Trotsky, Leon (1936).

The Revolution Betrayed – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ See, for example, Leon Trotsky, "The USSR and Problems of the Transitional Epoch" , extract from The Transitional Program (1938), or "The ABC of Materialist Dialectics" , extract From "A Petty-Bourgeois Opposition in the Socialist Workers Party" (1939), in Leon Trotsky, In Defense of Marxism, 1942.

^ Trotsky, Leon (1936).

"Socialism and the State" .

The Revolution Betrayed . Retrieved 22 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1936).

"The Soviet Thermidor" .

The Revolution Betrayed . Retrieved 22 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1936).

"Social Relations in the Soviet Union" .

The Revolution Betrayed . Retrieved 22 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b Trotsky, Leon (1935).

Leon Trotsky: The Workers' State, Thermidor and Bonapartism – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ "Deformed Workers' States" . Retrieved 22 June 2020 – via In Defence of Marxism .

v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xp7hf
Cached time: 20250817081301
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.456 seconds
Real time usage: 0.582 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1400/1000000
Revision size: 7624/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 81855/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3412/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 42798/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.301/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6833163/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  484.955      1 -total
 28.17%  136.616      1 Template:Reflist
 27.96%  135.593      1 Template:Trotskyism
 27.41%  132.910      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 24.21%  117.420      5 Template:Cite_book
 14.44%   70.048      1 Template:Short_description
 12.33%   59.817      1 Template:Primary_sources
 11.23%   54.452      1 Template:Ambox
  7.94%   38.506      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.72%   32.569      1 Template:Marxist_and_communist_phraseology Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42823988:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817081301 and revision id 1293898787. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Degenerated_workers%27_state&oldid=1293898787 " Categories : 1930s neologisms Political science terminology Trotskyism Marxist theory History of socialism Forms of government Marxist terminology Working-class culture Bureaucratic organization Cliques Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from June 2022 All articles lacking reliable references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 09:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Degenerated workers' state 10 languages Add topic

