Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation Toggle Formation subsection 1.1 Biological 1.2 Chemical 2 Notation 3 Modification Toggle Modification subsection 3.1 Isomerisation 3.2 Post-translational modification 3.3 Cleavage and ligation 4 History 5 Relation to secondary and tertiary structure 6 See also 7 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Protein primary structure 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Peptide sequence ) Linear sequence of amino acids in a peptide or protein The image above contains clickable links This diagram (which is interactive) of protein structure uses PCNA as an example. ( PDB : 1AXC ​) Protein primary structure is the linear sequence of amino acids in a peptide or protein .

[ 1 ] By convention, the primary structure of a protein is reported starting from the amino -terminal (N) end to the carboxyl -terminal (C) end.

Protein biosynthesis is most commonly performed by ribosomes in cells. Peptides can also be synthesized in the laboratory. Protein primary structures can be directly sequenced , or inferred from DNA sequences .

Formation [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Biological [ edit ] Main article: Translation (biology) Amino acids are polymerised via peptide bonds to form a long backbone , with the different amino acid side chains protruding along it. In biological systems, proteins are produced during translation by a cell's ribosomes . Some organisms can also make short peptides by non-ribosomal peptide synthesis , which often use amino acids other than the encoded 22, and may be cyclised, modified and cross-linked.

Chemical [ edit ] Main article: Peptide synthesis Peptides can be synthesised chemically via a range of laboratory methods. Chemical methods typically synthesise peptides in the opposite order (starting at the C-terminus) to biological protein synthesis (starting at the N-terminus).

Notation [ edit ] Protein sequence is typically notated as a string of letters, listing the amino acids starting at the amino -terminal end through to the carboxyl -terminal end. Either a three letter code or single letter code can be used to represent the 22 naturally encoded amino acids, as well as mixtures or ambiguous amino acids (similar to nucleic acid notation ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Peptides can be directly sequenced , or inferred from DNA sequences . Large sequence databases now exist that collate known protein sequences.

22 natural amino acid notation Amino Acid 3-Letter [ 4 ] 1-Letter [ 4 ] Alanine Ala A Arginine Arg R Asparagine Asn N Aspartic acid Asp D Cysteine Cys C Glutamic acid Glu E Glutamine Gln Q Glycine Gly G Histidine His H Isoleucine Ile I Leucine Leu L Lysine Lys K Methionine Met M Phenylalanine Phe F Proline Pro P Pyrrolysine Pyl O Selenocysteine Sec U Serine Ser S Threonine Thr T Tryptophan Trp W Tyrosine Tyr Y Valine Val V Ambiguous amino acid notation Symbol Description Residues represented X Any amino acid, or unknown All B Aspartate or Asparagine D, N Z Glutamate or Glutamine E, Q J Leucine or Isoleucine I, L Φ Hydrophobic V, I, L, F, W, M Ω Aromatic F, W, Y, H Ψ Aliphatic V, I, L, M π Small P, G, A, S ζ Hydrophilic S, T, H, N, Q, E, D, K, R, Y + Positively charged K, R, H - Negatively charged D, E Modification [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In general, polypeptides are unbranched polymers, so their primary structure can often be specified by the sequence of amino acids along their backbone. However, proteins can become cross-linked, most commonly by disulfide bonds , and the primary structure also requires specifying the cross-linking atoms, e.g., specifying the cysteines involved in the protein's disulfide bonds. Other crosslinks include desmosine .

Isomerisation [ edit ] The chiral centers of a polypeptide chain can undergo racemization . Although it does not change the sequence, it does affect the chemical properties of the sequence. In particular, the L -amino acids normally found in proteins can spontaneously isomerize at the C α α {\displaystyle \mathrm {C^{\alpha }} } atom to form D -amino acids, which cannot be cleaved by most proteases . Additionally, proline can form stable trans-isomers at the peptide bond.

Post-translational modification [ edit ] Additionally, the protein can undergo a variety of post-translational modifications , which are briefly summarized here.

The N-terminal amino group of a polypeptide can be modified covalently, e.g., Fig. 1 N-terminal acetylation acetylation − − C ( = O ) − − C H 3 {\displaystyle \mathrm {-C(=O)-CH_{3}} } The positive charge on the N-terminal amino group may be eliminated by changing it to an acetyl group (N-terminal blocking).

formylation − − C ( = O ) H {\displaystyle \mathrm {-C(=O)H} } The N-terminal methionine usually found after translation has an N-terminus blocked with a formyl group. This formyl group (and sometimes the methionine residue itself, if followed by Gly or Ser) is removed by the enzyme deformylase .

pyroglutamate Fig. 2 Formation of pyroglutamate from an N-terminal glutamine An N-terminal glutamine can attack itself, forming a cyclic pyroglutamate group.

myristoylation − − C ( = O ) − − ( C H 2 ) 12 − − C H 3 {\displaystyle \mathrm {-C(=O)-\left(CH_{2}\right)_{12}-CH_{3}} } Similar to acetylation. Instead of a simple methyl group, the myristoyl group has a tail of 14 hydrophobic carbons, which make it ideal for anchoring proteins to cellular membranes .

The C-terminal carboxylate group of a polypeptide can also be modified, e.g., Fig. 3 C-terminal amidation amination (see Figure) The C-terminus can also be blocked (thus, neutralizing its negative charge) by amination.

glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI) attachment Glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI) is a large, hydrophobic phospholipid prosthetic group that anchors proteins to cellular membranes . It is attached to the polypeptide C-terminus through an amide linkage that then connects to ethanolamine, thence to sundry sugars and finally to the phosphatidylinositol lipid moiety.

Finally, the peptide side chains can also be modified covalently, e.g., phosphorylation Aside from cleavage, phosphorylation is perhaps the most important chemical modification of proteins. A phosphate group can be attached to the sidechain hydroxyl group of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, adding a negative charge at that site and producing an unnatural amino acid. Such reactions are catalyzed by kinases and the reverse reaction is catalyzed by phosphatases. The phosphorylated tyrosines are often used as "handles" by which proteins can bind to one another, whereas phosphorylation of Ser/Thr often induces conformational changes, presumably because of the introduced negative charge. The effects of phosphorylating Ser/Thr can sometimes be simulated by mutating the Ser/Thr residue to glutamate.

glycosylation A catch-all name for a set of very common and very heterogeneous chemical modifications. Sugar moieties can be attached to the sidechain hydroxyl groups of Ser/Thr or to the sidechain amide groups of Asn.  Such attachments can serve many functions, ranging from increasing solubility to complex recognition. All glycosylation can be blocked with certain inhibitors, such as tunicamycin .

deamidation (succinimide formation) In this modification, an asparagine or aspartate side chain attacks the following peptide bond, forming a symmetrical succinimide intermediate. Hydrolysis of the intermediate produces either aspartate or the β-amino acid, iso(Asp). For asparagine, either product results in the loss of the amide group, hence "deamidation".

hydroxylation Proline residues may be hydroxylated at either of two atoms, as can lysine (at one atom).

Hydroxyproline is a critical component of collagen , which becomes unstable upon its loss. The hydroxylation reaction is catalyzed by an enzyme that requires ascorbic acid (vitamin C), deficiencies in which lead to many connective-tissue diseases such as scurvy .

methylation Several protein residues can be methylated, most notably the positive groups of lysine and arginine . Arginine residues interact with the nucleic acid phosphate backbone and commonly form hydrogen bonds with the base residues, particularly guanine , in protein–DNA complexes. Lysine residues can be singly, doubly and even triply methylated. Methylation does not alter the positive charge on the side chain, however.

acetylation Acetylation of the lysine amino groups is chemically analogous to the acetylation of the N-terminus. Functionally, however, the acetylation of lysine residues is used to regulate the binding of proteins to nucleic acids. The cancellation of the positive charge on the lysine weakens the electrostatic attraction for the (negatively charged) nucleic acids.

sulfation Tyrosines may become sulfated on their O η η {\displaystyle \mathrm {O^{\eta }} } atom. Somewhat unusually, this modification occurs in the Golgi apparatus , not in the endoplasmic reticulum . Similar to phosphorylated tyrosines, sulfated tyrosines are used for specific recognition, e.g., in chemokine receptors on the cell surface. As with phosphorylation, sulfation adds a negative charge to a previously neutral site.

prenylation and palmitoylation − − C ( = O ) − − ( C H 2 ) 14 − − C H 3 {\displaystyle \mathrm {-C(=O)-\left(CH_{2}\right)_{14}-CH_{3}} } The hydrophobic isoprene (e.g., farnesyl, geranyl, and geranylgeranyl groups) and palmitoyl groups may be added to the S γ γ {\displaystyle \mathrm {S^{\gamma }} } atom of cysteine residues to anchor proteins to cellular membranes . Unlike the GPI and myritoyl anchors, these groups are not necessarily added at the termini.

carboxylation A relatively rare modification that adds an extra carboxylate group (and, hence, a double negative charge) to a glutamate side chain, producing a Gla residue. This is used to strengthen the binding to "hard" metal ions such as calcium .

ADP-ribosylation The large ADP-ribosyl group can be transferred to several types of side chains within proteins, with heterogeneous effects. This modification is a target for the powerful toxins of disparate bacteria, e.g., Vibrio cholerae , Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Bordetella pertussis .

ubiquitination and SUMOylation Various full-length, folded proteins can be attached at their C-termini to the sidechain ammonium groups of lysines of other proteins. Ubiquitin is the most common of these, and usually signals that the ubiquitin-tagged protein should be degraded.

Most of the polypeptide modifications listed above occur post-translationally , i.e., after the protein has been synthesized on the ribosome , typically occurring in the endoplasmic reticulum , a subcellular organelle of the eukaryotic cell.

Many other chemical reactions (e.g., cyanylation) have been applied to proteins by chemists, although they are not found in biological systems.

Cleavage and ligation [ edit ] In addition to those listed above, the most important modification of primary structure is peptide cleavage (by chemical hydrolysis or by proteases ). Proteins are often synthesized in an inactive precursor form; typically, an N-terminal or C-terminal segment blocks the active site of the protein, inhibiting its function. The protein is activated by cleaving off the inhibitory peptide.

Some proteins even have the power to cleave themselves. Typically, the hydroxyl group of a serine (rarely, threonine) or the thiol group of a cysteine residue will attack the carbonyl carbon of the preceding peptide bond, forming a tetrahedrally bonded intermediate [classified as a hydroxyoxazolidine (Ser/Thr) or hydroxythiazolidine (Cys) intermediate]. This intermediate tends to revert to the amide form, expelling the attacking group, since the amide form is usually favored by free energy, (presumably due to the strong resonance stabilization of the peptide group). However, additional molecular interactions may render the amide form less stable; the amino group is expelled instead, resulting in an ester (Ser/Thr) or thioester (Cys) bond in place of the peptide bond. This chemical reaction is called an N-O acyl shift .

The ester/thioester bond can be resolved in several ways: Simple hydrolysis will split the polypeptide chain, where the displaced amino group becomes the new N-terminus. This is seen in the maturation of glycosylasparaginase.

A β-elimination reaction also splits the chain, but results in a pyruvoyl group at the new N-terminus. This pyruvoyl group may be used as a covalently attached catalytic cofactor in some enzymes, especially decarboxylases such as S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase (SAMDC) that exploit the electron-withdrawing power of the pyruvoyl group.

Intramolecular transesterification, resulting in a branched polypeptide. In inteins , the new ester bond is broken by an intramolecular attack by the soon-to-be C-terminal asparagine.

Intermolecular transesterification can transfer a whole segment from one polypeptide to another, as is seen in the Hedgehog protein autoprocessing.

History [ edit ] The proposal that proteins were linear chains of α-amino acids was made nearly simultaneously by two scientists at the same conference in 1902, the 74th meeting of the Society of German Scientists and Physicians, held in Karlsbad.

Franz Hofmeister made the proposal in the morning, based on his observations of the biuret reaction in proteins. Hofmeister was followed a few hours later by Emil Fischer , who had amassed a wealth of chemical details supporting the peptide-bond model. For completeness, the proposal that proteins contained amide linkages was made as early as 1882 by the French chemist E. Grimaux.

[ 5 ] Despite these data and later evidence that proteolytically digested proteins yielded only oligopeptides, the idea that proteins were linear, unbranched polymers of amino acids was not accepted immediately. Some scientists such as William Astbury doubted that covalent bonds were strong enough to hold such long molecules together; they feared that thermal agitations would shake such long molecules asunder.

Hermann Staudinger faced similar prejudices in the 1920s when he argued that rubber was composed of macromolecules .

[ 5 ] Thus, several alternative hypotheses arose. The colloidal protein hypothesis stated that proteins were colloidal assemblies of smaller molecules. This hypothesis was disproved in the 1920s by ultracentrifugation measurements by Theodor Svedberg that showed that proteins had a well-defined, reproducible molecular weight and by electrophoretic measurements by Arne Tiselius that indicated that proteins were single molecules. A second hypothesis, the cyclol hypothesis advanced by Dorothy Wrinch , proposed that the linear polypeptide underwent a chemical cyclol rearrangement C=O + HN → → {\displaystyle \rightarrow } C(OH)-N that crosslinked its backbone amide groups, forming a two-dimensional fabric . Other primary structures of proteins were proposed by various researchers, such as the diketopiperazine model of Emil Abderhalden and the pyrrol/piperidine model of Troensegaard in 1942. Although never given much credence, these alternative models were finally disproved when Frederick Sanger successfully sequenced insulin [ when?

] and by the crystallographic determination of myoglobin and hemoglobin by Max Perutz and John Kendrew [ when?

] .

Relation to secondary and tertiary structure [ edit ] Main article: Biomolecular structure This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The primary structure of a biological polymer to a large extent determines the three-dimensional shape ( tertiary structure ). Protein sequence can be used to predict local features , such as segments of secondary structure, or trans-membrane regions. However, the complexity of protein folding currently prohibits predicting the tertiary structure of a protein from its sequence alone. Knowing the structure of a similar homologous sequence (for example a member of the same protein family ) allows highly accurate prediction of the tertiary structure by homology modeling . If the full-length protein sequence is available, it is possible to estimate its general biophysical properties , such as its isoelectric point .

See also [ edit ] Protein sequencing Nucleic acid primary structure Translation Pseudo amino acid composition Notes and references [ edit ] ^ a b Sanger, F (1952). "The arrangement of amino acids in proteins". In Anson, M.L.; Bailey, Kenneth; Edsall, John T. (eds.).

Advances in Protein Chemistry . Vol. 7. pp.

1– 67.

doi : 10.1016/S0065-3233(08)60017-0 .

PMID 14933251 .

^ Aasland, Rein; Abrams, Charles; Ampe, Christophe; Ball, Linda J.; Bedford, Mark T.; Cesareni, Gianni; Gimona, Mario; Hurley, James H.; Jarchau, Thomas (2002-02-20).

"Normalization of nomenclature for peptide motifs as ligands of modular protein domains" .

FEBS Letters .

513 (1): 141– 144.

Bibcode : 2002FEBSL.513..141A .

doi : 10.1016/S0014-5793(01)03295-1 .

ISSN 1873-3468 .

PMID 11911894 .

^ IUPAC-IUB Commission on Biochemical Nomenclature (July 1968). "A One‐Letter Notation for Amino Acid Sequences: Tentative Rules".

European Journal of Biochemistry .

5 (2): 151– 153.

doi : 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1968.tb00350.x .

^ a b Hausman, Robert E.; Cooper, Geoffrey M. (2004).

The cell: a molecular approach . Washington, D.C.: ASM Press. p. 51.

ISBN 978-0-87893-214-6 .

^ a b Fruton, Joseph S. (May 1979). "Early theories of protein structure".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

325 (1): xiv, 1– 18.

Bibcode : 1979NYASA.325....1F .

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1979.tb14125.x .

PMID 378063 .

S2CID 39125170 .

v t e Biomolecular structure Protein Primary Secondary Tertiary Quaternary Determination Prediction Design Thermodynamics Nucleic acid Primary Secondary Tertiary Quaternary Determination Prediction Design Thermodynamics See also Protein Protein domain Protein engineering Proteasome Nucleic acid DNA RNA Structural motif Nucleic acid double helix v t e Protein primary structure and posttranslational modifications General Peptide bond Protein biosynthesis Proteolysis Racemization N–O acyl shift N terminus Acetylation Carbamylation Formylation Glycation Methylation Myristoylation (Gly) C terminus Amidation Glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI) O-methylation Detyrosination Single specific AAs Serine / Threonine Phosphorylation Dephosphorylation Glycosylation O -GlcNAc ADP-ribosylation Tyrosine Phosphorylation Dephosphorylation ADP-ribosylation Sulfation Porphyrin ring linkage Adenylylation Flavin linkage Topaquinone (TPQ) formation Detyrosination Cysteine Palmitoylation Prenylation Aspartate Succinimide formation ADP-ribosylation Glutamate Carboxylation ADP-ribosylation Methylation Polyglutamylation Polyglycylation Asparagine Deamidation Glycosylation Glutamine Transglutamination Lysine Methylation Acetylation Acylation Adenylylation Hydroxylation Ubiquitination Sumoylation ADP-ribosylation Deamination Oxidative deamination to aldehyde O -glycosylation Imine formation Glycation Carbamylation Succinylation Lactylation Propionylation Butyrylation Arginine Citrullination Methylation ADP-ribosylation Proline Hydroxylation Histidine Diphthamide formation Adenylylation Tryptophan C-mannosylation Crosslinks between two AAs Cysteine – Cysteine Disulfide bond ADP-ribosylation Methionine – Hydroxylysine Sulfilimine bond Lysine – Tyrosine Lysine tyrosylquinone (LTQ) formation Tryptophan – Tryptophan Tryptophan tryptophylquinone (TTQ) formation Crosslinks between three AAs Serine – Tyrosine – Glycine p-Hydroxybenzylidene-imidazolinone (HBI) formation (chromophore) Histidine – Tyrosine – Glycine 4-(p-hydroxybenzylidene)-5-imidazolinone (HBI) formation (chromophore) Alanine – Serine – Glycine Methylidene-imidazolone (MIO) formation Crosslinks between four AAs Allysine – Allysine – Allysine – Lysine Desmosine Portal : Biology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐r9fxq
Cached time: 20250812015224
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.370 seconds
Real time usage: 0.510 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1795/1000000
Revision size: 19979/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 89660/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1764/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48890/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.220/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5855355/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  378.712      1 -total
 30.25%  114.565      1 Template:Reflist
 21.32%   80.728      2 Template:Cite_book
 21.03%   79.647      6 Template:Navbox
 17.41%   65.938      1 Template:Biomolecular_structure
 14.64%   55.454      1 Template:Short_description
 12.19%   46.148      3 Template:Unreferenced_section
 10.96%   41.524      3 Template:Unreferenced
 10.15%   38.440      3 Template:Ambox
  8.55%   32.383      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24511:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015224 and revision id 1295472183. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Protein_primary_structure&oldid=1295472183 " Categories : Protein structure Stereochemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2019 This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 00:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Protein primary structure 33 languages Add topic

