Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pre-Christian traditions Toggle Pre-Christian traditions subsection 1.1 Symbolism of cattle 2 Foundation myth 3 Sacral kingship 4 Notes 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Primary 5.2 Secondary Toggle the table of contents Frankish paganism Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Frankish mythology ) It has been suggested that this article be merged with Continental Germanic mythology . ( Discuss ) Proposed since August 2025.

The pagan religion of the Germanic tribal confederation of the Franks has been traced from its roots in polytheistic Germanic paganism through to the incorporation of Greco - Roman components in the Early Middle Ages . This religion flourished among the Franks until the conversion of the Merovingian king Clovis I to Nicene Christianity (c. 500), though there were many Frankish Christians before that. After Clovis I, Frankish paganism was gradually replaced by the process of Christianisation , but there were still pagans in the late 7th century.

[ citation needed ] Pre-Christian traditions [ edit ] The majority of pagan Frankish beliefs may share similarities with that of other Germanic peoples. If so, then it may be possible to reconstruct the basic elements of Frankish traditional religion.

[ 1 ] The migration era religion of the Franks likely shared many of its characteristics with the other varieties of Germanic paganism , such as placing altars in forest glens, on hilltops, or beside lakes and rivers, and consecration of woods.

[ 2 ] Generally, Germanic gods were associated with local cult centres and their sacred character and power were associated with specific regions, outside of which they were neither worshipped nor feared.

[ 3 ] Other deities were known and feared and shared by cultures and tribes,  although in different names and variations. Of the latter, the Franks may have had one omnipotent god Allfadir ("All Father"), thought to have lived in a sacred grove. Germanic peoples may have gathered where they believed him to live, and sacrificed a human life to him.

[ 4 ] Variants of the phrase All Father (like Allfadir ) usually refer to Wuodan (Woden, Óðinn/Odin), and the Franks probably believed in Wuodan as "chief" of blessings, whom the first historian Tacitus called "Mercurius", and his consort Freia , [ 5 ] as well as Donar ( Thor ), god of thunder, and Zio ( Tyr ), whom Tacitus called "Mars". According to Herbert Schutz , most of their gods were "worldly", possessing form and having concrete relation to earthly objects, in contradistinction to the transcendent God of Christianity.

[ 3 ] Tacitus also mentioned a goddess Nerthus being worshipped by the Germanic people, in whom Perry thinks the Franks may have shared a belief.

[ 6 ] With the Germanic groups along the North Sea the Franks shared a special dedication to the worship of Yngvi , synonym to Freyr , whose cult can still be discerned in the time of Clovis.

[ 7 ] In contrast to many other Germanic tribes, no Merovingians claimed to be descended from Wodan.

[ 8 ] Some rich Frankish graves were surrounded by horse burials, such as Childeric's grave.

Symbolism of cattle [ edit ] Golden cicadas or bees with garnet inserts, discovered in the tomb of Childeric I (died 482). They may have symbolised eternal life (cicadas) or longevity (the bees of Artemis).

[ 9 ] Mythology Mythologies Indeterminate Proto-Indo-European Africa Berber Bantu Efik Guanche Kongo Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Somali West African Yoruba Mediterranean Egyptian French Greek Iberian Basque Catalan Cantabrian Lusitanian Italian Etruscan Roman Romanian Turkic Europe Albanian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Prussian Celtic Breton Cornish Irish Scottish Welsh English Estonian Georgian Germanic Nazi mythology Frankish Continental Germanic Norse Anglo-Saxon Gothic Slavic Uralic Finnish Hungarian Proto-Uralic Sámi Middle East Arabian Armenian Christian Hittite Jewish Mesopotamian Ossetian Persian Talysh Asia Buddhist Chinese Hindu Japanese Korean Meitei Mongol Philippine Tai Thai Tibetan Vietnamese Oceania Aboriginal Australian Indonesian Māori Melanesian Micronesian Papuan Polynesian North America Algonquian Abenaki Blackfoot Lenape Aztec Californian Miwok Ohlone Choctaw Muscogee/Creek Haida Inuit Iroquois Maya Kwakwakaʼwakw Plains Indians Ho-Chunk Lakota Pawnee Puebloan Hopi Zuni Talamancan South America Brazilian Chaná Chilote Guarani Inca Muisca Selk'nam Types Creation Flood National Origin Lists Creations Creatures Deities Feral children Floods Heroes Culture Folk Objects Pairs Places Sources Related concepts Deity Legendary creature Type Legendary progenitor Twins Culture hero Folk hero See also Comparative mythology Comparative religion Euhemerism Folklore Epics Lower mythology Pseudo-mythology Religion and mythology Symbolism Theology v t e The bulls that pulled the cart were taken as special animals, and according to Salian law the theft of those animals would impose a high sanction.

[ citation needed ] Eduardo Fabbro has speculated that the Germanic goddess Nerthus (who rode in a chariot drawn by cows) mentioned by Tacitus, was the origin of the Merovingian conception of Merovech , after whom their dynasty would be named. The Merovingian kings riding through the country on an oxcart could then be an imaginative reenactment the blessing journey of their divine ancestor.

[ 10 ] In the grave of Childeric I (died 481) was found the head of a bull, craftily made out of gold. This may have represented the symbol of a very old fertility ritual, [ 11 ] that centred on the worship of the cow. According to Fabbro, the Frankish pantheon expressed a variation of the Germanic structure that was especially devoted to fertility gods.

[ 1 ] However, a more likely explanation is that the Merovingian ox-cart went back to the Late-Roman tradition of governors riding through the province to dispense justice in the company of angariae, or ox wagons belonging to the imperial post.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The bull in Childeric's grave was probably an insignificant object imported from elsewhere, and belongs to a wide artistic usage of bulls in pre-historic European art.

[ 13 ] Foundation myth [ edit ] The Frankish mythology that has survived in primary sources is comparable to that of the Aeneas myth of in Roman mythology , but altered to suit Germanic tastes. Like many Germanic peoples, the Franks told a founding myth to explain their connection with peoples of classical history. In the case of the Franks, these people were the Sicambri and the Trojans . An anonymous work of 727 called Liber Historiae Francorum states that following the fall of Troy , 12,000 Trojans led by their kings Priam and Antenor moved through the Sea of Azov and up the Tanais (Don) river and settled in Pannonia , where they founded a city called "Sicambria". After altercations with the Alans and Emperor Valentinian (late 4th century AD), who renamed them Franks, they moved to the Rhine.

These stories have obvious difficulties if taken as fact. Historians, including eyewitnesses like Caesar, have given us accounts that places the Sicambri firmly at the delta of the Rhine and archaeologists have confirmed ongoing settlement of peoples. The Franks also appear close to the Rhine earlier than the 4th century. Frankish historian Fredegar , who also has the Franks originate in Troy but, under an eponymous king named Francio , lets them move straight to the Rhine without mentioning the Sicambri. For these reasons, current scholars think that this myth was not prevalent, certainly not historical: for example, J. M. Wallace-Hadrill states that "this legend is quite without historical substance".

[ 14 ] Ian Wood says that "these tales are obviously no more than legend" and "in fact there is no reason to believe that the Franks were involved in any long-distance migration".

[ 12 ] In Roman and Merovingian times, panegyrics played an important role in the transmission of culture. A common panegyrical device was the use of archaic names for contemporary things. Romans were often called "Trojans" and Franks were called "Sicambri". A notable example related by the sixth-century historian Gregory of Tours states that the Merovingian Frankish leader Clovis I, on the occasion of his baptism into the Catholic faith , was referred to as a Sicamber by Remigius , the officiating bishop of Rheims .

[ 15 ] At the crucial moment of Clovis' baptism, Remigius declared, "Bend your head, Sicamber. Honour what you have burnt. Burn what you have honoured." It is likely that in this way a link between the Sicambri and the Franks was being invoked. Further examples of Salians being called Sicambri can be found in the Panegyrici Latini , the Life of King Sigismund , the Life of King Dagobert , and other sources.

Sacral kingship [ edit ] Before Clovis converted to Catholic Christianity, pagan Frankish rulers probably maintained their elevated positions by their " charisma "; their legitimacy and "right to rule" may have been based on their supposed divine descent as well as their financial and military successes.

[ 3 ] [ 16 ] The concept of "charisma" has been controversial.

[ 17 ] Fredegar tells a story of the Frankish king Chlodio taking a summer bath with his wife when she was attacked by some sort of sea beast, which Fredegar described as bestea Neptuni Quinotauri similis , ("the beast of Neptune that looks like a Quinotaur "). Because of the attack, it was unknown if Merovech , the legendary founder of the Merovingian dynasty was conceived of Chlodio or the sea beast.

[ 18 ] In later centuries, divine kingship myths would flourish in the legends of Charlemagne (768–814) as a divinely-appointed Christian king. He was the central character in the Frankish mythology of the epics known as the Matter of France .

The Charlemagne Cycle epics, particularly the first, known as Geste du Roi ("Songs of the King"), concern a King's role as champion of Christianity. From the Matter of France, sprang some mythological stories and characters adapted through Europe, such as the knights Lancelot and Gawain .

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Fabbro, p. 5.

^ Perry, p. 22.

^ a b c Schutz, 153.

^ Perry, p. 22-23, paraphrasing Tacitus.

^ Perry, p. 23.

^ Perry, p. 24.

^ Fabbro, p.17 ^ J.M. Wallace-Hadrill - Early Germanic Kingship in England and on the Continent. London, Oxford University Press.1971, p. 18.

^ For cicadas, cf. Joachim Werner, "Frankish Royal Tombs in the Cathedrals of Cologne and Saint-Denis", Antiquity , 38:151 (1964), 202; for bees, cf. G. W. Elderkin, "The Bee of Artemis", The American Journal of Philology , 60:2 (1939), 213.

^ Fabbro, p. 16 ^ Fabbro, p.14 ^ a b Wood, p. 33-54.

^ a b Alexander Callander Murray, ' Post vocantur Merohingii : Fredegar, Merovech, and "sacred kingship", in: idem ed., After Rome's Fall: Narrators and Sources of early medieval history. Essays presented to Walter Goffart (Toronto 1998) p.125 ^ Wallace-Hadrill p. ???

^ Gregory, II.31.

^ Wallace-Hadrill, 169.

^ Schutz, 232 n49.

^ Pseudo-Fredegar, III.9.

References [ edit ] Primary [ edit ] Pseudo-Fredegar .

Historia , in Monumenta Germaniae Historica , Scriptores Rerum Merovingicarum, Tomus II. Hannover: 1888.

Gregory of Tours .

The History of the Franks . Lewis Thorpe, trans. Penguin Group.

ISBN 0-14-044295-2 .

Publius Cornelius Tacitus .

Germania .

Secondary [ edit ] Daly, William M. "Clovis: How Barbaric, How Pagan?" Speculum , vol. 69, no. 3 (July 1994), pp. 619–664.

Fabbro, Eduardo.

"Germanic Paganism among the Early Salian Franks." The Journal of Germanic Mythology and Folklore . Volume 1, Issue 4, August 2006.

Murray, Archibald Callander, and Goffart, Walter A.

After Rome's Fall: Narrators and Sources of Early Medieval History . Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1998.

Nelson, Janet L. "Royal Saints and Early Medieval Kingship." Studies in Church History , 10 (1973), pp. 39–44. Reprinted in Politics and Ritual in Early Medieval Europe . Janet L. Nelson, ed. London: Hambledon Press, 1986. pp. 69–74.

ISBN 0-907628-59-1 .

Perry, Walter Copland .

The Franks, from Their First Appearance in History to the Death of King Pepin . Longman, Brown, Green: 1857.

Prummel, W., and van der Sanden, W. A. B.

"Runderhoorns uit de Drentse venen." Nieuwe Drentse Volksalmanak , 112. 1995. pp. 84–131.

Prummel, W., and van der Sanden, W. A. B.

"Een oeroshoren uit het Drostendiep bij Dalen." Nieuwe Drentse Volksalmanak , 119. 2002. pp. 217–221.

Raemakers, Daan.

De Spiegel van Swifterbant .

Groningen: 2006.

Schutz, Herbert .

The Germanic Realms in Pre-Carolingian Central Europe, 400–750 . American University Studies, Series IX: History, Vol. 196. New York: Peter Lang, 2000.

Tessier, Georges.

Le Baptême de Clovis . Paris: Gallimard, 1964.

Wallace-Hadrill, J. M.

The Long-Haired Kings . London: Butler & Tanner Ltd, 1962.

Wood, Ian.

The Merovingian Kingdoms, 450-751 AD.

1994.

v t e Germanic mythology Subjects Deities Anglo-Saxon Sacred trees and groves Heroic legend Lists of figures A B–C D–E F–G H–He Hi–Hy I–O P–S T–Y Creatures Objects Heroic Age Legendary kings Denmark Sweden Variations Continental Alpine Dutch Frankish English Norse In popular culture List of films Norse Related topics Germanic paganism Proto-Germanic folklore Alliterative verse Matter of England v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Paganism (and modern paganism ) Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions ( list ) (existing and extinct) Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawèn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese Donyi-Polo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic Paleo-Balkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Scythian Slavic Uralic Baltic Finnic Hungarian Mari Sami Middle-Eastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Māori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan Sub-Saharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern paganism ( movements ) Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu Italo-Roman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic Turko-Mongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochrane's Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blót Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frankish_paganism&oldid=1304715971 " Categories : Germanic mythology Frankish people French mythology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be merged from August 2025 All articles to be merged All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 18:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frankish paganism Add languages Add topic

