Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 2.1 Extent 2.2 Places 2.3 Gulfs and straits 2.4 Islands 2.5 Islets 3 History 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ionian Sea 117 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Sardu Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°N 19°E ﻿ / ﻿ 38°N 19°E ﻿ / 38; 19 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of the Mediterranean Sea south of the Adriatic Sea Ionian Sea Boundaries of Ionian Sea: red lines define border per International Hydrographic Organization Location Southern Europe Coordinates 38°N 19°E ﻿ / ﻿ 38°N 19°E ﻿ / 38; 19 Type Sea Primary outflows Mediterranean Sea Basin countries Albania , Greece , and Italy Islands List of islands in the Ionian Sea Settlements Igoumenitsa , Parga , Preveza , Astakos , Patras , Kerkyra , Lefkada , Argostoli , Zakynthos , Kyparissia , Pylos , Kalamata , Himarë , Sarandë , Syracuse , Catania , Taormina , Messina , Catanzaro , Crotone , Taranto Location The Ionian Sea, view from the island Kefalonia , Greece The Ionian Sea, as seen from Corfu Island, Greece , and with Sarandë , Albania in the background The Ionian Sea ( Modern Greek : Ιόνιο Πέλαγος , romanized : Iónio Pélagos , IPA: [iˈoni.o ˈpelaɣos] ; [ a ] Italian : Mar Ionio or Mar Jonio , IPA: [mar ˈjɔːnjo] ; [ b ] Albanian : Deti Jon , IPA: [ˈdɛti ˈjɔn] ) is an elongated bay of the Mediterranean Sea . It is connected to the Adriatic Sea to the north, and is bounded by Southern Italy , including Basilicata , Calabria , Sicily , and the Salento peninsula to the west, southern Albania (and western Apulia , Italy) to the north, and the west coast of Greece , including the Peloponnese .

All major islands in the sea, which are located in the east of the sea, belong to Greece . They are collectively named the Ionian Islands , the main ones being Corfu , Kefalonia , Zakynthos , Lefkada , and Ithaca .

There are ferry routes between Patras and Igoumenitsa , Greece, and Brindisi and Ancona , Italy, that cross the east and north of the Ionian Sea, and from Piraeus westward.

Calypso Deep , the deepest point in the Mediterranean at 5,109 m (16,762 ft), is in the Ionian Sea, at 36°34′N 21°8′E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.567°N 21.133°E ﻿ / 36.567; 21.133 .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The sea is one of the most seismically active areas in the world.

Etymology [ edit ] The name Ionian comes from the Greek word Ionion (Ἰόνιον) . Its etymology is unknown.

[ 3 ] Ancient Greek writers, especially Aeschylus , linked it to the myth of Io . In ancient Greek the adjective Ionios ( Ἰόνιος ) was used as an epithet for the sea because Io swam across it.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] According to the Oxford Classical Dictionary , the name may derive from Ionians who sailed to the West, [ 7 ] however the word for Ionians is spelled with an omega ( Ἴωνες) rather than an omicron as in the word for the Ionian Sea. There were also narratives about other eponymic legendary figures; [ 8 ] according to one version, Ionius was a son of Adrias (eponymic for the Adriatic Sea ); according to another, Ionius was a son of Dyrrhachus .

[ 9 ] When Dyrrhachus was attacked by his own brothers, Heracles , who was passing through the area, came to his aid, but in the fight the hero killed his ally's son by mistake. The body was cast into the water, and thereafter was called the Ionian Sea.

Geography [ edit ] Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Ionian Sea as follows: [ 10 ] On the North.

A line running from the mouth of the Butrinto River (39°44'N) in Albania , to Cape Karagol in Corfu (39°45'N), along the North Coast of Corfu to Cape Kephali (39°45'N) and from thence to Cape Santa Maria di Leuca in Italy.

On the East.

From the mouth of the Butrinto River in Albania down the coast of the mainland to Cape Matapan .

On the South.

A line from Cape Matapan to Cape Passero , the Southern point of Sicily .

On the West.

The East coast of Sicily and the Southeast coast of Italy to Cape Santa Maria di Leuca.

Places [ edit ] Gjipe in the south of Albania where the Adriatic Sea meets the Ionian Sea The Ionian Sea, view from the island Lefkada , Greece Cape Drastis and the Ionian Sea, Corfu Island From south to north in the west, then north to south in the east: Syracuse , port, W Augusta , port, W Catania , port, W Messina , port, W Taranto , port N Himara , small port, NE Saranda , port and a beach, NE Kerkyra , port, E Igoumenitsa , port, E Parga , small port, E Preveza , port, E Astakos , port, E Argostoli , port, E Patra , port, E Kyparissia , port, E Pylos , port, E Methoni , small port and a beach Koroni smal port Kalamata ,port, E Ionian Islands Gulfs and straits [ edit ] Strait of Messina , W Gulf of Catania , W Gulf of Augusta , W Gulf of Taranto , NW Gulf of Squillace , NW Ambracian Gulf , E Gulf of Patras , connecting the Gulf of Corinth , ESE Gulf of Kyparissia , SE Messenian Gulf , SE Laconian Gulf , ESE Islands [ edit ] Corfu Kefalonia Ithaca Zakynthos Lefkada Paxi Kythira Islets [ edit ] Antikythera Antipaxi Arkoudi Atokos Kalamos Kastos Ksamil Islands Kravia Kythros Lazareto (Ithaca) Lazaretto (Corfu) Meganisi Navtilos Pontikonisi Proti Sphacteria Skorpios Sparti (Lefkada) Stillo Strofades Tongo Vido History [ edit ] Main article: Ionian Islands § History The sea is famous for the seafaring adventures of the Ancient Greek hero Odysseus , the warrior-king of the island of Ithaca .

[ 11 ] The Ionian Sea was regularly crossed since at least the 8th century BC, by ancient Greek colonizers who were establishing colonies in Italy .

[ 12 ] During the Roman period , it was the location of the Battle of Actium between Octavian and Mark Antony in 31 BC.

[ 13 ] A number of major naval engagements would be fought over the sea and its islands throughout the modern era, culminating in its control by the modern state of Greece.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Ancient Greek : Ἰόνιον πέλαγος ( Iónion pélagos ), Ἰόνιος θάλασσα ( Iónios thálassa ) or Ἰόνιος πόντος ( Iónios póntos ).

^ Sicilian : Mari Joniu [ˈmaːɾɪ ˈjɔːnjʊ] ; Salentino : Mare Joniu ; Tarantino : Mare Jonie .

References [ edit ] ^ Gade, Martin (March 15, 2008).

"The European Marginal and Enclosed Seas: An Overview" . In Barale, Vittorio (ed.).

Remote Sensing of the European Seas .

Springer Science+Business Media . pp.

3– 22.

ISBN 978-1-4020-6771-6 .

LCCN 2007942178 . Retrieved August 28, 2009 .

^ "NCMR - MAP" .

National Observatory of Athens . Archived from the original on August 28, 2009 . Retrieved April 5, 2018 .

^ Babiniotis, Lexiko tis Neoellinikis Glossas .

^ Jakub Pigoń (18 December 2008).

The Children of Herodotus: Greek and Roman Historiography and Related Genres . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 114.

ISBN 978-1-4438-0251-2 .

^ Liddel & Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon Ἰόνιος .

^ John Freely (30 April 2008).

The Ionian Islands: Corfu, Cephalonia and Beyond . I.B.Tauris. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-85771-828-0 .

^ John Keahey (15 July 2014).

A Sweet and Glorious Land: Revisiting the Ionian Sea . St. Martin's Press. p. 116.

ISBN 978-1-4668-7603-3 .

^ Charles Anthon (1869).

A Classical Dictionary Containing an Account of the Principal Proper Names Mentioned in Ancient Authors [and Intended to Elucidate All the Important Points Connected with the Geography, History, Biography, Mythology, and Fine Arts of the Greeks and Romans: Together with an Account of Coins, Weights, and Measures, with Tabular Values of the Same] . Harper [& Brothers]. p.

679 .

^ Gocha R. Tsetskhladze (2008).

Greek Colonisation: An Account of Greek Colonies and Other Settlements Overseas . BRILL. p. 157.

ISBN 978-90-04-15576-3 .

^ Limits of Oceans and Seas (PDF) (3rd ed.).

Organisation hydrographique internationale . 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 8, 2011 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ "Odysseus | Myth, Significance, Trojan War, & Odyssey | Britannica" . 29 April 2023.

^ "Greek colonization" .

Museum of Cycladic Art . Retrieved 2025-02-11 .

^ "Battle of Actium | ancient Roman history | Britannica" . 2 June 2023.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ionian Sea .

The Ionian-Puglia Network of Ground Meteorological Stations (real-time weather observations) Archived 2023-03-21 at the Wayback Machine v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bnlcs
Cached time: 20250817043701
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.783 seconds
Real time usage: 1.033 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3297/1000000
Revision size: 12535/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 220197/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5832/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 88730/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.468/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16730021/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  796.032      1 -total
 24.34%  193.729      1 Template:Infobox_sea
 22.78%  181.369      1 Template:Infobox
 19.08%  151.899      2 Template:Reflist
 17.33%  137.915     12 Template:Navbox
 13.49%  107.359      7 Template:Cite_book
 12.70%  101.132      1 Template:List_of_seas
 12.11%   96.430      1 Template:Native_name_checker
  8.72%   69.442      1 Template:Short_description
  6.50%   51.738      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44736:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043701 and revision id 1301590856. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ionian_Sea&oldid=1301590856 " Categories : Ionian Sea Seas of Italy Seas of Greece Seas of Albania Albania–Greece border Marginal seas of the Mediterranean European seas Landforms of Corfu (regional unit) Landforms of the Ionian Islands (region) Landforms of Thesprotia Landforms of Epirus (region) Landforms of Preveza (regional unit) Landforms of Aetolia-Acarnania Landforms of Western Greece Landforms of Cephalonia Landforms of Achaea Landforms of Messenia Landforms of Peloponnese (region) Geography of Europe Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Sicilian-language text Pages with Sicilian IPA Articles containing Neapolitan-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles using infobox body of water with mapframe Articles containing Greek-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Italian-language text Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Albanian-language text Pages with Albanian IPA Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 17:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ionian Sea 117 languages Add topic

