Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Texas A&M University Press 4 languages فارسی Français Italiano Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scholarly publishing house of Texas A&M university Texas A&M University Press Parent company Texas A&M University Founded 1974 Country of origin United States Headquarters location College Station, Texas Distribution self-distribution (US) East-West Export Books (Asia, Australia, Hawaii) Eurospan Group (EMEA) Scholarly Book Services (Canada) [ 1 ] Publication types Books Official website www .tamupress .com Texas A&M University Press (also known informally as TAMU Press ) is a scholarly publishing house associated with Texas A&M University . It was founded in 1974 and is located in College Station, Texas , in the United States.

Overview [ edit ] The Texas A&M University Press was founded in 1974 under the direction of Texas A&M University president and chancellor Jack K. Williams. The first director of the press, Frank H. Wardlaw, had previously helped to establish the University of Texas Press and the University of South Carolina Press . From its founding, the press has operated as a university department, reporting directly to the university president.

[ 2 ] The press is expected to "further the objectives of the university through publications devoted to advancing knowledge among scholars and to enriching the cultural heritage of the Southwest." [ 2 ] The original press offices were destroyed by a fire in February 1979. They were replaced in 1983 with the construction of the John H. Lindsey Building. This allows for offices, the warehouse, and a shipping area to be consolidated under one roof.

[ 2 ] The press is funded by book sales, an endowment, and financial support from Texas A&M University.

[ 2 ] Works [ edit ] In September 1975, the press published its first work, Elizabeth A. H. John's Storms Brewed in Other Men's Worlds . Within a decade, the press had begun publishing over thirty titles a year.

[ 2 ] The press has published works in several series designed to feature regional history. Among these are the Centennial Series of the Association of Former Students, which concerns aspects of Texas A&M's history , the Montague History of Oil Series, the Texas A&M Southwestern Studies Series, and the Clayton Wheat Williams Texas Life Series. Additionally, the press has developed a series featuring regional art, the Joe and Betty Moore Texas Art Series, one dealing with regional literature (the Tarleton State University Southwestern Studies in the Humanities), and the Louise Lindsey Merrick Texas Environment Series and the W.L. Moody, Jr. Natural History Series , which cover natural history. Fiction and nonfiction of the 19th and 20th centuries are also reprinted as part of the Southwest Landmarks series. The press has also published works dealing with military history, architecture, business history, chemistry, economics, veterinary medicine, nautical archeology and engineering.

[ 2 ] Apart from its own publications, the press also distributes books from various other university presses , including Texas Review Press , the University of North Texas Press ,  and Texas Christian University Press , as well as books from the Texas State Historical Association .

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Literature portal Texas portal Books portal List of English-language book publishing companies List of university presses References [ edit ] ^ "Booksellers" . Texas A&M University Press.

^ a b c d e f g Lloyd Lyman: Texas A&M University Press from the Handbook of Texas Online .  Retrieved December 24, 2008.

.

External links [ edit ] Official site v t e Texas A&M University Located in College Station, Texas Academics Colleges Agriculture Architecture Arts and Sciences Geosciences (merged) Liberal Arts (merged) Science (merged) Business Education Engineering Government Law Performance Veterinary Texas A&M Health Dentistry Engineering Medicine Medicine Biomedical Sciences Public Health Pharmacy Nursing Institute of Biosciences and Technology Research Doppler Radar Hagler Institute for Advanced Study Integrative Center for Homeland Security Libraries Nuclear Science Center Observatory Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station Texas A&M Engineering Extension Service Texas A&M Transportation Institute Athletics Sports Baseball Men's Basketball Women's Basketball Football Women's Soccer Softball Rivalries Arkansas–Texas A&M football rivalry Battle of the Brazos (Baylor) Lone Star Showdown (Texas) Texas A&M–Texas Tech football rivalry Facilities Davis Diamond Ellis Field G. Rollie White Coliseum Gilliam Indoor Track Stadium Kyle Field Olsen Field Reed Arena Student Rec Center Natatorium People Football head coaches Gary Blair Bill Byrne Steve Denton Jo Evans Mike Elko Pat Henry Jim Schlossnagle R. C. Slocum Buzz Williams Conferences Southwest (SWC) Big 12 Southeastern (SEC) - Current Campus Aggieland Bush Library and Museum The Day the Wall Came Down Easterwood Airport History Northgate Riverside Campus Branches Galveston Qatar Student life Aggie Band AggieCon The Battalion Century Singers Corps of Cadets Gay Student Service KAMU 90.9 FM KAMU TV KANM Student Radio The Mugdown MSC Town Hall Singing Cadets Spirit of Aggieland Student Government Wind Symphony Traditions The 12th Man Aggie Bonfire ( leadership roles , 1999 collapse ) Elephant Walk Midnight Yell Practice Muster Reveille The Association of Former Students War Hymn Yell Leaders Related History List of notable people List of presidents Terms Trotter Prize University Press Established 1876 Endowment $4.69 billion Students 60,435 Authority control databases International ISNI Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Texas_A%26M_University_Press&oldid=1259765151 " Categories : University presses of the United States Publishing companies established in 1974 Book publishing companies based in Texas 1974 establishments in Texas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2020 This page was last edited on 26 November 2024, at 22:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Texas A&M University Press 4 languages Add topic

