Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Otto Friedrich Müller 22 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Danish zoologist Otto Friedrich Müller Müller painted by Erik Pauelsen , 1789.

Born ( 1730-11-02 ) 2 November 1730 Copenhagen Died 26 December 1784 (1784-12-26) (aged 54) Otto Friedrich Müller , also known as Otto Friedrich Mueller (2 November 1730 – 26 December 1784) was a Danish naturalist and scientific illustrator .

Biography [ edit ] Müller was born in Copenhagen . He was educated for the church, became tutor to a young nobleman, and after several years' travel with him, settled in Copenhagen in 1767, and married a lady of wealth.

His first important works, Fauna Insectorum Friedrichsdaliana (Leipzig, 1764), and Flora Friedrichsdaliana (Strasbourg, 1767), giving accounts of the insects and flora of the estate of Frederiksdal , near Copenhagen, recommended him to Frederick V of Denmark , by whom he was employed to continue the Flora Danica a comprehensive atlas of the flora of Denmark. Müller added two volumes to the three published by Georg Christian Oeder since 1761.

The study of invertebrates began to occupy his attention almost exclusively, and in 1771 he produced a work in German on “Certain Worms inhabiting Fresh and Salt Water,” which described many new species of those annulose animals called by Linnaeus aphroditae and nereides , and gave much additional information respecting their habits. He discovered the first diatom ever seen, the colonial diatom Bacillaria paradoxa , though he thought it was an animal because of its movement.

[ 1 ] Otto Friedrich Müller gravsten's grave monument at St. Peter's Church in Copenhagen.

In his Vermium Terrestrium et Fluviatilium, seu Animalium Infusoriorum, Helminthecorum, et Testaceorum non Marinorum, succincta Historia (2 vols. in 4to, Copenhagen and Leipzig, 1773–74), he arranged the Infusoria for the first time into genera and species . His Hydrachnæ in Aquis Daniæ Palustribus detectæ et descriptæ (Leipzig, 1781), and Entomostraca (1785), describe many species of microorganisms previously unknown, amongst other dinoflagellates . To these was added an illustrated work on the infusoria, published in 1786. These three works, according to the contemporary dean of naturalists Baron Cuvier , give the author “a place in the first rank of those naturalists who have enriched science with original observations.” His Zoologiae Danicae Prodromus (1776) was the first survey of the fauna of the combined kingdoms of Norway and Denmark, and classified over three thousand local species. He was one of the first to study microorganisms and established the classification of several groups of animals in addition to the infusoria, including Hydrachnellae and Entomostraca , all unknown to Linnaeus .

He was a member of the Academia Caesarea Leopoldina , a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (elected in 1769), the Académie des sciences , Paris, and the Berlin Society of Friends of Natural Science . He had a lasting impact on zoological studies across Europe.

Works [ edit ] Title page of "Vermivm terrestrium et fluviatilium, seu, Animalium infusoriorum, helminthicorum et testaceorum, non marinorum, succincta historia / auctore Othone Friderico Müller" Fauna Insectorum Fridrichsdaliana . Lipsiae: Hafniae et Gleditsch xxiv 96 pp. (1764).

Vermium terrestrium et fluviatilium, seu animalium infusoriorum, helminthicorum, et testaecorum, non marinorum, succincta historia. Volumen alterum . pp. I-XXVI [= 1-36], 1–214, [1-10]. Havniæ [Copenhagen] et Lipsiæ [Leipzig]: Heineck and Faber, [1] . (1773-1774).

Zoologiae Danicae Prodromus, seu Animalium Daniae et Norvegiae Indigenarum characteres, nomina, et synonyma imprimis popularium .... Copenhagen, Hallager for the author, [2] . (1776).

"... the first manual on this topic (Danish and Norwegian Zoology) and was for many years the most comprehensive. It was planned as the beginning of a large illustrated fauna, but only one volume appeared before Müller's death; the following volumes, including those prepared by Søren Abildgaard and Martin Heinrich Rathke , never reached the standard of the Flora Danica begun by Georg Christian Oeder " [ 2 ] Animalcula infusoria fluviatilia et marina, quae detexit, systematice descripsit et ad vivum delineari curavit . Havniae [Copenhagen] et Lipsiae [Leipzig]: Mölleri, [3] . (1786).

Entomostraca seu Insecta Testacea, quae in aquis Daniae et Norvegiae reperit, descripsit et iconibus illustravit . 135 pp., [4] . (1785).

The standard author abbreviation O.F.Müll.

is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Category:Taxa named by Otto Friedrich Müller Notes [ edit ] ^ Ussing, A.P. et al.

The Colonial Diatom “Bacillaria paradoxa”: Chaotic Gliding Motility, Lindenmeyer Model of Colonial Morphogenesis, and Bibliography, with Translation of O.F. Müller (1783), “About a peculiar being in the beach-water” Ruggell,  A.R.G. Ganter Verlag Kommanditgesellschaft. 5, 2005 (retrieved June 6, 2015) ^ Dictionary of Scientific Biography . 16 vols. New York. 1981.

^ International Plant Names Index .

O.F.Müll .

References [ edit ] Spärck, R.(1932) “Otto Friedrich Müller” in: Meisen, V.

Prominent Danish Scientists through the Ages . University Library of Copenhagen 450th Anniversary. Copenhagen: Levin & Munksgaard, pp. 60–64.

Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905).

"Müller, Otho Friederik" .

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Ripley, George; Dana, Charles A., eds. (1879).

"Müller, Otto Frederik" .

The American Cyclopædia .

External links [ edit ] Müller's works at GDZ Göttigen (Search as Mueller) [5] —Gastropod species named after Otto Müller: Helix Aspersa Müller. Pictures of snail and of its anatomy.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii International Plant Names Index Leopoldina People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Te Papa (New Zealand) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Otto_Friedrich_Müller&oldid=1294056649 " Categories : Danish naturalists 18th-century Danish zoologists 1730 births 1784 deaths Danish carcinologists Danish ornithologists Danish lepidopterists Members of the French Academy of Sciences Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Danish scientific illustrators 18th-century Danish illustrators Scientists from Copenhagen Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Botanists with author abbreviations Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 09:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Otto Friedrich Müller 22 languages Add topic

