Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Purpose 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Deer stalking 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Deer-stalking ) British term for the stealthy hunting of deer without hounds or horses Scottish deer stalker glassing the surroundings with a telescope Deer stalking , or simply stalking , is a British term for the stealthy pursuit of deer on foot to hunt for venison , for leisure, as trophies , or to control their numbers [ 1 ] as part of wildlife management , just as with rabbiting and boar hunting . Deer hunted in the UK are red deer , roe deer , fallow deer , sika deer , muntjac , water deer , and hybrids of these species.

[ 2 ] Stalked deer are commonly shot with a bolt action rifle. This may happen on moors , or in woodland . Controls provided by the Game Act apply to deer (from the Deer Act 1991). Venison is also a highly popular meat, with sales quadrupling in the UK in 2014.

[ 3 ] [ Quoting a single year, some time ago, may not be representative of the general trend.

] Prior to the invention of centerfire ammunition , deer were stalked with the aid of a sighthound , such as the Scottish Deerhound .

Bowhunting is illegal in the United Kingdom for all animals.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The term deer hunting is used in North America to describe the hunting strategy of deer without using hunting dogs , but in Britain and Ireland, the term generally refers to the pursuit of deer with scent hounds and unarmed pursuers, typically on horseback . The hunter is called a game stalker .

[ 6 ] The deerstalker hat is a design associated with this style of hunting.

Background [ edit ] Deer stalkers on Glenfeshie Estate spying with telescopes, ca. 1858 Stalking is defined as pursuing or approaching stealthily, which is often necessary when approaching wild deer or the high seat [ clarification needed ] overseeing the area where the deer are likely to be passing. Scottish deer stalking is often under the guidance of a professional stalker or a resident expert.

[ 7 ] Apart from the stalking of red and sika deer on the open hillsides of Scotland and the English Lake District , which takes place in daylight, most deer stalking takes place in the first and last two hours of daylight. The only historical English county without any wild deer is Middlesex , and in all other English and Scottish counties, as well as most Welsh counties, there are deer populations controlled by deer stalking.

[ 7 ] For trophy hunting, antlers are measured by one of several scoring systems used to compare the relative merits of the heads. In Europe, including the UK, the Conseil International du Chasse (CIC) system is used; in America, it is either the Boone & Crockett or the Safari Club International (SCI), and in Australia, it is the Douglas system.

[ 8 ] Purpose [ edit ] Professional stalker standing next to a red deer stag shot on Ardnamurchan Estate in the Scottish Highlands There are no natural predators of deer in Britain. Therefore, to maintain a stable population of deer, a cull [ 9 ] of some of them is performed each year. Yearly, the deer population is counted to determine the age and sex profile of those to be culled. Barren, genetically odd or very old animals are then killed during the correct [ clarification needed ] deer season. This selection results in a pyramid profile, with a few healthy older animals of each sex at the top and increasing numbers of each sex down to the yearlings at the bottom.

[ 10 ] The males with outstanding [ clarification needed ] antlers are sometimes referred to as trophy animals, and as part of the cull they can be shot as part of a purchased sporting package to bring income to help with the management of the deer population as a whole. If population reduction is required, more females will be culled. If a population increase is required, only a select few will be culled.

[ 6 ] There are many scenarios that prevent a shot from being taken, such as no safe backstop, no clear shot, the deer does not stop, there are other deer behind the chosen deer, the deer which is visible is out of season, it is not an appropriate animal to cull, or it is a trophy animal which could bring in much-needed funds. As such, not every stalk results in a killed deer.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Whitehurst, Frederick Feild (1882). "Chapter VIII".

On the Grampian hills. Grouse and ptarmigan shooting, deer stalking, salmon and trout fishing . London: Tinsley Brothers. p.

64 . Retrieved 13 July 2019 .

^ "Shooting seasons" .

BASC . Retrieved 27 October 2024 .

^ Nineham, Laura (25 July 2014).

"Venison sales quadruple - Shooting UK" .

shootinguk.co.uk . Retrieved 12 April 2018 .

^ Scrope, William .

The Art of Deer-stalking . London: John Murray 1839.

^ MacRae, Alexander, A Handbook of Deer-stalking (1880) ^ a b c Brander, Michael (1986).

Deer stalking in Britain . London: Sportsman's Press.

ISBN 978-0-948253-05-8 .

^ a b Hart-Davis, Duff (1978).

Monarchs of the glen: a history of deer-stalking in the Scottish highlands . London: J. Cape.

ISBN 978-0-224-01463-2 .

^ Fears, J. Wayne (2015).

Deer hunter's & land manager's pocket reference: a database for hunters and rural landowners interested in deer management . New York, NY: Skyhorse Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-63220-590-2 .

^ "Cull planning" (PDF) .

thedeerinitiative.co.uk . 2009.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 2 November 2020 .

^ Alcock, I. C. N. (1996).

Stalking deer in Great Britain (Repr ed.). Shrewsbury: Swan Hill.

ISBN 978-1-85310-250-9 .

External links [ edit ] The British Deer Society The Deer Initiative Deer Stalking Scotland The Stalking Directory Wikisource has the text of the 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article Deer-stalking .

v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deer_stalking&oldid=1278447608 " Categories : Deer hunting Hunting and shooting in Scotland Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2025 This page was last edited on 2 March 2025, at 14:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deer stalking 1 language Add topic

