Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 Derivation 3 Related theories 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Causal dynamical triangulation 9 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Italiano עברית 日本語 Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical approach to quantum gravity with emergent spacetime This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Beyond the Standard Model Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electrons Standard Model Evidence Hierarchy problem Dark matter Dark energy Quintessence Phantom energy Dark radiation Dark photon Cosmological constant problem Strong CP problem Neutrino oscillation Theories Brans–Dicke theory Cosmic censorship hypothesis Fifth force F-theory Theory of everything Unified field theory Grand Unified Theory Technicolor Kaluza–Klein theory 6D (2,0) superconformal field theory Noncommutative quantum field theory Quantum cosmology Brane cosmology String theory Superstring theory M-theory Mathematical universe hypothesis Mirror matter Randall–Sundrum model N = 4 supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory Twistor string theory Dark fluid Doubly special relativity de Sitter invariant special relativity Causal fermion systems Black hole thermodynamics Unparticle physics Graviphoton Graviscalar Graviton Gravitino Massive gravity Gauge gravitation theory Gauge theory gravity CPT symmetry Supersymmetry MSSM NMSSM Superstring theory M-theory Supergravity Supersymmetry breaking Extra dimensions Large extra dimensions Quantum gravity False vacuum String theory Spin foam Quantum foam Quantum geometry Loop quantum gravity Quantum cosmology Loop quantum cosmology Causal dynamical triangulation Causal fermion systems Causal sets Canonical quantum gravity Semiclassical gravity Superfluid vacuum theory Experiments ANNIE Gran Sasso INO LHC SNO Super-K Tevatron NOvA v t e Causal dynamical triangulation ( CDT ), theorized by Renate Loll , Jan Ambjørn and Jerzy Jurkiewicz, is an approach to quantum gravity that, like loop quantum gravity , is background independent .

This means that it does not assume any pre-existing arena (dimensional space) but, rather, attempts to show how the spacetime fabric itself evolves.

There is evidence [ 1 ] that, at large scales, CDT approximates the familiar 4-dimensional spacetime but shows spacetime to be 2-dimensional near the Planck scale , and reveals a fractal structure on slices of constant time.  These interesting results agree with the findings of Lauscher and Reuter, who use an approach called Quantum Einstein Gravity , and with other recent theoretical work.

Introduction [ edit ] Near the Planck scale , the structure of spacetime itself is supposed to be constantly changing due to quantum fluctuations and topological fluctuations. CDT theory uses a triangulation process which varies dynamically and follows deterministic rules, to map out how this can evolve into dimensional spaces similar to that of our universe.

The results of researchers suggest that this is a good way to model the early universe [ citation needed ] , and describe its evolution. Using a structure called a simplex , it divides spacetime into tiny triangular sections. A simplex is the multidimensional analogue of a triangle [2-simplex]; a 3-simplex is usually called a tetrahedron , while the 4-simplex, which is the basic building block in this theory, is also known as the pentachoron . Each simplex is geometrically flat, but simplices can be "glued" together in a variety of ways to create curved spacetimes.  Whereas previous attempts at triangulation of quantum spaces have produced jumbled universes with far too many dimensions, or minimal universes with too few, CDT avoids this problem by allowing only those configurations in which the timelines of all joined edges of simplices agree.

Derivation [ edit ] CDT is a modification of quantum Regge calculus where spacetime is discretized by approximating it with a piecewise linear manifold in a process called triangulation . In this process, a d -dimensional spacetime is considered as formed by space slices that are labeled by a discrete time variable t .  Each space slice is approximated by a simplicial manifold composed by regular ( d − 1)-dimensional simplices and the connection between these slices is made by a piecewise linear manifold of d -simplices.  In place of a smooth manifold there is a network of triangulation nodes, where space is locally flat (within each simplex) but globally curved, as with the individual faces and the overall surface of a geodesic dome .  The line segments which make up each triangle can represent either a space-like or time-like extent, depending on whether they lie on a given time slice, or connect a vertex at time t with one at time t + 1.  The crucial development is that the network of simplices is constrained to evolve in a way that preserves causality .  This allows a path integral to be calculated non-perturbatively , by summation of all possible (allowed) configurations of the simplices, and correspondingly, of all possible spatial geometries.

Simply put, each individual simplex is like a building block of spacetime, but the edges that have a time arrow must agree in direction, wherever the edges are joined.  This rule preserves causality, a feature missing from previous "triangulation" theories. When simplexes are joined in this way, the complex evolves in an orderly [ how?

] fashion, and eventually creates the observed framework of dimensions.  CDT builds upon the earlier work of Barrett , Crane , and Baez , but by introducing the causality constraint as a fundamental rule (influencing the process from the very start), Loll, Ambjørn, and Jurkiewicz created something different.

Related theories [ edit ] CDT has some similarities with loop quantum gravity , especially with its spin foam formulations.  For example, the Lorentzian Barrett–Crane model is essentially a non-perturbative prescription for computing path integrals, just like CDT.  There are important differences, however.  Spin foam formulations of quantum gravity use different degrees of freedom and different Lagrangians.  For example, in CDT, the distance, or "the interval", between any two points in a given triangulation can be calculated exactly (triangulations are eigenstates of the distance operator). This is not true for spin foams or loop quantum gravity in general. Moreover, in spin foams the discreteness is thought to be fundamental, while in CDT it is viewed as a regularization of the path integral, to be removed by the continuum limit .

Another approach to quantum gravity that is closely related to causal dynamical triangulation is called causal sets .  Both CDT and causal sets attempt to model the spacetime with a discrete causal structure.  The main difference between the two is that the causal set approach is relatively general, whereas CDT assumes a more specific relationship between the lattice of spacetime events and geometry. Consequently, the Lagrangian of CDT is constrained by the initial assumptions to the extent that it can be written down explicitly and analyzed (see, for example, hep-th/0505154 , page 5), whereas there is more freedom in how one might write down an action for causal-set theory.

In the continuum limit, CDT is probably related to some version of Hořava–Lifshitz gravity . In fact, both theories rely on a foliation of spacetime, and thus they can be expected to lie in the same universality class. In 1+1 dimensions they have actually been shown to be the same theory, [ 2 ] while in higher dimensions there are only some hints, as understanding the continuum limit of CDT remains a difficult task.

See also [ edit ] Physics portal Asymptotic safety in quantum gravity Causal sets Fractal cosmology Loop quantum gravity 5-cell Planck scale Quantum gravity Regge calculus Simplex Simplicial manifold Spin foam References [ edit ] Notes ^ Loll, Renate (2019). "Quantum gravity from causal dynamical triangulations: a review".

Classical and Quantum Gravity .

37 (1): 013002.

arXiv : 1905.08669 .

doi : 10.1088/1361-6382/ab57c7 .

S2CID 160009859 .

^ Ambjørn, J.; Glaser, L.; Sato, Y.; Watabiki, Y. (2013). "2d CDT is 2d Hořava–Lifshitz quantum gravity".

Physics Lettetters B .

722 ( 1– 3): 172– 175.

arXiv : 1302.6359 .

Bibcode : 2013PhLB..722..172A .

doi : 10.1016/j.physletb.2013.04.006 .

S2CID 85444972 .

Bibliography Quantum gravity: progress from an unexpected direction Archived 2007-03-11 at the Wayback Machine Jan Ambjørn , Jerzy Jurkiewicz , and Renate Loll – "The Self-Organizing Quantum Universe" , Scientific American , July 2008 Alpert, Mark "The Triangular Universe" Scientific American page 24, February 2007 Ambjørn, J.; Jurkiewicz, J.; Loll, R. – Quantum Gravity or the Art of Building Spacetime Loll, R.; Ambjørn, J.; Jurkiewicz, J. – The Universe from Scratch – a less technical recent overview Loll, R.; Ambjørn, J.; Jurkiewicz, J. – Reconstructing the Universe – a technically detailed overview Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee – Gauge Fixing in Causal Dynamical Triangulations – shows that varying the time-slice gives similar results Loll, R – Quantum Gravity from Causal Dynamical Triangulations: A Review A review from May 2019, focusing on results that were recent at that time Early papers on the subject: R. Loll, Discrete Lorentzian Quantum Gravity , arXiv:hep-th/0011194v1 21 Nov 2000 J Ambjørn, A. Dasgupta, J. Jurkiewicz, and R. Loll, A Lorentzian cure for Euclidean troubles , arXiv:hep-th/0201104 v1 14 Jan 2002 External links [ edit ] Renate Loll's talk at Loops '05 John Baez' talk at Loops '05 Pentatope: from MathWorld (Re-)Constructing the Universe from Renate Loll's homepage Renate Loll on the Quantum Origins of Space and Time as broadcast by TVO v t e Theories of gravitation Standard Newtonian gravity (NG) Newton's law of universal gravitation Gauss's law for gravity Poisson's equation for gravity History of gravitational theory General relativity (GR) Introduction History Mathematics Exact solutions Resources Tests Post-Newtonian formalism Linearized gravity ADM formalism Gibbons–Hawking–York boundary term Alternatives to general relativity Paradigms Classical theories of gravitation Quantum gravity Theory of everything Classical Poincaré gauge theory Einstein–Cartan Teleparallelism Bimetric theories Gauge theory gravity Composite gravity f ( R ) gravity Infinite derivative gravity Massive gravity Modified Newtonian dynamics, MOND AQUAL Tensor–vector–scalar Nonsymmetric gravitation Scalar–tensor theories Brans–Dicke Scalar–tensor–vector Conformal gravity Scalar theories Nordström Whitehead Geometrodynamics Induced gravity Degenerate Higher-Order Scalar-Tensor theories Quantum-mechanical Euclidean quantum gravity Canonical quantum gravity Wheeler–DeWitt equation Loop quantum gravity Spin foam Causal dynamical triangulation Asymptotic safety in quantum gravity Causal sets DGP model Rainbow gravity theory Unified-field-theoric Kaluza–Klein theory Supergravity Unified-field-theoric and quantum-mechanical Noncommutative geometry Semiclassical gravity Superfluid vacuum theory Logarithmic BEC vacuum String theory M-theory F-theory Heterotic string theory Type I string theory Type 0 string theory Bosonic string theory Type II string theory Little string theory Twistor theory Twistor string theory Generalisations / extensions of GR Liouville gravity Lovelock theory (2+1)-dimensional topological gravity Gauss–Bonnet gravity Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity Pre-Newtonian theories and toy models Aristotelian physics CGHS model RST model Mechanical explanations Fatio–Le Sage Entropic gravity Gravitational interaction of antimatter Physics in the medieval Islamic world Theory of impetus Related topics Gravitational wave Graviton v t e Quantum gravity Central concepts AdS/CFT correspondence Batalin–Vilkovisky formalism CA-duality Causal patch Faddeev–Popov ghost Gravitational anomaly Graviton Holographic principle IR/UV mixing Planck units Quantum foam Ryu–Takayanagi conjecture Trans-Planckian problem Weinberg–Witten theorem Toy models 2+1D topological gravity CGHS model Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity Liouville gravity RST model Topological quantum field theory Quantum field theory in curved spacetime Bunch–Davies vacuum Hawking radiation Semiclassical gravity Unruh effect Black holes Black hole complementarity Black hole information paradox Black-hole thermodynamics Bekenstein bound Bousso's holographic bound Cosmic censorship hypothesis ER = EPR Firewall (physics) Gravitational singularity Approaches String theory Bosonic string theory M-theory Supergravity Superstring theory Canonical quantum gravity Loop quantum gravity Wheeler–DeWitt equation Euclidean quantum gravity Hartle–Hawking state Others Causal dynamical triangulation Causal sets Dual graviton Group field theory Noncommutative geometry Spin foam Superfluid vacuum theory Twistor theory Applications Quantum cosmology Eternal inflation FRW/CFT duality Multiverse See also: Template:Quantum mechanics topics v t e Standard Model Background Particle physics Fermions Gauge boson Higgs boson Quantum field theory Gauge theory Strong interaction Color charge Quantum chromodynamics Quark model Electroweak interaction Weak interaction Quantum electrodynamics Fermi's interaction Weak hypercharge Weak isospin Constituents CKM matrix Spontaneous symmetry breaking Higgs mechanism Mathematical formulation of the Standard Model Beyond the Standard Model Evidence Hierarchy problem Dark matter Cosmological constant problem Strong CP problem Neutrino oscillation Theories Technicolor Kaluza–Klein theory Grand Unified Theory Theory of everything Supersymmetry MSSM NMSSM Split supersymmetry Supergravity Quantum gravity String theory Superstring theory Loop quantum gravity Causal dynamical triangulation Canonical quantum gravity Superfluid vacuum theory Twistor theory Experiments Gran Sasso INO LHC SNO Super-K Tevatron Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Causal_dynamical_triangulation&oldid=1209389083 " Categories : Physical cosmology Astrophysics Quantum gravity Physics beyond the Standard Model Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2013 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 21 February 2024, at 17:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Causal dynamical triangulation 9 languages Add topic

