Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Neuroprosthetics 3 Animal research Toggle Animal research subsection 3.1 Early work 3.2 Research 3.2.1 Kennedy and Yang Dan 3.2.2 Nicolelis 3.2.3 Donoghue, Schwartz, and Andersen 3.2.4 Other research 4 Human research Toggle Human research subsection 4.1 Invasive BCIs 4.1.1 Vision 4.1.2 Movement 4.1.3 Communication 4.1.4 Technical challenges 4.2 Partially invasive BCIs 4.2.1 Endovascular 4.2.2 Electrocorticography 4.2.3 Functional near-infrared spectroscopy 4.2.4 Electroencephalography (EEG)-based brain-computer interfaces 4.2.5 Dry active electrode arrays 4.2.6 SSVEP mobile EEG BCIs 4.2.7 Prosthesis and environment control 4.2.8 Magnetoencephalography and fMRI 4.2.9 BCI control strategies in neurogaming 4.2.9.1 Motor imagery 4.2.9.2 Bio/neurofeedback for passive BCI designs 4.2.9.3 Visual evoked potential (VEP) 4.2.10 Non-brain-based human–computer interface (physiological computing) 4.2.10.1 Electrooculography (EOG) 4.2.10.2 Pupil-size oscillation 4.3 Brain-to-brain communication 5 Cell-culture BCIs 6 Ethical considerations 7 Low-cost systems 8 Future directions Toggle Future directions subsection 8.1 Disorders of consciousness (DOC) 8.2 Motor recovery 8.3 Functional brain mapping 8.4 Flexible devices 8.5 Neural dust 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Brain–computer interface 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית മലയാളം Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For direct brain control of prosthetic devices, see Neuroprosthetics .

Direct communication pathway between an enhanced or wired brain and an external device Participant in a brain-computer interface is getting connected to a computer Dummy unit illustrating the design of a BrainGate interface A brain–computer interface ( BCI ), sometimes called a brain–machine interface ( BMI ), is a direct communication link between the brain 's electrical activity and an external device, most commonly a computer or robotic limb. BCIs are often directed at researching, mapping , assisting, augmenting , or repairing human cognitive or sensory-motor functions .

[ 1 ] They are often conceptualized as a human–machine interface that skips the intermediary of moving body parts (e.g. hands or feet). BCI implementations range from non-invasive ( EEG , MEG , MRI ) and partially invasive ( ECoG and endovascular) to invasive ( microelectrode array ), based on how physically close electrodes are to brain tissue.

[ 2 ] Research on BCIs began in the 1970s by Jacques Vidal at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) under a grant from the National Science Foundation , followed by a contract from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Vidal's 1973 paper introduced the expression brain–computer interface into scientific literature.

Due to the cortical plasticity of the brain, signals from implanted prostheses can, after adaptation, be handled by the brain like natural sensor or effector channels.

[ 5 ] Following years of animal experimentation, the first neuroprosthetic devices were implanted in humans in the mid-1990s.

History [ edit ] The history of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) starts with Hans Berger 's discovery of the brain's electrical activity and the development of electroencephalography (EEG). In 1924 Berger was the first to record human brain activity utilizing EEG. Berger was able to identify oscillatory activity , such as the alpha wave (8–13 Hz), by analyzing EEG traces.

Berger's first recording device was rudimentary. He inserted silver wires under the scalps of his patients. These were later replaced by silver foils attached to the patient's head by rubber bandages. Berger connected these sensors to a Lippmann capillary electrometer , with disappointing results. However, more sophisticated measuring devices, such as the Siemens double-coil recording galvanometer , which displayed voltages as small as 10 −4 volt, led to success.

Berger analyzed the interrelation of alternations in his EEG wave diagrams with brain diseases . EEGs permitted completely new possibilities for brain research.

Although the term had not yet been coined, one of the earliest examples of a working brain-machine interface was the piece Music for Solo Performer (1965) by American composer Alvin Lucier . The piece makes use of EEG and analog signal processing hardware (filters, amplifiers, and a mixing board) to stimulate acoustic percussion instruments. Performing the piece requires producing alpha waves and thereby "playing" the various instruments via loudspeakers that are placed near or directly on the instruments.

[ 6 ] Jacques Vidal coined the term "BCI" and produced the first peer-reviewed publications on this topic.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] He is widely recognized as the inventor of BCIs.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] A review pointed out that Vidal's 1973 paper stated the "BCI challenge" [ 10 ] of controlling external objects using EEG signals, and especially use of Contingent Negative Variation (CNV) potential as a challenge for BCI control. Vidal's 1977 experiment was the first application of BCI after his 1973 BCI challenge. It was a noninvasive EEG (actually Visual Evoked Potentials (VEP)) control of a cursor-like graphical object on a computer screen. The demonstration was movement in a maze.

[ 11 ] 1988 was the first demonstration of noninvasive EEG control of a physical object, a robot. The experiment demonstrated EEG control of multiple start-stop-restart cycles of movement, along an arbitrary trajectory defined by a line drawn on a floor. The line-following behavior was the default robot behavior, utilizing autonomous intelligence and an autonomous energy source.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] In 1990, a report was given on a closed loop, bidirectional, adaptive BCI controlling a computer buzzer by an anticipatory brain potential, the Contingent Negative Variation (CNV) potential.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The experiment described how an expectation state of the brain, manifested by CNV, used a feedback loop to control the S2 buzzer in the S1-S2-CNV paradigm. The resulting cognitive wave representing the expectation learning in the brain was termed Electroexpectogram (EXG). The CNV brain potential was part of Vidal's 1973 challenge.

Studies in the 2010s suggested neural stimulation's potential to restore functional connectivity and associated behaviors through modulation of molecular mechanisms.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] This opened the door for the concept that BCI technologies may be able to restore function.

Beginning in 2013, DARPA funded BCI technology through the BRAIN initiative, which supported work out of teams including University of Pittsburgh Medical Center , [ 20 ] Paradromics, [ 21 ] Brown, [ 22 ] and Synchron.

[ 23 ] Neuroprosthetics [ edit ] Main article: Neuroprosthetics Neuroprosthetics is an area of neuroscience concerned with neural prostheses, that is, using artificial devices to replace the function of impaired nervous systems and brain-related problems, or of sensory or other organs (bladder, diaphragm, etc.). As of December 2010, cochlear implants had been implanted as neuroprosthetic devices in some 736,900 people worldwide.

[ 24 ] Other neuroprosthetic devices aim to restore vision, including retinal implants . The first neuroprosthetic device, however, was the pacemaker .

The terms are sometimes used interchangeably. Neuroprosthetics and BCIs seek to achieve the same aims, such as restoring sight, hearing, movement, ability to communicate, and even cognitive function .

[ 1 ] Both use similar experimental methods and surgical techniques.

Animal research [ edit ] See also: Remote control animal Several laboratories have managed to read signals from monkey and rat cerebral cortices to operate BCIs to produce movement. Monkeys have moved computer cursors and commanded robotic arms to perform simple tasks simply by thinking about the task and seeing the results, without motor output.

[ 25 ] In May 2008 photographs that showed a monkey at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center operating a robotic arm by thinking were published in multiple studies.

[ 26 ] Sheep have also been used to evaluate BCI technology including Synchron's Stentrode.

In 2020, Elon Musk 's Neuralink was successfully implanted in a pig.

[ 27 ] In 2021, Musk announced that the company had successfully enabled a monkey to play video games using Neuralink's device.

[ 28 ] Early work [ edit ] Monkey operating a robotic arm with brain–computer interfacing (Schwartz lab, University of Pittsburgh) In 1969 operant conditioning studies by Fetz et al. at the Regional Primate Research Center and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington School of Medicine showed that monkeys could learn to control the deflection of a biofeedback arm with neural activity.

[ 29 ] Similar work in the 1970s established that monkeys could learn to control the firing rates of individual and multiple neurons in the primary motor cortex if they were rewarded accordingly.

[ 30 ] Algorithms to reconstruct movements from motor cortex neurons , which control movement, date back to the 1970s. In the 1980s, Georgopoulos at Johns Hopkins University found a mathematical relationship between the electrical responses of single motor cortex neurons in rhesus macaque monkeys and the direction in which they moved their arms. He also found that dispersed groups of neurons, in different areas of the monkey's brains, collectively controlled motor commands. He was able to record the firings of neurons in only one area at a time, due to equipment limitations.

[ 31 ] Several groups have been able to capture complex brain motor cortex signals by recording from neural ensembles (groups of neurons) and using these to control external devices.

[ citation needed ] Research [ edit ] Kennedy and Yang Dan [ edit ] Phillip Kennedy (Neural Signals founder (1987) and colleagues built the first intracortical brain–computer interface by implanting neurotrophic-cone electrodes into monkeys.

[ citation needed ] Yang Dan and colleagues' recordings of cat vision using a BCI implanted in the lateral geniculate nucleus (top row: original image; bottom row: recording) In 1999, Yang Dan et al. at University of California, Berkeley decoded neuronal firings to reproduce images from cats. The team used an array of electrodes embedded in the thalamus (which integrates the brain's sensory input). Researchers targeted 177 brain cells in the thalamus lateral geniculate nucleus area, which decodes signals from the retina . Neuron firings were recorded from watching eight short movies. Using mathematical filters, the researchers decoded the signals to reconstruct recognizable scenes and moving objects.

[ 32 ] Nicolelis [ edit ] See also: Walk Again Project Duke University professor Miguel Nicolelis advocates using multiple electrodes spread over a greater area of the brain to obtain neuronal signals.

After initial studies in rats during the 1990s, Nicolelis and colleagues developed BCIs that decoded brain activity in owl monkeys and used the devices to reproduce monkey movements in robotic arms. Monkeys' advanced reaching and grasping abilities and hand manipulation skills, made them good test subjects.

By 2000, the group succeeded in building a BCI that reproduced owl monkey movements while the monkey operated a joystick or reached for food.

[ 33 ] The BCI operated in real time and could remotely control a separate robot. But the monkeys received no feedback ( open-loop BCI).

Diagram of the BCI developed by Miguel Nicolelis and colleagues for use on rhesus monkeys Later experiments on rhesus monkeys included feedback and reproduced monkey reaching and grasping movements in a robot arm. Their deeply cleft and furrowed brains made them better models for human neurophysiology than owl monkeys. The monkeys were trained to reach and grasp objects on a computer screen by manipulating a joystick while corresponding movements by a robot arm were hidden.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] The monkeys were later shown the robot and learned to control it by viewing its movements. The BCI used velocity predictions to control reaching movements and simultaneously predicted gripping force .

In 2011 O'Doherty and colleagues showed a BCI with sensory feedback with rhesus monkeys. The monkey controlled the position of an avatar arm while receiving sensory feedback through direct intracortical stimulation (ICMS) in the arm representation area of the sensory cortex .

[ 36 ] Donoghue, Schwartz, and Andersen [ edit ] Other laboratories that have developed BCIs and algorithms that decode neuron signals include John Donoghue at the Carney Institute for Brain Science at Brown University , Andrew Schwartz at the University of Pittsburgh , and Richard Andersen at Caltech . These researchers produced working BCIs using recorded signals from far fewer neurons than Nicolelis (15–30 neurons versus 50–200 neurons).

The Carney Institute reported training rhesus monkeys to use a BCI to track visual targets on a computer screen (closed-loop BCI) with or without a joystick.

[ 37 ] The group created a BCI for three-dimensional tracking in virtual reality and reproduced BCI control in a robotic arm.

[ 38 ] The same group demonstrated that a monkey could feed itself pieces of fruit and marshmallows using a robotic arm controlled by the animal's brain signals.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Andersen's group used recordings of premovement activity from the posterior parietal cortex , including signals created when experimental animals anticipated receiving a reward.

[ 42 ] Other research [ edit ] In addition to predicting kinematic and kinetic parameters of limb movements, BCIs that predict electromyographic or electrical activity of the muscles of primates are in process.

[ 43 ] Such BCIs could restore mobility in paralyzed limbs by electrically stimulating muscles.

Nicolelis and colleagues demonstrated that large neural ensembles can predict arm position. This work allowed BCIs to read arm movement intentions and translate them into actuator movements. Carmena and colleagues [ 34 ] programmed a BCI that allowed a monkey to control reaching and grasping movements by a robotic arm. Lebedev and colleagues argued that brain networks reorganize to create a new representation of the robotic appendage in addition to the representation of the animal's own limbs.

[ 35 ] In 2019, researchers from the University of San Francisco, California, initiated a brain-computer interface (BCI) study that had the potential to aid patients with speech impairment resulting from neurological disorders. Their BCI utilized high-density electrocorticography to capture neural activity from a patient's brain and employed deep learning to synthesize speech.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] In 2021, those researchers reported the potential of a BCI to decode words and sentences in an anarthric patient who had been unable to speak for over 15 years.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] The biggest impediment to BCI technology is the lack of a sensor modality that provides safe, accurate and robust access to brain signals. The use of a better sensor expands the range of communication functions that can be provided using a BCI.

Development and implementation of a BCI system is complex and time-consuming. In response to this problem, Gerwin Schalk has been developing BCI2000 , a general-purpose system for BCI research, since 2000.

[ 48 ] A new 'wireless' approach uses light-gated ion channels such as channelrhodopsin to control the activity of genetically defined subsets of neurons in vivo . In the context of a simple learning task, illumination of transfected cells in the somatosensory cortex influenced decision-making in mice.

[ 49 ] BCIs led to a deeper understanding of neural networks and the central nervous system . Research has reported that despite neuroscientists' inclination to believe that neurons have the most effect when working together, single neurons can be conditioned through the use of BCIs to fire in a pattern that allows primates to control motor outputs. BCIs led to development of the single neuron insufficiency principle that states that even with a well-tuned firing rate, single neurons can only carry limited information and therefore the highest level of accuracy is achieved by recording ensemble firings. Other principles discovered with BCIs include the neuronal multitasking principle, the neuronal mass principle, the neural degeneracy principle, and the plasticity principle.

[ 50 ] BCIs are proposed to be applied by users without disabilities. Passive BCIs allow for assessing and interpreting changes in the user state during Human–computer interaction (HCI). In a secondary, implicit control loop, the system adapts to its user, improving its usability .

[ 51 ] BCI systems can potentially be used to encode signals from the periphery. These sensory BCI devices enable real-time, behaviorally-relevant decisions based upon closed-loop neural stimulation.

[ 52 ] Human research [ edit ] Invasive BCIs [ edit ] Invasive BCI requires surgery to implant electrodes under the scalp for accessing brain signals. The main advantage is to increase accuracy. Downsides include side effects from the surgery, including scar tissue that can obstruct brain signals, or the body potentially rejecting the implanted electrodes.

[ 53 ] Vision [ edit ] Invasive BCI research has targeted repairing damaged sight and providing new functionality for people with paralysis. Invasive BCIs are implanted directly into the grey matter of the brain during neurosurgery. Because they lie in the grey matter, invasive devices produce the highest quality signals of BCI devices but are prone to scar-tissue build-up, causing the signal to weaken, or disappear, as the body reacts to the foreign object.

[ 54 ] In vision science , direct brain implants have been used to treat non- congenital (acquired) blindness. One of the first scientists to produce a working brain interface to restore sight was private researcher William Dobelle . Dobelle's first prototype was implanted into "Jerry", a man blinded in adulthood, in 1978. A single-array BCI containing 68 electrodes was implanted onto Jerry's visual cortex and succeeded in producing phosphenes , the sensation of seeing light. The system included cameras mounted on glasses to send signals to the implant. Initially, the implant allowed Jerry to see shades of grey in a limited field of vision at a low frame-rate. This also required him to be hooked up to a mainframe computer , but shrinking electronics and faster computers made his artificial eye more portable and now enable him to perform simple tasks unassisted.

[ 55 ] In 2002, Jens Naumann, also blinded in adulthood, became the first in a series of 16 paying patients to receive Dobelle's second generation implant, one of the earliest commercial uses of BCIs. The second generation device used a more sophisticated implant enabling better mapping of phosphenes into coherent vision. Phosphenes are spread out across the visual field in what researchers call "the starry-night effect". Immediately after his implant, Jens was able to use his imperfectly restored vision to drive an automobile slowly around the parking area of the research institute.

[ 56 ] Dobelle died in 2004 before his processes and developments were documented, leaving no one to continue his work.

[ 57 ] Subsequently, Naumann and the other patients in the program began having problems with their vision, and eventually lost their "sight" again.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Movement [ edit ] BCIs focusing on motor neuroprosthetics aim to restore movement in individuals with paralysis or provide devices to assist them, such as interfaces with computers or robot arms.

Kennedy and Bakay were first to install a human brain implant that produced signals of high enough quality to simulate movement. Their patient, Johnny Ray (1944–2002), developed ' locked-in syndrome ' after a brain-stem stroke in 1997. Ray's implant was installed in 1998 and he lived long enough to start working with the implant, eventually learning to control a computer cursor; he died in 2002 of a brain aneurysm .

[ 60 ] Tetraplegic Matt Nagle became the first person to control an artificial hand using a BCI in 2005 as part of the first nine-month human trial of Cyberkinetics 's BrainGate chip-implant. Implanted in Nagle's right precentral gyrus (area of the motor cortex for arm movement), the 96-electrode implant allowed Nagle to control a robotic arm by thinking about moving his hand as well as a computer cursor, lights and TV.

[ 61 ] One year later, Jonathan Wolpaw received the Altran Foundation for Innovation prize for developing a Brain Computer Interface with electrodes located on the surface of the skull, instead of directly in the brain.

[ 62 ] Research teams led by the BrainGate group and another at University of Pittsburgh Medical Center , both in collaborations with the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), demonstrated control of prosthetic limbs with many degrees of freedom using direct connections to arrays of neurons in the motor cortex of tetraplegia patients.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Communication [ edit ] In May 2021, a Stanford University team reported a successful proof-of-concept test that enabled a quadraplegic participant to produce English sentences at about 86 characters per minute and 18 words per minute. The participant imagined moving his hand to write letters, and the system performed handwriting recognition on electrical signals detected in the motor cortex, utilizing Hidden Markov models and recurrent neural networks .

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Since researchers from UCSF initiated a brain-computer interface (BCI) study, numerous reports have been made. In 2021, they reported that a paralyzed and with anarthria man was able to communicate fifteen words per minute using an implanted device that examined nerve cells controlling the muscles of the vocal tract.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] In addition in 2022 it was announced that their implant could also be used to spell out words and entire sentences without speaking aloud. The first bilingual speech neuroprosthesis was reported to have been developed by the same team at the University of San Francisco, in 2024.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] In a review article, authors wondered whether human information transfer rates can surpass that of language with BCIs. Language research has reported that information transfer rates are relatively constant across many languages. This may reflect the brain's information processing limit. Alternatively, this limit may be intrinsic to language itself, as a modality for information transfer.

[ 72 ] In 2023 two studies used BCIs with recurrent neural network to decode speech at a record rate of 62 words per minute and 78 words per minute.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Technical challenges [ edit ] There exist a number of technical challenges to recording brain activity with invasive BCIs. Advances in CMOS technology are pushing and enabling integrated, invasive BCI designs with smaller size, lower power requirements, and higher signal acquisition capabilities.

[ 76 ] Invasive BCIs involve electrodes that penetrate brain tissue in an attempt to record action potential signals (also known as spikes) from individual, or small groups of, neurons near the electrode. The interface between a recording electrode and the electrolytic solution surrounding neurons has been modelled using the Hodgkin-Huxley model .

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Electronic limitations to invasive BCIs have been an active area of research in recent decades. While intracellular recordings of neurons reveal action potential voltages on the scale of hundreds of millivolts, chronic invasive BCIs rely on recording extracellular voltages which typically are three orders of magnitude smaller, existing at hundreds of microvolts.

[ 79 ] Further adding to the challenge of detecting signals on the scale of microvolts is the fact that the electrode-tissue interface has a high capacitance at small voltages. Due to the nature of these small signals, for BCI systems that incorporate functionality onto an integrated circuit, each electrode requires its own amplifier and ADC , which convert analog extracellular voltages into digital signals.

[ 79 ] Because a typical neuron action potential lasts for one millisecond, BCIs measuring spikes must have sampling rates ranging from 300 Hz to 5 kHz. Yet another concern is that invasive BCIs must be low-power, so as to dissipate less heat to surrounding tissue; at the most basic level more power is traditionally needed to optimize signal-to-noise ratio .

[ 78 ] Optimal battery design is an active area of research in BCIs.

[ 80 ] Illustration of invasive and partially invasive BCIs: electrocorticography (ECoG), endovascular, and intracortical microelectrode.

Challenges existing in the area of material science are central to the design of invasive BCIs. Variations in signal quality over time have been commonly observed with implantable microelectrodes.

[ 81 ] Optimal material and mechanical characteristics for long term signal stability in invasive BCIs has been an active area of research.

[ 82 ] It has been proposed that the formation of glial scarring , secondary to damage at the electrode-tissue interface, is likely responsible for electrode failure and reduced recording performance.

[ 83 ] Research has suggested that blood-brain barrier leakage, either at the time of insertion or over time, may be responsible for the inflammatory and glial reaction to chronic microelectrodes implanted in the brain.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] As a result, flexible [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] and tissue-like designs [ 88 ] [ 89 ] have been researched and developed to minimize foreign-body reaction by means of matching the Young's modulus of the electrode closer to that of brain tissue.

[ 88 ] Partially invasive BCIs [ edit ] Partially invasive BCI devices are implanted inside the skull but rest outside the brain rather than within the grey matter. They produce higher resolution signals than non-invasive BCIs where the bone tissue of the cranium deflects and deforms signals and have a lower risk of forming scar-tissue in the brain than fully invasive BCIs. Preclinical demonstration of intracortical BCIs from the stroke perilesional cortex has been conducted.

[ 90 ] Endovascular [ edit ] A systematic review published in 2020 detailed multiple clinical and non-clinical studies investigating the feasibility of endovascular BCIs.

[ 91 ] In 2010, researchers affiliated with University of Melbourne began developing a BCI that could be inserted via the vascular system. Australian neurologist Thomas Oxley conceived the idea for this BCI, called Stentrode, earning funding from DARPA . Preclinical studies evaluated the technology in sheep.

[ 2 ] Stentrode is a monolithic stent electrode array designed to be delivered via an intravenous catheter under image-guidance to the superior sagittal sinus , in the region which lies adjacent to the motor cortex .

[ 92 ] This proximity enables Stentrode to measure neural activity. The procedure is most similar to how venous sinus stents are placed for the treatment of idiopathic intracranial hypertension .

[ 93 ] Stentrode communicates neural activity to a battery-less telemetry unit implanted in the chest, which communicates wirelessly with an external telemetry unit capable of power and data transfer. While an endovascular BCI benefits from avoiding a craniotomy for insertion, risks such as clotting and venous thrombosis exist.

Human trials with Stentrode were underway as of 2021.

[ 92 ] In November 2020, two participants with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis were able to wirelessly control an operating system to text, email, shop, and bank using direct thought using Stentrode, [ 94 ] marking the first time a brain-computer interface was implanted via the patient's blood vessels, eliminating the need for brain surgery. In January 2023, researchers reported no serious adverse events during the first year for all four patients, who could use it to operate computers.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Electrocorticography [ edit ] Electrocorticography (ECoG) measures brain electrical activity from beneath the skull in a way similar to non-invasive electroencephalography, using electrodes embedded in a thin plastic pad placed above the cortex, beneath the dura mater .

[ 97 ] ECoG technologies were first trialled in humans in 2004 by Eric Leuthardt and Daniel Moran from Washington University in St. Louis . In a later trial, the researchers enabled a teenage boy to play Space Invaders .

[ 98 ] This research indicates that control is rapid, requires minimal training, balancing signal fidelity and level of invasiveness.

[ note 1 ] Signals can be either subdural or epidural, but are not taken from within the brain parenchyma . Patients are required to have invasive monitoring for localization and resection of an epileptogenic focus.

[ citation needed ] ECoG offers higher spatial resolution, better signal-to-noise ratio, wider frequency range, and less training requirements than scalp-recorded EEG, and at the same time has lower technical difficulty, lower clinical risk, and may have superior long-term stability than intracortical single-neuron recording.

[ 100 ] This feature profile and evidence of the high level of control with minimal training requirements shows potential for real world application for people with motor disabilities.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Edward Chang and Joseph Makin from UCSF reported that ECoG signals could be used to decode speech from epilepsy patients implanted with high-density ECoG arrays over the peri-Sylvian cortices.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] They reported word error rates of 3% (a marked improvement from prior efforts) utilizing an encoder-decoder neural network , which translated ECoG data into one of fifty sentences composed of 250 unique words.

[ citation needed ] Functional near-infrared spectroscopy [ edit ] In 2014, a BCI using functional near-infrared spectroscopy for "locked-in" patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) was able to restore basic ability to communicate.

[ 105 ] Electroencephalography (EEG)-based brain-computer interfaces [ edit ] Recordings of brainwaves produced by an electroencephalogram After Vidal stated the BCI challenge, the initial reports on non-invasive approaches included control of a cursor in 2D using VEP, [ 106 ] control of a buzzer using CNV, [ 107 ] control of a physical object, a robot, using a brain rhythm (alpha), [ 108 ] control of a text written on a screen using P300.

[ 109 ] [ 10 ] In the early days of BCI research, another substantial barrier to using EEG was that extensive training was required. For example, in experiments beginning in the mid-1990s, Niels Birbaumer at the University of Tübingen in Germany trained paralysed people to self-regulate the slow cortical potentials in their EEG to such an extent that these signals could be used as a binary signal to control a computer cursor. (Birbaumer had earlier trained epileptics to prevent impending fits by controlling this low voltage wave.) The experiment trained ten patients to move a computer cursor. The process was slow, requiring more than an hour for patients to write 100 characters with the cursor, while training often took months. The slow cortical potential approach has fallen away in favor of approaches that require little or no training, are faster and more accurate, and work for a greater proportion of users.

[ 110 ] Another research parameter is the type of oscillatory activity that is measured. Gert Pfurtscheller founded the BCI Lab 1991 and conducted the first online BCI based on oscillatory features and classifiers. Together with Birbaumer and Jonathan Wolpaw at New York State University they focused on developing technology that would allow users to choose the brain signals they found easiest to operate a BCI, including mu and beta rhythms.

[ citation needed ] A further parameter is the method of feedback used as shown in studies of P300 signals. Patterns of P300 waves are generated involuntarily ( stimulus-feedback ) when people see something they recognize and may allow BCIs to decode categories of thoughts without training.

[ citation needed ] A 2005 study reported EEG emulation of digital control circuits, using a CNV flip-flop.

[ 111 ] A 2009 study reported noninvasive EEG control of a robotic arm using a CNV flip-flop.

[ 112 ] A 2011 study reported control of two robotic arms solving Tower of Hanoi task with three disks using a CNV flip-flop.

[ 113 ] A 2015 study described EEG-emulation of a Schmitt trigger , flip-flop, demultiplexer , and modem .

[ 114 ] Advances by Bin He and his team at University of Minnesota suggest the potential of EEG-based brain-computer interfaces to accomplish tasks close to invasive brain-computer interfaces. Using advanced functional neuroimaging including BOLD functional MRI and EEG source imaging, They identified the co-variation and co-localization of electrophysiological and hemodynamic signals.

[ 115 ] Refined by a neuroimaging approach and a training protocol, They fashioned a non-invasive EEG based brain-computer interface to control the flight of a virtual helicopter in 3-dimensional space, based upon motor imagination.

[ 116 ] In June 2013 they announced a technique to guide a remote-control helicopter through an obstacle course.

[ 117 ] They also solved the EEG inverse problem and then used the resulting virtual EEG for BCI tasks. Well-controlled studies suggested the merits of such a source analysis-based BCI.

[ 118 ] A 2014 study reported that severely motor-impaired patients could communicate faster and more reliably with non-invasive EEG BCI than with muscle-based communication channels.

[ 119 ] A 2019 study reported that the application of evolutionary algorithms could improve EEG mental state classification with a non-invasive Muse device, enabling classification of data acquired by a consumer-grade sensing device.

[ 120 ] In a 2021 systematic review of randomized controlled trials using BCI for post-stroke upper-limb rehabilitation, EEG-based BCI was reported to have efficacy in improving upper-limb motor function compared to control therapies. More specifically, BCI studies that utilized band power features, motor imagery , and functional electrical stimulation were reported to be more effective than alternatives.

[ 121 ] Another 2021 systematic review focused on post-stroke robot-assisted EEG-based BCI for hand rehabilitation. Improvement in motor assessment scores was observed in three of eleven studies.

[ 122 ] Dry active electrode arrays [ edit ] In the early 1990s Babak Taheri, at University of California, Davis demonstrated the first single and multichannel dry active electrode arrays.

[ 123 ] The arrayed electrode was demonstrated to perform well compared to silver / silver chloride electrodes. The device consisted of four sensor sites with integrated electronics to reduce noise by impedance matching . The advantages of such electrodes are: no electrolyte used, no skin preparation, significantly reduced sensor size, compatibility with EEG monitoring systems.

The active electrode array is an integrated system containing an array of capacitive sensors with local integrated circuitry packaged with batteries to power the circuitry. This level of integration was required to achieve the result.

The electrode was tested on a test bench and on human subjects in four modalities, namely: spontaneous EEG, sensory event-related potentials, brain stem potentials, cognitive event-related potentials.

Performance compared favorably with that of standard wet electrodes in terms of skin preparation, no gel requirements (dry), and higher signal-to-noise ratio.

[ 124 ] In 1999 Hunter Peckham and others at Case Western Reserve University used a 64-electrode EEG skullcap to return limited hand movements to a quadriplegic . As he concentrated on simple but opposite concepts like up and down. A basic pattern was identified in his beta-rhythm EEG output and used to control a switch: Above average activity was interpreted as on, below average off. The signals were also used to drive nerve controllers embedded in his hands, restoring some movement.

[ 125 ] SSVEP mobile EEG BCIs [ edit ] In 2009, the NCTU Brain-Computer-Interface-headband was announced. Those researchers also engineered silicon-based microelectro-mechanical system (MEMS) dry electrodes designed for application to non-hairy body sites. These electrodes were secured to the headband's DAQ board with snap-on electrode holders. The signal processing module measured alpha activity and transferred it over Bluetooth to a phone that assessed the patients' alertness and cognitive capacity. When the subject became drowsy, the phone sent arousing feedback to the operator to rouse them.

[ 126 ] In 2011, researchers reported a cellular based BCI that could cause a phone to ring. The wearable system was composed of a four channel bio-signal acquisition/amplification module , a communication module, and a Bluetooth phone. The electrodes were placed to pick up steady state visual evoked potentials ( SSVEPs ).

[ 127 ] SSVEPs are electrical responses to flickering visual stimuli with repetition rates over 6 Hz [ 127 ] that are best found in the parietal and occipital scalp regions of the visual cortex.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] It was reported that all study participants were able to initiate the phone call with minimal practice in natural environments.

[ 131 ] The scientists reported that a single channel fast Fourier transform (FFT) and multiple channel system canonical correlation analysis ( CCA ) algorithm can support mobile BCIs.

[ 127 ] [ 132 ] The CCA algorithm has been applied in experiments investigating BCIs with claimed high accuracy and speed.

[ 133 ] Cellular BCI technology can reportedly be translated for other applications, such as picking up sensorimotor mu / beta rhythms to function as a motor-imagery based BCI.

[ 127 ] In 2013, comparative tests performed on Android cell phone, tablet, and computer based BCIs, analyzed the power spectrum density of resultant EEG SSVEPs. The stated goals of this study were to "increase the practicability, portability, and ubiquity of an SSVEP-based BCI, for daily use". It was reported that the stimulation frequency on all mediums was accurate, although the phone's signal was not stable. The amplitudes of the SSVEPs for the laptop and tablet were reported to be larger than those of the cell phone. These two qualitative characterizations were suggested as indicators of the feasibility of using a mobile stimulus BCI.

[ 132 ] One of the difficulties with EEG readings is susceptibility to motion artifacts.

[ 134 ] In most research projects, the participants were asked to sit still in a laboratory setting, reducing head and eye movements as much as possible. However, since these initiatives were intended to create a mobile device for daily use, [ 132 ] the technology had to be tested in motion. In 2013, researchers tested mobile EEG-based BCI technology, measuring SSVEPs from participants as they walked on a treadmill. Reported results were that as speed increased, SSVEP detectability using CCA decreased.

Independent component analysis (ICA) had been shown to be efficient in separating EEG signals from noise.

[ 135 ] The researchers stated that CCA data with and without ICA processing were similar. They concluded that CCA demonstrated robustness to motion artifacts.

[ 129 ] EEG-based BCI applications offer low spatial resolution. Possible solutions include: EEG source connectivity based on graph theory , EEG pattern recognition based on Topomap and EEG- fMRI fusion.

Prosthesis and environment control [ edit ] Non-invasive BCIs have been applied to prosthetic upper and lower extremity devices in people with paralysis. For example, Gert Pfurtscheller of Graz University of Technology and colleagues demonstrated a BCI-controlled functional electrical stimulation system to restore upper extremity movements in a person with tetraplegia due to spinal cord injury .

[ 136 ] Between 2012 and 2013, researchers at University of California, Irvine demonstrated for the first time that BCI technology can restore brain-controlled walking after spinal cord injury . In their study , a person with paraplegia operated a BCI-robotic gait orthosis to regain basic ambulation.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] In 2009 independent researcher Alex Blainey used the Emotiv EPOC to control a 5 axis robot arm.

[ 139 ] He made several demonstrations of mind controlled wheelchairs and home automation .

Magnetoencephalography and fMRI [ edit ] Main articles: Magnetoencephalography and Functional magnetic resonance imaging ATR Labs' reconstruction of human vision using fMRI (top row: original image; bottom row: reconstruction from mean of combined readings) Magnetoencephalography (MEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have both been used as non-invasive BCIs.

[ 140 ] In a widely reported experiment, fMRI allowed two users to play Pong in real-time by altering their haemodynamic response or brain blood flow through biofeedback .

[ 141 ] fMRI measurements of haemodynamic responses in real time have also been used to control robot arms with a seven-second delay between thought and movement.

[ 142 ] In 2008 research developed in the Advanced Telecommunications Research (ATR) Computational Neuroscience Laboratories in Kyoto , Japan, allowed researchers to reconstruct images from brain signals at a resolution of 10x10 pixels .

[ 143 ] A 2011 study reported second-by-second reconstruction of videos watched by the study's subjects, from fMRI data.

[ 144 ] This was achieved by creating a statistical model relating videos to brain activity. This model was then used to look up 100 one-second video segments, in a database of 18 million seconds of random YouTube videos, matching visual patterns to brain activity recorded when subjects watched a video. These 100 one-second video extracts were then combined into a mash-up image that resembled the video.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] BCI control strategies in neurogaming [ edit ] Motor imagery [ edit ] Motor imagery involves imagining the movement of body parts, activating the sensorimotor cortex , which modulates sensorimotor oscillations in the EEG. This can be detected by the BCI and used to infer user intent. Motor imagery typically requires training to acquire acceptable control. Training sessions typically consume hours over several days. Regardless of the duration of the training session, users are unable to master the control scheme. This results in very slow pace of the gameplay.

[ 148 ] Machine learning methods were used to compute a subject-specific model for detecting motor imagery performance. The top performing algorithm from BCI Competition IV in 2022 [ 149 ] dataset 2 for motor imagery was the Filter Bank Common Spatial Pattern, developed by Ang et al. from A*STAR , Singapore .

[ 150 ] Bio/neurofeedback for passive BCI designs [ edit ] Biofeedback can be used to monitor a subject's mental relaxation. In some cases, biofeedback does not match EEG, while parameters such as electromyography (EMG), galvanic skin resistance (GSR), and heart rate variability (HRV) can do so. Many biofeedback systems treat disorders such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) , sleep problems in children, teeth grinding, and chronic pain. EEG biofeedback systems typically monitor four brainwave bands (theta: 4–7 Hz, alpha:8–12 Hz, SMR: 12–15 Hz, beta: 15–18 Hz) and challenge the subject to control them. Passive BCI uses BCI to enrich human–machine interaction with information on the user's mental state, for example, simulations that detect when users intend to push brakes during emergency vehicle braking.

[ 51 ] Game developers using passive BCIs understand that through repetition of game levels the user's cognitive state adapts. During the first play of a given level, the player reacts differently than during subsequent plays: for example, the user is less surprised by an event that they expect.

[ 148 ] Visual evoked potential (VEP) [ edit ] A VEP is an electrical potential recorded after a subject is presented with a visual stimuli. The types of VEPs include SSVEPs and P300 potential.

Steady-state visually evoked potentials (SSVEPs) use potentials generated by exciting the retina , using visual stimuli modulated at certain frequencies. SSVEP stimuli are often formed from alternating checkerboard patterns and at times use flashing images. The frequency of the phase reversal of the stimulus used can be distinguished by EEG; this makes detection of SSVEP stimuli relatively easy. SSVEP is used within many BCI systems. This is due to several factors. The signal elicited is measurable in as large a population as the transient VEP and blink movement. Electrocardiographic artefacts do not affect the frequencies monitored. The SSVEP signal is robust; the topographic organization of the primary visual cortex is such that a broader area obtains afferents from the visual field's central or fovial region. SSVEP comes with problems. As SSVEPs use flashing stimuli to infer user intent, the user must gaze at one of the flashing or iterating symbols in order to interact with the system. It is, therefore, likely that the symbols become irritating and uncomfortable during longer play sessions.

Another type of VEP is the P300 potential . This potential is a positive peak in the EEG that occurs roughly 300 ms after the appearance of a target stimulus (a stimulus for which the user is waiting or seeking) or oddball stimuli . P300 amplitude decreases as the target stimuli and the ignored stimuli grow more similar. P300 is thought to be related to a higher level attention process or an orienting response. Using P300 requires fewer training sessions. The first application to use it was the P300 matrix. Within this system, a subject chooses a letter from a 6 by 6 grid of letters and numbers. The rows and columns of the grid flashed sequentially and every time the selected "choice letter" was illuminated the user's P300 was (potentially) elicited. However, the communication process, at approximately 17 characters per minute, was slow. P300 offers a discrete selection rather than continuous control. The advantage of P300 within games is that the player does not have to learn how to use a new control system, requiring only short training instances to learn gameplay mechanics and the basic BCI paradigm.

[ 148 ] Non-brain-based human–computer interface (physiological computing) [ edit ] Human-computer interaction can exploit other recording modalities, such as electrooculography and eye-tracking. These modalities do not record brain activity and therefore do not qualify as BCIs.

[ 151 ] Electrooculography (EOG) [ edit ] In 1989, a study reported control of a mobile robot by eye movement using electrooculography signals. A mobile robot was driven to a goal point using five EOG commands, interpreted as forward, backward, left, right, and stop.

[ 152 ] Pupil-size oscillation [ edit ] A 2016 article described a new non-EEG-based HCI that required no visual fixation , or ability to move the eyes.

[ 153 ] The interface is based on covert interest ; directing attention to a chosen letter on a virtual keyboard, without the need to look directly at the letter. Each letter has its own (background) circle which micro-oscillates in brightness differently from the others. Letter selection is based on best fit between unintentional pupil-size oscillation and the background circle's brightness oscillation pattern. Accuracy is additionally improved by the user's mental rehearsal of the words 'bright' and 'dark' in synchrony with the brightness transitions of the letter's circle.

Brain-to-brain communication [ edit ] In the 1960s a researcher after training used EEG to create Morse code using alpha waves.

[ 154 ] On 27 February 2013 Miguel Nicolelis 's group at Duke University and IINN-ELS connected the brains of two rats, allowing them to share information, in the first-ever direct brain-to-brain interface .

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] [ 157 ] Gerwin Schalk reported that ECoG signals can discriminate vowels and consonants embedded in spoken and imagined words, shedding light on the mechanisms associated with their production and could provide a basis for brain-based communication using imagined speech.

[ 102 ] [ 158 ] In 2002 Kevin Warwick had an array of 100 electrodes fired into his nervous system in order to link his nervous system to the Internet. Warwick carried out a series of experiments. Electrodes were implanted into his wife's nervous system, allowing them to conduct the first direct electronic communication experiment between the nervous systems of two humans.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] [ 162 ] Other researchers achieved brain-to-brain communication between participants at a distance using non-invasive technology attached to the participants' scalps. The words were encoded in binary streams by the cognitive motor input of the person sending the information. Pseudo-random bits of the information carried encoded words "hola" ("hi" in Spanish) and "ciao" ("goodbye" in Italian) and were transmitted mind-to-mind.

[ 163 ] Cell-culture BCIs [ edit ] Main article: Cultured neuronal network The world's first neurochip , developed by Caltech researchers Jerome Pine and Michael Maher Researchers have built devices to interface with neural cells and entire neural networks in vitro . Experiments on cultured neural tissue focused on building problem-solving networks, constructing basic computers and manipulating robotic devices. Research into techniques for stimulating and recording individual neurons grown on semiconductor chips is neuroelectronics or neurochips .

[ 164 ] Development of the first neurochip was claimed by a Caltech team led by Jerome Pine and Michael Maher in 1997.

[ 165 ] The Caltech chip had room for 16 neurons.

In 2003 a team led by Theodore Berger, at the University of Southern California , worked on a neurochip designed to function as an artificial or prosthetic hippocampus . The neurochip was designed for rat brains. The hippocampus was chosen because it is thought to be the most structured and most studied part of the brain. Its function is to encode experiences for storage as long-term memories elsewhere in the brain.

[ 166 ] In 2004 Thomas DeMarse at the University of Florida used a culture of 25,000 neurons taken from a rat's brain to fly a F-22 fighter jet aircraft simulator . After collection, the cortical neurons were cultured in a petri dish and reconnected themselves to form a living neural network. The cells were arranged over a grid of 60 electrodes and used to control the pitch and yaw functions of the simulator. The study's focus was on understanding how the human brain performs and learns computational tasks at a cellular level.

[ 167 ] Ethical considerations [ edit ] Concerns center on the safety and long-term effects on users. These include obtaining informed consent from individuals with communication difficulties, the impact on patients' and families' quality of life, health-related side effects, misuse of therapeutic applications, safety risks, and the non-reversible nature of some BCI-induced changes. Additionally, questions arise about access to maintenance, repair, and spare parts, particularly in the event of a company's bankruptcy.

[ 168 ] The legal and social aspects of BCIs complicate mainstream adoption. Concerns include issues of accountability and responsibility, such as claims that BCI influence overrides free will and control over actions, inaccurate translation of cognitive intentions, personality changes resulting from deep-brain stimulation, and the blurring of the line between human and machine.

[ 169 ] Other concerns involve the use of BCIs in advanced interrogation techniques, unauthorized access ("brain hacking"), [ 170 ] social stratification through selective enhancement, privacy issues related to mind-reading, tracking and "tagging" systems, and the potential for mind, movement, and emotion control.

[ 171 ] In their current form, most BCIs are more akin to corrective therapies that engage few of such ethical issues. Bioethics is well-equipped to address the challenges posed by BCI technologies, with Clausen suggesting in 2009 that "BCIs pose ethical challenges, but these are conceptually similar to those that bioethicists have addressed for other realms of therapy." [ 172 ] Haselager and colleagues highlighted the importance of managing expectations and value.

[ 173 ] The evolution of BCIs mirrors that of pharmaceutical science, which began as a means to address impairments and now enhances focus and reduces the need for sleep. As BCIs progress from therapies to enhancements, the BCI community is working to create consensus on ethical guidelines for research, development, and dissemination.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] Low-cost systems [ edit ] Various companies are developing inexpensive BCIs for research and entertainment. Toys such as the NeuroSky and Mattel MindFlex have seen some commercial success.

In 2006, Sony patented a neural interface system allowing radio waves to affect signals in the neural cortex.

[ 176 ] In 2007, NeuroSky released the first affordable consumer based EEG along with the game NeuroBoy. It was the first large scale EEG device to use dry sensor technology.

[ 177 ] In 2008, OCZ Technology developed a device for use in video games relying primarily on electromyography .

[ 178 ] In 2008, Final Fantasy developer Square Enix announced that it was partnering with NeuroSky to create Judecca, a game.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] In 2009, Mattel partnered with NeuroSky to release Mindflex , a game that used an EEG to steer a ball through an obstacle course. It was by far the best selling consumer based EEG at the time.

[ 179 ] [ 181 ] In 2009, Uncle Milton Industries partnered with NeuroSky to release the Star Wars Force Trainer , a game designed to create the illusion of possessing the Force .

[ 179 ] [ 182 ] In 2009, Emotiv released the EPOC, a 14 channel EEG device that can read 4 mental states, 13 conscious states, facial expressions, and head movements. The EPOC was the first commercial BCI to use dry sensor technology, which can be dampened with a saline solution for a better connection.

[ 183 ] In November 2011, Time magazine selected "necomimi" produced by Neurowear as one of the year's best inventions.

[ 184 ] In February 2014, They Shall Walk (a nonprofit organization fixed on constructing exoskeletons, dubbed LIFESUITs, for paraplegics and quadriplegics) began a partnership with James W. Shakarji on the development of a wireless BCI.

[ 185 ] In 2016, a group of hobbyists developed an open-source BCI board that sends neural signals to the audio jack of a smartphone, dropping the cost of entry-level BCI to £20.

[ 186 ] Basic diagnostic software is available for Android devices, as well as a text entry app for Unity .

[ 187 ] In 2020, NextMind released a dev kit including an EEG headset with dry electrodes at $399.

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] The device can run various visual-BCI demonstration applications or developers can create their own. It was later acquired by Snap Inc.

in 2022.

[ 190 ] In 2023, PiEEG released a shield that allows converting a single-board computer Raspberry Pi to a brain-computer interface for $350.

[ 191 ] Future directions [ edit ] Brain-computer interface A consortium of 12 European partners completed a roadmap to support the European Commission in their funding decisions for the Horizon 2020 framework program. The project was funded by the European Commission. It started in November 2013 and published a roadmap in April 2015.

[ 192 ] A 2015 publication describes this project, as well as the Brain-Computer Interface Society.

[ 193 ] It reviewed work within this project that further defined BCIs and applications, explored recent trends, discussed ethical issues, and evaluated directions for new BCIs.

Other recent publications too have explored future BCI directions for new groups of disabled users.

[ 7 ] [ 194 ] Disorders of consciousness (DOC) [ edit ] Some people have a disorder of consciousness (DOC). This state is defined to include people in a coma and those in a vegetative state (VS) or minimally conscious state (MCS). BCI research seeks to address DOC. A key initial goal is to identify patients who can perform basic cognitive tasks, which would change their diagnosis, and allow them to make important decisions (such as whether to seek therapy, where to live, and their views on end-of-life decisions regarding them). Patients incorrectly diagnosed may die as a result of end-of-life decisions made by others. The prospect of using BCI to communicate with such patients is a tantalizing prospect.

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] Many such patients cannot use BCIs based on vision. Hence, tools must rely on auditory and/or vibrotactile stimuli. Patients may wear headphones and/or vibrotactile stimulators placed on responsive body parts. Another challenge is that patients may be able to communicate only at unpredictable intervals. Home devices can allow communications when the patient is ready.

Automated tools can ask questions that patients can easily answer, such as "Is your father named George?" or "Were you born in the USA?" Automated instructions inform patients how to convey yes or no, for example by focusing their attention on stimuli on the right vs. left wrist. This focused attention produces reliable changes in EEG patterns that can help determine whether the patient is able to communicate.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] Motor recovery [ edit ] People may lose some of their ability to move due to many causes, such as stroke or injury. Research in recent years has demonstrated the utility of EEG-based BCI systems in aiding motor recovery and neurorehabilitation in patients who have had a stroke.

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] [ 202 ] [ 203 ] Several groups have explored systems and methods for motor recovery that include BCIs.

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] [ 206 ] [ 207 ] In this approach, a BCI measures motor activity while the patient imagines or attempts movements as directed by a therapist. The BCI may provide two benefits: (1) if the BCI indicates that a patient is not imagining a movement correctly (non-compliance), then the BCI could inform the patient and therapist; and (2) rewarding feedback such as functional stimulation or the movement of a virtual avatar also depends on the patient's correct movement imagery.

So far, BCIs for motor recovery have relied on the EEG to measure the patient's motor imagery. However, studies have also used fMRI to study different changes in the brain as persons undergo BCI-based stroke rehab training.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] [ 210 ] Imaging studies combined with EEG-based BCI systems hold promise for investigating neuroplasticity during motor recovery post-stroke.

[ 210 ] Future systems might include the fMRI and other measures for real-time control, such as functional near-infrared, probably in tandem with EEGs. Non-invasive brain stimulation has also been explored in combination with BCIs for motor recovery.

[ 211 ] In 2016, scientists out of the University of Melbourne published preclinical proof-of-concept data related to a potential brain-computer interface technology platform being developed for patients with paralysis to facilitate control of external devices such as robotic limbs, computers and exoskeletons by translating brain activity.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] [ 214 ] Functional brain mapping [ edit ] In 2014, some 400,000 people underwent brain mapping during neurosurgery. This procedure is often required for people who do not respond to medication .

[ 215 ] During this procedure, electrodes are placed on the brain to precisely identify the locations of structures and functional areas. Patients may be awake during neurosurgery and asked to perform tasks, such as moving fingers or repeating words. This is necessary so that surgeons can remove the desired tissue while sparing other regions. Removing too much brain tissue can cause permanent damage, while removing too little can mandate additional neurosurgery.

[ citation needed ] Researchers explored ways to improve neurosurgical mapping. This work focuses largely on high gamma activity, which is difficult to detect non-invasively. Results improved methods for identifying key functional areas.

[ 216 ] Flexible devices [ edit ] Flexible electronics are polymers or other flexible materials (e.g.

silk , [ 217 ] pentacene , PDMS , Parylene , polyimide [ 218 ] ) printed with circuitry ; the flexibility allows the electronics to bend. The fabrication techniques used to create these devices resembles those used to create integrated circuits and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).

[ citation needed ] Flexible neural interfaces may minimize brain tissue trauma related to mechanical mismatch between electrode and tissue.

[ 219 ] Neural dust [ edit ] Main article: Neural dust Neural dust is millimeter-sized devices operated as wirelessly powered nerve sensors that were proposed in a 2011 paper from the University of California, Berkeley Wireless Research Center.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] In one model, local field potentials could be distinguished from action potential "spikes", which would offer greatly diversified data vs conventional techniques.

[ 220 ] See also [ edit ] AlterEgo , a system that reads unspoken verbalizations and responds with bone-conduction headphones Augmented learning BrainCo Cortical implants Deep brain stimulation Experience machine Intendix Kernel (neurotechnology company) Neural engineering Neurorobotics Neurostimulation Nootropic Paradromics Precision Neuroscience Project Cyborg Simulated reality Stent-electrode recording array Thought identification Wetware computer (Uses similar technology for IO) Whole brain emulation Wirehead (science fiction) Notes [ edit ] ^ These electrodes had not been implanted in the patient with the intention of developing a BCI. The patient had had severe epilepsy and the electrodes were temporarily implanted to help his physicians localize seizure foci; the BCI researchers simply took advantage of this.

[ 99 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Krucoff MO, Rahimpour S, Slutzky MW, Edgerton VR, Turner DA (2016).

"Enhancing Nervous System Recovery through Neurobiologics, Neural Interface Training, and Neurorehabilitation" .

Frontiers in Neuroscience .

10 : 584.

doi : 10.3389/fnins.2016.00584 .

PMC 5186786 .

PMID 28082858 .

^ a b Martini, Michael L.; Oermann, Eric Karl; Opie, Nicholas L.; Panov, Fedor; Oxley, Thomas; Yaeger, Kurt (February 2020).

"Sensor Modalities for Brain-Computer Interface Technology: A Comprehensive Literature Review" .

Neurosurgery .

86 (2): E108 – E117 .

doi : 10.1093/neuros/nyz286 .

ISSN 0148-396X .

PMID 31361011 .

^ a b Vidal JJ (1973).

"Toward direct brain-computer communication" .

Annual Review of Biophysics and Bioengineering .

2 (1): 157– 180.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.bb.02.060173.001105 .

PMID 4583653 .

^ a b Vidal J (1977). "Real-Time Detection of Brain Events in EEG".

Proceedings of the IEEE .

65 (5): 633– 641.

doi : 10.1109/PROC.1977.10542 .

S2CID 7928242 .

^ Levine SP, Huggins JE, BeMent SL, Kushwaha RK, Schuh LA, Rohde MM, et al. (June 2000). "A direct brain interface based on event-related potentials".

IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering .

8 (2): 180– 185.

doi : 10.1109/86.847809 .

PMID 10896180 .

^ Straebel V , Thoben W (2014).

"Alvin Lucier's music for solo performer: experimental music beyond sonification" .

Organised Sound .

19 (1): 17– 29.

doi : 10.1017/S135577181300037X .

S2CID 62506825 .

^ a b Wolpaw, J.R. and Wolpaw, E.W. (2012). "Brain-Computer Interfaces: Something New Under the Sun". In: Brain-Computer Interfaces: Principles and Practice , Wolpaw, J.R. and Wolpaw (eds.), E.W. Oxford University Press.

^ Wolpaw JR, Birbaumer N, McFarland DJ, Pfurtscheller G, Vaughan TM (June 2002). "Brain-computer interfaces for communication and control".

Clinical Neurophysiology .

113 (6): 767– 791.

doi : 10.1016/s1388-2457(02)00057-3 .

PMID 12048038 .

S2CID 17571592 .

^ Allison BZ, Wolpaw EW, Wolpaw JR (July 2007). "Brain-computer interface systems: progress and prospects".

Expert Review of Medical Devices .

4 (4): 463– 474.

doi : 10.1586/17434440.4.4.463 .

PMID 17605682 .

S2CID 4690450 .

^ a b Bozinovski S, Bozinovska L (2019).

"Brain-computer interface in Europe: The thirtieth anniversary" .

Automatika .

60 (1): 36– 47.

doi : 10.1080/00051144.2019.1570644 .

^ Vidal, Jacques J. (1977).

"Real-time detection of brain events in EEG" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the IEEE .

65 (5): 633– 641.

doi : 10.1109/PROC.1977.10542 .

S2CID 7928242 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2015 . Retrieved 4 November 2022 .

^ S. Bozinovski, M. Sestakov, L. Bozinovska: Using EEG alpha rhythm to control a mobile robot, In G. Harris, C. Walker (eds.) Proc. IEEE Annual Conference of Medical and Biological Society , p. 1515-1516, New Orleans, 1988 ^ S. Bozinovski: Mobile robot trajectory control: From fixed rails to direct bioelectric control, In O. Kaynak (ed.) Proc. IEEE Workshop on Intelligent Motion Control , p. 63-67, Istanbul, 1990 ^ M. Lebedev: Augmentation of sensorimotor functions with neural prostheses. Opera Medica and Physiologica. Vol. 2 (3): 211-227, 2016 ^ M. Lebedev, M. Nicolelis: Brain-machine interfaces: from basic science to neuroprostheses and neurorehabilitation, Physiological Review 97:737-867, 2017 ^ L. Bozinovska, G. Stojanov, M. Sestakov, S. Bozinovski: CNV pattern recognition: a step toward a cognitive wave observation, In L. Torres, E. Masgrau, E. Lagunas (eds.) Signal Processing V: Theories and Applications, Proc. EUSIPCO-90: Fifth European Signal Processing Conference, Elsevier, p. 1659-1662, Barcelona, 1990 ^ L. Bozinovska, S. Bozinovski, G. Stojanov, Electroexpectogram: experimental design and algorithms, In Proc IEEE International Biomedical Engineering Days, p. 55-60, Istanbul, 1992 ^ Miranda RA, Casebeer WD, Hein AM, Judy JW, Krotkov EP, Laabs TL, et al. (April 2015).

"DARPA-funded efforts in the development of novel brain-computer interface technologies" .

Journal of Neuroscience Methods .

244 : 52– 67.

doi : 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.07.019 .

PMID 25107852 .

S2CID 14678623 .

^ Jacobs M, Premji A, Nelson AJ (16 May 2012).

"Plasticity-inducing TMS protocols to investigate somatosensory control of hand function" .

Neural Plasticity .

2012 : 350574.

doi : 10.1155/2012/350574 .

PMC 3362131 .

PMID 22666612 .

^ Fox, Maggie (13 October 2016).

"Brain Chip Helps Paralyzed Man Feel His Fingers" .

NBC News . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ Hatmaker, Taylor (10 July 2017).

"DARPA awards $65 million to develop the perfect, tiny two-way brain-computer interface" .

Tech Crunch . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ Stacey, Kevin (10 July 2017).

"Brown to receive up to $19M to engineer next-generation brain-computer interface" .

Brown University . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ "Minimally Invasive "Stentrode" Shows Potential as Neural Interface for Brain" .

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) . 8 February 2016 . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ "Cochlear Implants" .

National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders . February 2016 . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

^ Miguel Nicolelis et al. (2001) Duke neurobiologist has developed system that allows monkeys to control robot arms via brain signals Archived 19 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Baum M (6 September 2008).

"Monkey Uses Brain Power to Feed Itself With Robotic Arm" . Pitt Chronicle. Archived from the original on 10 September 2009 . Retrieved 6 July 2009 .

^ Lewis T (November 2020).

"Elon Musk's Pig-Brain Implant Is Still a Long Way from 'Solving Paralysis' " .

Scientific American . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ Shead S (February 2021).

"Elon Musk says his start-up Neuralink has wired up a monkey to play video games using its mind" .

CNBC . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ Fetz EE (February 1969). "Operant conditioning of cortical unit activity".

Science .

163 (3870): 955– 958.

Bibcode : 1969Sci...163..955F .

doi : 10.1126/science.163.3870.955 .

PMID 4974291 .

S2CID 45427819 .

^ Schmidt EM, McIntosh JS, Durelli L, Bak MJ (September 1978). "Fine control of operantly conditioned firing patterns of cortical neurons".

Experimental Neurology .

61 (2): 349– 369.

doi : 10.1016/0014-4886(78)90252-2 .

PMID 101388 .

S2CID 37539476 .

^ Georgopoulos AP, Lurito JT, Petrides M, Schwartz AB, Massey JT (January 1989). "Mental rotation of the neuronal population vector".

Science .

243 (4888): 234– 236.

Bibcode : 1989Sci...243..234G .

doi : 10.1126/science.2911737 .

PMID 2911737 .

S2CID 37161168 .

^ Stanley GB, Li FF, Dan Y (September 1999).

"Reconstruction of natural scenes from ensemble responses in the lateral geniculate nucleus" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

19 (18): 8036– 8042.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-18-08036.1999 .

PMC 6782475 .

PMID 10479703 .

^ Wessberg J, Stambaugh CR, Kralik JD, Beck PD, Laubach M, Chapin JK, et al. (November 2000). "Real-time prediction of hand trajectory by ensembles of cortical neurons in primates".

Nature .

408 (6810): 361– 365.

Bibcode : 2000Natur.408..361W .

doi : 10.1038/35042582 .

PMID 11099043 .

S2CID 795720 .

^ a b Carmena JM, Lebedev MA, Crist RE, O'Doherty JE, Santucci DM, Dimitrov DF, et al. (November 2003).

"Learning to control a brain-machine interface for reaching and grasping by primates" .

PLOS Biology .

1 (2): E42.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0000042 .

PMC 261882 .

PMID 14624244 .

^ a b Lebedev MA, Carmena JM, O'Doherty JE, Zacksenhouse M, Henriquez CS, Principe JC, Nicolelis MA (May 2005).

"Cortical ensemble adaptation to represent velocity of an artificial actuator controlled by a brain-machine interface" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

25 (19): 4681– 4693.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4088-04.2005 .

PMC 6724781 .

PMID 15888644 .

^ O'Doherty JE, Lebedev MA, Ifft PJ, Zhuang KZ, Shokur S, Bleuler H, Nicolelis MA (October 2011).

"Active tactile exploration using a brain-machine-brain interface" .

Nature .

479 (7372): 228– 231.

Bibcode : 2011Natur.479..228O .

doi : 10.1038/nature10489 .

PMC 3236080 .

PMID 21976021 .

^ Serruya MD, Hatsopoulos NG, Paninski L, Fellows MR, Donoghue JP (March 2002). "Instant neural control of a movement signal".

Nature .

416 (6877): 141– 142.

Bibcode : 2002Natur.416..141S .

doi : 10.1038/416141a .

PMID 11894084 .

S2CID 4383116 .

^ Taylor DM, Tillery SI, Schwartz AB (June 2002). "Direct cortical control of 3D neuroprosthetic devices".

Science .

296 (5574): 1829– 1832.

Bibcode : 2002Sci...296.1829T .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1027.4335 .

doi : 10.1126/science.1070291 .

PMID 12052948 .

S2CID 9402759 .

^ Pitt team to build on brain-controlled arm Archived 4 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Pittsburgh Tribune Review , 5 September 2006.

^ Video on YouTube ^ Velliste M, Perel S, Spalding MC, Whitford AS, Schwartz AB (June 2008).

"Cortical control of a prosthetic arm for self-feeding" .

Nature .

453 (7198): 1098– 1101.

Bibcode : 2008Natur.453.1098V .

doi : 10.1038/nature06996 .

PMID 18509337 .

S2CID 4404323 .

^ Musallam S, Corneil BD, Greger B, Scherberger H, Andersen RA (July 2004).

"Cognitive control signals for neural prosthetics" .

Science .

305 (5681): 258– 262.

Bibcode : 2004Sci...305..258M .

doi : 10.1126/science.1097938 .

PMID 15247483 .

S2CID 3112034 .

^ Santucci DM, Kralik JD, Lebedev MA, Nicolelis MA (September 2005). "Frontal and parietal cortical ensembles predict single-trial muscle activity during reaching movements in primates".

The European Journal of Neuroscience .

22 (6): 1529– 1540.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04320.x .

PMID 16190906 .

S2CID 31277881 .

^ Anumanchipalli GK, Chartier J, Chang EF (April 2019).

"Speech synthesis from neural decoding of spoken sentences" .

Nature .

568 (7753): 493– 498.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.568..493A .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-019-1119-1 .

PMC 9714519 .

PMID 31019317 .

S2CID 129946122 .

^ Pandarinath C, Ali YH (April 2019).

"Brain implants that let you speak your mind" .

Nature .

568 (7753): 466– 467.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.568..466P .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-019-01181-y .

PMID 31019323 .

^ Moses DA, Metzger SL, Liu JR, Anumanchipalli GK, Makin JG, Sun PF, et al. (July 2021).

"Neuroprosthesis for Decoding Speech in a Paralyzed Person with Anarthria" .

The New England Journal of Medicine .

385 (3): 217– 227.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa2027540 .

PMC 8972947 .

PMID 34260835 .

S2CID 235907121 .

^ Belluck, Pam (14 July 2021).

"Tapping Into the Brain to Help a Paralyzed Man Speak" .

The New York Times .

^ "Using BCI2000 in BCI Research" . National Center for Adaptive Neurotechnology . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .

^ Huber D, Petreanu L, Ghitani N, Ranade S, Hromádka T, Mainen Z, Svoboda K (January 2008).

"Sparse optical microstimulation in barrel cortex drives learned behaviour in freely moving mice" .

Nature .

451 (7174): 61– 64.

Bibcode : 2008Natur.451...61H .

doi : 10.1038/nature06445 .

PMC 3425380 .

PMID 18094685 .

^ Nicolelis MA, Lebedev MA (July 2009). "Principles of neural ensemble physiology underlying the operation of brain-machine interfaces".

Nature Reviews. Neuroscience .

10 (7): 530– 540.

doi : 10.1038/nrn2653 .

PMID 19543222 .

S2CID 9290258 .

^ a b Zander TO, Kothe C (April 2011). "Towards passive brain-computer interfaces: applying brain-computer interface technology to human-machine systems in general".

Journal of Neural Engineering .

8 (2): 025005.

Bibcode : 2011JNEng...8b5005Z .

doi : 10.1088/1741-2560/8/2/025005 .

PMID 21436512 .

S2CID 37168897 .

^ Richardson AG, Ghenbot Y, Liu X, Hao H, Rinehart C, DeLuccia S, et al. (August 2019).

"Learning active sensing strategies using a sensory brain-machine interface" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

116 (35): 17509– 17514.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..11617509R .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1909953116 .

PMC 6717311 .

PMID 31409713 .

^ Abdulkader SN, Atia A, Mostafa MS (July 2015).

"Brain computer interfacing: Applications and challenges" .

Egyptian Informatics Journal .

16 (2): 213– 230.

doi : 10.1016/j.eij.2015.06.002 .

ISSN 1110-8665 .

^ Polikov VS, Tresco PA, Reichert WM (October 2005). "Response of brain tissue to chronically implanted neural electrodes".

Journal of Neuroscience Methods .

148 (1): 1– 18.

doi : 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.08.015 .

PMID 16198003 .

S2CID 11248506 .

^ "Vision quest" .

Wired . (September 2002).

^ Kotler S.

"Vision Quest" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved 10 November 2021 .

^ Tuller D (1 November 2004).

"Dr. William Dobelle, Artificial Vision Pioneer, Dies at 62" .

The New York Times .

^ Naumann J (2012).

Search for Paradise: A Patient's Account of the Artificial Vision Experiment . Xlibris.

ISBN 978-1-4797-0920-5 .

^ nurun.com (28 November 2012).

"Mr. Jen Naumann's high-tech paradise lost" .

thewhig . Thewhig.com . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ Kennedy PR, Bakay RA (June 1998). "Restoration of neural output from a paralyzed patient by a direct brain connection".

NeuroReport .

9 (8): 1707– 1711.

doi : 10.1097/00001756-199806010-00007 .

PMID 9665587 .

S2CID 5681602 .

^ Hochberg LR, Serruya MD, Friehs GM, Mukand JA, Saleh M, Caplan AH, et al. (July 2006). "Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with tetraplegia".

Nature .

442 (7099). Gerhard M. Friehs, Jon A. Mukand, Maryam Saleh, Abraham H. Caplan, Almut Branner, David Chen, Richard D. Penn and John P. Donoghue: 164– 171.

Bibcode : 2006Natur.442..164H .

doi : 10.1038/nature04970 .

PMID 16838014 .

S2CID 4347367 .

^ Martins Iduwe.

"Brain Computer Interface" . Academia.edu . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .

^ Hochberg LR, Bacher D, Jarosiewicz B, Masse NY, Simeral JD, Vogel J, et al. (May 2012).

"Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic arm" .

Nature .

485 (7398): 372– 375.

Bibcode : 2012Natur.485..372H .

doi : 10.1038/nature11076 .

PMC 3640850 .

PMID 22596161 .

^ Collinger JL, Wodlinger B, Downey JE, Wang W, Tyler-Kabara EC, Weber DJ, et al. (February 2013).

"High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia" .

Lancet .

381 (9866): 557– 564.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61816-9 .

PMC 3641862 .

PMID 23253623 .

^ Willett FR, Avansino DT, Hochberg LR, Henderson JM, Shenoy KV (May 2021).

"High-performance brain-to-text communication via handwriting" .

Nature .

593 (7858): 249– 254.

Bibcode : 2021Natur.593..249W .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-03506-2 .

PMC 8163299 .

PMID 33981047 .

^ Willett FR (2021). "A High-Performance Handwriting BCI". In Guger C, Allison BZ, Gunduz A (eds.).

Brain-Computer Interface Research: A State-of-the-Art Summary 10 . SpringerBriefs in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

105– 109.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-79287-9_11 .

ISBN 978-3-030-79287-9 .

S2CID 239736609 .

^ Moses, David A.; Metzger, Sean L.; Liu, Jessie R.; Anumanchipalli, Gopala K.; Makin, Joseph G.; Sun, Pengfei F.; Chartier, Josh; Dougherty, Maximilian E.; Liu, Patricia M.; Abrams, Gary M.; Tu-Chan, Adelyn; Ganguly, Karunesh; Chang, Edward F. (14 July 2021).

"Neuroprosthesis for Decoding Speech in a Paralyzed Person with Anarthria" .

New England Journal of Medicine .

385 (3): 217– 227.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa2027540 .

ISSN 0028-4793 .

PMC 8972947 .

PMID 34260835 .

^ Maiseli, Baraka; Abdalla, Abdi T.; Massawe, Libe V.; Mbise, Mercy; Mkocha, Khadija; Nassor, Nassor Ally; Ismail, Moses; Michael, James; Kimambo, Samwel (4 August 2023).

"Brain–computer interface: trend, challenges, and threats" .

Brain Informatics .

10 (1): 20.

doi : 10.1186/s40708-023-00199-3 .

ISSN 2198-4026 .

PMC 10403483 .

PMID 37540385 .

^ Matsiko, Amos (21 August 2024).

"Bilingual speech neuroprosthesis" .

Science Robotics .

9 (93): eads4122.

doi : 10.1126/scirobotics.ads4122 .

^ Silva, Alexander B.; Liu, Jessie R.; Metzger, Sean L.; Bhaya-Grossman, Ilina; Dougherty, Maximilian E.; Seaton, Margaret P.; Littlejohn, Kaylo T.; Tu-Chan, Adelyn; Ganguly, Karunesh; Moses, David A.; Chang, Edward F. (August 2024).

"A bilingual speech neuroprosthesis driven by cortical articulatory representations shared between languages" .

Nature Biomedical Engineering .

8 (8): 977– 991.

doi : 10.1038/s41551-024-01207-5 .

ISSN 2157-846X .

PMC 11554235 .

PMID 38769157 .

^ "Bilingual AI brain implant helps stroke survivor communicate in Spanish and English" .

NBC News . 28 May 2024 . Retrieved 23 June 2025 .

^ Pandarinath C, Bensmaia SJ (September 2021).

"The science and engineering behind sensitized brain-controlled bionic hands" .

Physiological Reviews .

102 (2): 551– 604.

doi : 10.1152/physrev.00034.2020 .

PMC 8742729 .

PMID 34541898 .

S2CID 237574228 .

^ Willett, Francis R.; Kunz, Erin M.; Fan, Chaofei; Avansino, Donald T.; Wilson, Guy H.; Choi, Eun Young; Kamdar, Foram; Glasser, Matthew F.; Hochberg, Leigh R.; Druckmann, Shaul; Shenoy, Krishna V.; Henderson, Jaimie M. (23 August 2023).

"A high-performance speech neuroprosthesis" .

Nature .

620 (7976): 1031– 1036.

Bibcode : 2023Natur.620.1031W .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-023-06377-x .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMC 10468393 .

PMID 37612500 .

^ Metzger, Sean L.; Littlejohn, Kaylo T.; Silva, Alexander B.; Moses, David A.; Seaton, Margaret P.; Wang, Ran; Dougherty, Maximilian E.; Liu, Jessie R.; Wu, Peter; Berger, Michael A.; Zhuravleva, Inga; Tu-Chan, Adelyn; Ganguly, Karunesh; Anumanchipalli, Gopala K.; Chang, Edward F. (23 August 2023).

"A high-performance neuroprosthesis for speech decoding and avatar control" .

Nature .

620 (7976): 1037– 1046.

Bibcode : 2023Natur.620.1037M .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-023-06443-4 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMC 10826467 .

PMID 37612505 .

S2CID 261098775 .

^ Naddaf, Miryam (23 August 2023).

"Brain-reading devices allow paralysed people to talk using their thoughts" .

Nature .

620 (7976): 930– 931.

Bibcode : 2023Natur.620..930N .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-023-02682-7 .

PMID 37612493 .

S2CID 261099321 .

^ Zhang M, Tang Z, Liu X, Van der Spiegel J (April 2020). "Electronic neural interfaces".

Nature Electronics .

3 (4): 191– 200.

doi : 10.1038/s41928-020-0390-3 .

ISSN 2520-1131 .

S2CID 216508360 .

^ Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF (August 1952).

"A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve" .

The Journal of Physiology .

117 (4): 500– 544.

doi : 10.1113/jphysiol.1952.sp004764 .

PMC 1392413 .

PMID 12991237 .

^ a b Obien ME, Deligkaris K, Bullmann T, Bakkum DJ, Frey U (2015).

"Revealing neuronal function through microelectrode array recordings" .

Frontiers in Neuroscience .

8 : 423.

doi : 10.3389/fnins.2014.00423 .

PMC 4285113 .

PMID 25610364 .

^ a b Harrison RR (July 2008). "The Design of Integrated Circuits to Observe Brain Activity".

Proceedings of the IEEE .

96 (7): 1203– 1216.

doi : 10.1109/JPROC.2008.922581 .

ISSN 1558-2256 .

S2CID 7020369 .

^ Haci D, Liu Y, Ghoreishizadeh SS, Constandinou TG (February 2020).

"Key Considerations for Power Management in Active Implantable Medical Devices" .

2020 IEEE 11th Latin American Symposium on Circuits & Systems (LASCAS) . pp.

1– 4.

doi : 10.1109/LASCAS45839.2020.9069004 .

ISBN 978-1-7281-3427-7 .

S2CID 215817530 .

^ Downey JE, Schwed N, Chase SM, Schwartz AB, Collinger JL (August 2018). "Intracortical recording stability in human brain-computer interface users".

Journal of Neural Engineering .

15 (4): 046016.

Bibcode : 2018JNEng..15d6016D .

doi : 10.1088/1741-2552/aab7a0 .

PMID 29553484 .

S2CID 3961913 .

^ Szostak KM, Grand L, Constandinou TG (2017).

"Neural Interfaces for Intracortical Recording: Requirements, Fabrication Methods, and Characteristics" .

Frontiers in Neuroscience .

11 : 665.

doi : 10.3389/fnins.2017.00665 .

PMC 5725438 .

PMID 29270103 .

^ a b Saxena T, Karumbaiah L, Gaupp EA, Patkar R, Patil K, Betancur M, et al. (July 2013). "The impact of chronic blood-brain barrier breach on intracortical electrode function".

Biomaterials .

34 (20): 4703– 4713.

doi : 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.03.007 .

PMID 23562053 .

^ Nolta NF, Christensen MB, Crane PD, Skousen JL, Tresco PA (1 June 2015). "BBB leakage, astrogliosis, and tissue loss correlate with silicon microelectrode array recording performance".

Biomaterials .

53 : 753– 762.

doi : 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.02.081 .

PMID 25890770 .

^ Robinson JT, Pohlmeyer E, Gather MC, Kemere C, Kitching JE, Malliaras GG, et al. (November 2019).

"Developing Next-generation Brain Sensing Technologies - A Review" .

IEEE Sensors Journal .

19 (22): 10163– 10175.

doi : 10.1109/JSEN.2019.2931159 .

PMC 7047830 .

PMID 32116472 .

^ Luan L, Wei X, Zhao Z, Siegel JJ, Potnis O, Tuppen CA, et al. (February 2017).

"Ultraflexible nanoelectronic probes form reliable, glial scar-free neural integration" .

Science Advances .

3 (2): e1601966.

Bibcode : 2017SciA....3E1966L .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1601966 .

PMC 5310823 .

PMID 28246640 .

^ Frank JA, Antonini MJ, Anikeeva P (September 2019).

"Next-generation interfaces for studying neural function" .

Nature Biotechnology .

37 (9): 1013– 1023.

doi : 10.1038/s41587-019-0198-8 .

PMC 7243676 .

PMID 31406326 .

^ a b Hong G, Viveros RD, Zwang TJ, Yang X, Lieber CM (July 2018).

"Tissue-like Neural Probes for Understanding and Modulating the Brain" .

Biochemistry .

57 (27): 3995– 4004.

doi : 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00122 .

PMC 6039269 .

PMID 29529359 .

^ Viveros RD, Zhou T, Hong G, Fu TM, Lin HG, Lieber CM (June 2019).

"Advanced One- and Two-Dimensional Mesh Designs for Injectable Electronics" .

Nano Letters .

19 (6): 4180– 4187.

Bibcode : 2019NanoL..19.4180V .

doi : 10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b01727 .

PMC 6565464 .

PMID 31075202 .

^ Gulati T, Won SJ, Ramanathan DS, Wong CC, Bodepudi A, Swanson RA, Ganguly K (June 2015).

"Robust neuroprosthetic control from the stroke perilesional cortex" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

35 (22): 8653– 8661.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5007-14.2015 .

PMC 6605327 .

PMID 26041930 .

^ Soldozy S, Young S, Kumar JS, Capek S, Felbaum DR, Jean WC, et al. (July 2020).

"A systematic review of endovascular stent-electrode arrays, a minimally invasive approach to brain-machine interfaces" .

Neurosurgical Focus .

49 (1): E3.

doi : 10.3171/2020.4.FOCUS20186 .

PMID 32610291 .

S2CID 220308983 .

^ a b Opie N (2021). "The StentrodeTM Neural Interface System". In Guger C, Allison BZ, Tangermann M (eds.).

Brain-Computer Interface Research . SpringerBriefs in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

127– 132.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-60460-8_13 .

ISBN 978-3-030-60460-8 .

S2CID 234102889 .

^ Teleb MS, Cziep ME, Lazzaro MA, Gheith A, Asif K, Remler B, Zaidat OO (May 2014).

"Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension. A Systematic Analysis of Transverse Sinus Stenting" .

Interventional Neurology .

2 (3): 132– 143.

doi : 10.1159/000357503 .

PMC 4080637 .

PMID 24999351 .

^ Bryson S (5 November 2020).

"Stentrode Device Allows Computer Control by ALS Patients with Partial Upper Limb Paralysis" .

ALS News Today .

^ Lanese, Nicoletta (12 January 2023).

"New 'thought-controlled' device reads brain activity through the jugular" .

livescience.com .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2023 . Retrieved 16 February 2023 .

^ Mitchell, Peter; Lee, Sarah C. M.; Yoo, Peter E.; Morokoff, Andrew; Sharma, Rahul P.; Williams, Daryl L.; MacIsaac, Christopher; Howard, Mark E.; Irving, Lou; Vrljic, Ivan; Williams, Cameron; Bush, Steven; Balabanski, Anna H.; Drummond, Katharine J.; Desmond, Patricia; Weber, Douglas; Denison, Timothy; Mathers, Susan; O'Brien, Terence J.; Mocco, J.; Grayden, David B.; Liebeskind, David S.; Opie, Nicholas L.; Oxley, Thomas J.; Campbell, Bruce C. V. (9 January 2023).

"Assessment of Safety of a Fully Implanted Endovascular Brain-Computer Interface for Severe Paralysis in 4 Patients: The Stentrode With Thought-Controlled Digital Switch (SWITCH) Study" .

JAMA Neurology .

80 (3): 270– 278.

doi : 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.4847 .

ISSN 2168-6149 .

PMC 9857731 .

PMID 36622685 .

S2CID 255545643 .

^ Serruya M, Donoghue J (2004).

"Chapter III: Design Principles of a Neuromotor Prosthetic Device" (PDF) . In Horch KW, Dhillon GS (eds.).

Neuroprosthetics: Theory and Practice . Imperial College Press. pp.

1158– 1196.

doi : 10.1142/9789812561763_0040 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2005.

^ "Teenager moves video icons just by imagination" .

Press release . Washington University in St Louis. 9 October 2006.

^ Schalk G, Miller KJ, Anderson NR, Wilson JA, Smyth MD, Ojemann JG, et al. (March 2008).

"Two-dimensional movement control using electrocorticographic signals in humans" .

Journal of Neural Engineering .

5 (1): 75– 84.

Bibcode : 2008JNEng...5...75S .

doi : 10.1088/1741-2560/5/1/008 .

PMC 2744037 .

PMID 18310813 .

^ Nicolas-Alonso LF, Gomez-Gil J (31 January 2012).

"Brain computer interfaces, a review" .

Sensors .

12 (2): 1211– 1279.

Bibcode : 2012Senso..12.1211N .

doi : 10.3390/s120201211 .

PMC 3304110 .

PMID 22438708 .

^ Yanagisawa T (2011). "Electrocorticographic Control of Prosthetic Arm in Paralyzed Patients".

American Neurological Association . Vol. 71, no. 3. pp.

353– 361.

doi : 10.1002/ana.22613 .

ECoG- Based BCI has advantage in signal and durability that are absolutely necessary for clinical application ^ a b Pei X (2011). "Decoding Vowels and Consonants in Spoken and Imagined Words Using Electrocorticographic Signals in Humans".

J Neural Eng 046028th ser. 8.4 .

PMID 21750369 .

Justin Williams, a biomedical engineer at the university, has already transformed the ECoG implant into a micro device that can be installed with a minimum of fuss. It has been tested in animals for a long period of time – the micro ECoG stays in place and doesn't seem to negatively affect the immune system.

^ Makin JG, Moses DA, Chang EF (2021). "Speech Decoding as Machine Translation". In Guger C, Allison BZ, Gunduz A (eds.).

Brain-Computer Interface Research . SpringerBriefs in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

23– 33.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-79287-9_3 .

ISBN 978-3-030-79287-9 .

S2CID 239756345 .

^ Makin JG, Moses DA, Chang EF (April 2020).

"Machine translation of cortical activity to text with an encoder-decoder framework" .

Nature Neuroscience .

23 (4): 575– 582.

doi : 10.1038/s41593-020-0608-8 .

PMC 10560395 .

PMID 32231340 .

S2CID 214704481 .

^ Gallegos-Ayala G, Furdea A, Takano K, Ruf CA, Flor H, Birbaumer N (May 2014).

"Brain communication in a completely locked-in patient using bedside near-infrared spectroscopy" .

Neurology .

82 (21): 1930– 1932.

doi : 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000449 .

PMC 4049706 .

PMID 24789862 .

^ Vidal 1977 ^ Bozinovska et al. 1988, 1990 ^ Bozinovski et al. 1988 ^ Farwell and Donchin, 1988 ^ Winters, Jeffrey (May 2003).

"Communicating by Brain Waves" .

Psychology Today .

^ Adrijan Bozinovski "CNV flip-flop as a brain-computer interface paradigm" In J. Kern, S. Tonkovic, et al. (Eds) Proc 7th Conference of the Croatian Association of Medical Informatics, pp. 149-154, Rijeka, 2005 ^ Bozinovski, Adrijan; Bozinovska, Liljana (2009).

Anticipatory brain potentials in a Brain-Robot Interface paradigm . 2009 4th International IEEE/EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering. IEEE. pp.

451– 454.

doi : 10.1109/ner.2009.5109330 .

^ Božinovski, Adrijan; Tonković, Stanko; Išgum, Velimir; Božinovska, Liljana (2011).

"Robot Control Using Anticipatory Brain Potentials" .

Automatika .

52 (1): 20– 30.

doi : 10.1080/00051144.2011.11828400 .

S2CID 33223634 .

^ Bozinovski, Stevo; Bozinovski, Adrijan (2015).

"Mental States, EEG Manifestations, and Mentally Emulated Digital Circuits for Brain-Robot Interaction" .

IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development .

7 (1). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE): 39– 51.

doi : 10.1109/tamd.2014.2387271 .

ISSN 1943-0604 .

S2CID 21464338 .

^ Yuan H, Liu T, Szarkowski R, Rios C, Ashe J, He B (February 2010).

"Negative covariation between task-related responses in alpha/beta-band activity and BOLD in human sensorimotor cortex: an EEG and fMRI study of motor imagery and movements" .

NeuroImage .

49 (3): 2596– 2606.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.028 .

PMC 2818527 .

PMID 19850134 .

^ Doud AJ, Lucas JP, Pisansky MT, He B (2011). Gribble PL (ed.).

"Continuous three-dimensional control of a virtual helicopter using a motor imagery based brain-computer interface" .

PLOS ONE .

6 (10): e26322.

Bibcode : 2011PLoSO...626322D .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0026322 .

PMC 3202533 .

PMID 22046274 .

^ "Thought-guided helicopter takes off" .

BBC News . 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 5 June 2013 .

^ Qin L, Ding L, He B (September 2004).

"Motor imagery classification by means of source analysis for brain-computer interface applications" .

Journal of Neural Engineering .

1 (3): 135– 141.

Bibcode : 2004JNEng...1..135Q .

doi : 10.1088/1741-2560/1/3/002 .

PMC 1945182 .

PMID 15876632 .

^ Höhne J, Holz E, Staiger-Sälzer P, Müller KR , Kübler A, Tangermann M (2014).

"Motor imagery for severely motor-impaired patients: evidence for brain-computer interfacing as superior control solution" .

PLOS ONE .

9 (8): e104854.

Bibcode : 2014PLoSO...9j4854H .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0104854 .

PMC 4146550 .

PMID 25162231 .

^ Bird JJ, Faria DR, Manso LJ, Ekárt A, Buckingham CD (13 March 2019).

"A Deep Evolutionary Approach to Bioinspired Classifier Optimisation for Brain-Machine Interaction" .

Complexity .

2019 . Hindawi Limited: 1– 14.

arXiv : 1908.04784 .

doi : 10.1155/2019/4316548 .

ISSN 1076-2787 .

^ Mansour S, Ang KK, Nair KP, Phua KS, Arvaneh M (January 2022).

"Efficacy of Brain-Computer Interface and the Impact of Its Design Characteristics on Poststroke Upper-limb Rehabilitation: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials" .

Clinical EEG and Neuroscience .

53 (1): 79– 90.

doi : 10.1177/15500594211009065 .

PMC 8619716 .

PMID 33913351 .

S2CID 233446181 .

^ Baniqued PD, Stanyer EC, Awais M, Alazmani A, Jackson AE, Mon-Williams MA, et al. (January 2021).

"Brain-computer interface robotics for hand rehabilitation after stroke: a systematic review" .

Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation .

18 (1) 15.

doi : 10.1186/s12984-021-00820-8 .

PMC 7825186 .

PMID 33485365 .

^ Taheri BA, Knight RT, Smith RL (May 1994).

"A dry electrode for EEG recording" .

Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology .

90 (5): 376– 383.

doi : 10.1016/0013-4694(94)90053-1 .

PMID 7514984 .

^ Alizadeh-Taheri B (1994).

Active Micromachined Scalp Electrode Array for Eeg Signal Recording (PHD Thesis thesis). p. 82.

Bibcode : 1994PhDT........82A .

^ Hockenberry, John (August 2001).

"The Next Brainiacs" .

Wired . Vol. 9, no. 8.

^ Lin CT, Ko LW, Chang CJ, Wang YT, Chung CH, Yang FS, et al. (2009), "Wearable and Wireless Brain-Computer Interface and Its Applications", Foundations of Augmented Cognition. Neuroergonomics and Operational Neuroscience , Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5638, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.

741– 748, doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-02812-0_84 , ISBN 978-3-642-02811-3 , S2CID 14515754 ^ a b c d Wang YT, Wang Y, Jung TP (April 2011). "A cell-phone-based brain-computer interface for communication in daily life".

Journal of Neural Engineering .

8 (2): 025018.

Bibcode : 2011JNEng...8b5018W .

doi : 10.1088/1741-2560/8/2/025018 .

PMID 21436517 .

S2CID 10943518 .

^ Guger C, Allison BZ, Großwindhager B, Prückl R, Hintermüller C, Kapeller C, et al. (2012).

"How Many People Could Use an SSVEP BCI?" .

Frontiers in Neuroscience .

6 : 169.

doi : 10.3389/fnins.2012.00169 .

PMC 3500831 .

PMID 23181009 .

^ a b Lin YP, Wang Y, Jung TP (2013). "A mobile SSVEP-based brain-computer interface for freely moving humans: The robustness of canonical correlation analysis to motion artifacts".

2013 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) . Vol. 2013. pp.

1350– 1353.

doi : 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6609759 .

ISBN 978-1-4577-0216-7 .

PMID 24109946 .

S2CID 23136360 .

^ Rashid M, Sulaiman N, Abdul Majeed AP, Musa RM, Ab Nasir AF, Bari BS, Khatun S (2020).

"Current Status, Challenges, and Possible Solutions of EEG-Based Brain-Computer Interface: A Comprehensive Review" .

Frontiers in Neurorobotics .

14 : 25.

doi : 10.3389/fnbot.2020.00025 .

PMC 7283463 .

PMID 32581758 .

^ US 20130127708 , issued 23 May 2013 ^ a b c Wang YT, Wang Y, Cheng CK, Jung TP (2013). "Developing stimulus presentation on mobile devices for a truly portable SSVEP-based BCI".

2013 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) . Vol. 2013. pp.

5271– 5274.

doi : 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610738 .

ISBN 978-1-4577-0216-7 .

PMID 24110925 .

S2CID 14324159 .

^ Bin G, Gao X, Yan Z, Hong B, Gao S (August 2009). "An online multi-channel SSVEP-based brain-computer interface using a canonical correlation analysis method".

Journal of Neural Engineering .

6 (4): 046002.

Bibcode : 2009JNEng...6d6002B .

doi : 10.1088/1741-2560/6/4/046002 .

PMID 19494422 .

S2CID 32640699 .

^ Symeonidou ER, Nordin AD, Hairston WD, Ferris DP (April 2018).

"Effects of Cable Sway, Electrode Surface Area, and Electrode Mass on Electroencephalography Signal Quality during Motion" .

Sensors .

18 (4): 1073.

Bibcode : 2018Senso..18.1073S .

doi : 10.3390/s18041073 .

PMC 5948545 .

PMID 29614020 .

^ Wang Y, Wang R, Gao X, Hong B, Gao S (June 2006). "A practical VEP-based brain-computer interface".

IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering .

14 (2): 234– 239.

doi : 10.1109/TNSRE.2006.875576 .

PMID 16792302 .

^ Pfurtscheller G, Müller GR, Pfurtscheller J, Gerner HJ, Rupp R (November 2003). " 'Thought'--control of functional electrical stimulation to restore hand grasp in a patient with tetraplegia".

Neuroscience Letters .

351 (1): 33– 36.

doi : 10.1016/S0304-3940(03)00947-9 .

PMID 14550907 .

S2CID 38568963 .

^ Do AH, Wang PT, King CE, Chun SN, Nenadic Z (December 2013).

"Brain-computer interface controlled robotic gait orthosis" .

Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation .

10 (1): 111.

doi : 10.1186/1743-0003-10-111 .

PMC 3907014 .

PMID 24321081 .

^ Subject with Paraplegia Operates BCI-controlled RoGO (4x) at YouTube.com ^ Alex Blainey controls a cheap consumer robot arm using the EPOC headset via a serial relay port at YouTube.com ^ Ranganatha Sitaram, Andrea Caria, Ralf Veit, Tilman Gaber, Giuseppina Rota, Andrea Kuebler and Niels Birbaumer(2007) " FMRI Brain–Computer Interface: A Tool for Neuroscientific Research and Treatment " ^ Peplow, Mark (27 August 2004). "Mental ping-pong could aid paraplegics".

News@nature .

doi : 10.1038/news040823-18 .

^ "To operate robot only with brain, ATR and Honda develop BMI base technology" .

Tech-on . 26 May 2006. Archived from the original on 23 June 2017 . Retrieved 22 September 2006 .

^ Miyawaki Y, Uchida H, Yamashita O, Sato MA, Morito Y, Tanabe HC, et al. (December 2008).

"Visual image reconstruction from human brain activity using a combination of multiscale local image decoders" .

Neuron .

60 (5): 915– 929.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.11.004 .

PMID 19081384 .

S2CID 17327816 .

^ Nishimoto S, Vu AT, Naselaris T, Benjamini Y, Yu B, Gallant JL (October 2011).

"Reconstructing visual experiences from brain activity evoked by natural movies" .

Current Biology .

21 (19): 1641– 1646.

Bibcode : 2011CBio...21.1641N .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2011.08.031 .

PMC 3326357 .

PMID 21945275 .

^ Yam, Philip (22 September 2011).

"Breakthrough Could Enable Others to Watch Your Dreams and Memories" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 25 September 2011 .

^ "Reconstructing visual experiences from brain activity evoked by natural movies (Project page)" . The Gallant Lab at UC Berkeley . Archived from the original on 25 September 2011 . Retrieved 25 September 2011 .

^ Anwar, Yasmin (22 September 2011).

"Scientists use brain imaging to reveal the movies in our mind" .

UC Berkeley News Center . Retrieved 25 September 2011 .

^ a b c Marshall D, Coyle D, Wilson S, Callaghan M (2013). "Games, Gameplay, and BCI: The State of the Art".

IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games .

5 (2): 83.

doi : 10.1109/TCIAIG.2013.2263555 .

S2CID 206636315 .

^ "Goals of the organizers" . BBC . Retrieved 19 December 2022 .

^ Ang KK, Chin ZY, Wang C, Guan C, Zhang H (1 January 2012).

"Filter Bank Common Spatial Pattern Algorithm on BCI Competition IV Datasets 2a and 2b" .

Frontiers in Neuroscience .

6 : 39.

doi : 10.3389/fnins.2012.00039 .

PMC 3314883 .

PMID 22479236 .

^ Fairclough, Stephen H. (January 2009).

"Fundamentals of physiological computing" .

Interacting with Computers .

21 ( 1– 2): 133– 145.

doi : 10.1016/j.intcom.2008.10.011 .

S2CID 16314534 .

^ Bozinovski S (2017). "Signal Processing Robotics Using Signals Generated by a Human Head: From Pioneering Works to EEG-Based Emulation of Digital Circuits".

Advances in Robot Design and Intelligent Control . Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing. Vol. 540. pp.

449– 462.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-49058-8_49 .

ISBN 978-3-319-49057-1 .

^ Mathôt S, Melmi JB, van der Linden L, Van der Stigchel S (2016).

"The Mind-Writing Pupil: A Human-Computer Interface Based on Decoding of Covert Attention through Pupillometry" .

PLOS ONE .

11 (2): e0148805.

Bibcode : 2016PLoSO..1148805M .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0148805 .

PMC 4743834 .

PMID 26848745 .

^ Bland, Eric (13 October 2008).

"Army Developing 'synthetic telepathy' " .

Discovery News . Retrieved 13 October 2008 .

^ Pais-Vieira M, Lebedev M, Kunicki C, Wang J, Nicolelis MA (28 February 2013).

"A brain-to-brain interface for real-time sharing of sensorimotor information" .

Scientific Reports .

3 1319.

Bibcode : 2013NatSR...3.1319P .

doi : 10.1038/srep01319 .

PMC 3584574 .

PMID 23448946 .

^ Gorman, James (28 February 2013).

"One Rat Thinks, and Another Reacts" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 28 February 2013 .

^ Sample, Ian (1 March 2013).

"Brain-to-brain interface lets rats share information via internet" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 March 2013 .

^ Kennedy, Pagan (18 September 2011).

"The Cyborg in Us All" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 28 January 2012 .

^ Selim, Jocelyn; Drinkell, Pete (1 November 2002).

"The Bionic Connection" .

Discover . Archived from the original on 6 January 2008.

^ Giaimo, Cara (10 June 2015).

"Nervous System Hookup Leads to Telepathic Hand-Holding" .

Atlas Obscura .

^ Warwick, K, Gasson, M, Hutt, B, Goodhew, I, Kyberd, P, Schulzrinne, H and Wu, X: "Thought Communication and Control: A First Step using Radiotelegraphy", IEE Proceedings on Communications, 151(3), pp.185–189, 2004 ^ Warwick K, Gasson M, Hutt B, Goodhew I, Kyberd P, Andrews B, et al. (October 2003).

"The application of implant technology for cybernetic systems" .

Archives of Neurology .

60 (10): 1369– 1373.

doi : 10.1001/archneur.60.10.1369 .

PMID 14568806 .

^ Grau C, Ginhoux R, Riera A, Nguyen TL, Chauvat H, Berg M, et al. (2014).

"Conscious brain-to-brain communication in humans using non-invasive technologies" .

PLOS ONE .

9 (8): e105225.

Bibcode : 2014PLoSO...9j5225G .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0105225 .

PMC 4138179 .

PMID 25137064 .

^ Mazzatenta A, Giugliano M, Campidelli S, Gambazzi L, Businaro L, Markram H, et al. (June 2007).

"Interfacing neurons with carbon nanotubes: electrical signal transfer and synaptic stimulation in cultured brain circuits" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

27 (26): 6931– 6936.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1051-07.2007 .

PMC 6672220 .

PMID 17596441 .

^ Caltech Scientists Devise First Neurochip , Caltech, 26 October 1997 ^ Sandhana, Lakshmi (22 October 2004).

"Coming to a brain near you" .

Wired News . Archived from the original on 10 September 2006.

^ " 'Brain' in a dish flies flight simulator" .

CNN . 4 November 2004.

^ "Paralyzed Again" .

MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 8 December 2023 .

^ "Gale - Product Login" .

galeapps.gale.com . Retrieved 8 December 2023 .

^ Ienca, Marcello; Haselager, Pim (June 2016).

"Hacking the brain: brain-computer interfacing technology and the ethics of neurosecurity" .

Ethics & Information Technology .

18 (2): 117– 129.

doi : 10.1007/s10676-016-9398-9 .

hdl : 2066/157644 .

S2CID 5132634 .

^ Steinert, Steffen; Friedrich, Orsolya (1 February 2020).

"Wired Emotions: Ethical Issues of Affective Brain–Computer Interfaces" .

Science and Engineering Ethics .

26 (1): 351– 367.

doi : 10.1007/s11948-019-00087-2 .

ISSN 1471-5546 .

PMC 6978299 .

PMID 30868377 .

^ Clausen, Jens (1 February 2009).

"Man, machine and in between" .

Nature .

457 (7233): 1080– 1081.

Bibcode : 2009Natur.457.1080C .

doi : 10.1038/4571080a .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 19242454 .

S2CID 205043226 .

^ Haselager, Pim; Vlek, Rutger; Hill, Jeremy; Nijboer, Femke (1 November 2009).

"A note on ethical aspects of BCI" .

Neural Networks . Brain-Machine Interface.

22 (9): 1352– 1357.

doi : 10.1016/j.neunet.2009.06.046 .

hdl : 2066/77533 .

ISSN 0893-6080 .

PMID 19616405 .

^ Attiah, Mark A.; Farah, Martha J. (15 May 2014).

"Minds, motherboards, and money: futurism and realism in the neuroethics of BCI technologies" .

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience .

8 : 86.

doi : 10.3389/fnsys.2014.00086 .

ISSN 1662-5137 .

PMC 4030132 .

PMID 24860445 .

^ Nijboer, Femke; Clausen, Jens; Allison, Brendan Z.; Haselager, Pim (2013).

"The Asilomar Survey: Stakeholders' Opinions on Ethical Issues Related to Brain-Computer Interfacing" .

Neuroethics .

6 (3): 541– 578.

doi : 10.1007/s12152-011-9132-6 .

ISSN 1874-5490 .

PMC 3825606 .

PMID 24273623 .

^ "Sony patent neural interface" . Archived from the original on 7 April 2012.

^ "Mind Games" .

The Economist . 23 March 2007.

^ "nia Game Controller Product Page" . OCZ Technology Group . Retrieved 30 January 2013 .

^ a b c Li S (8 August 2010).

"Mind reading is on the market" .

Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 4 January 2013.

^ Fruhlinger, Joshua (9 October 2008).

"Brains-on with NeuroSky and Square Enix's Judecca mind-control game" .

Engadget . Retrieved 29 May 2012 .

^ New games powered by brain waves . Physorg.com (10 January 2009). Retrieved on 12 September 2010.

^ Snider, Mike (7 January 2009).

"Toy trains 'Star Wars' fans to use The Force" .

USA Today . Retrieved 1 May 2010 .

^ "Emotiv Homepage" . Emotiv.com . Retrieved 29 December 2009 .

^ " 'necomimi' selected 'Time Magazine / The 50 best invention of the year' " . Neurowear. 22 November 2011. Archived from the original on 25 January 2012.

^ "LIFESUIT Updates & News – They Shall Walk" . Theyshallwalk.org . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ "SmartphoneBCI" .

GitHub . Retrieved 5 June 2018 .

^ "SSVEP_keyboard" .

GitHub . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ Protalinski, Emil (8 December 2020).

"NextMind ships its real-time brain computer interface Dev Kit for $399" .

VentureBeat . Retrieved 8 September 2021 .

^ Etherington, Darrell (21 December 2020).

"NextMind's Dev Kit for mind-controlled computing offers a rare 'wow' factor in tech" .

TechCrunch . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

^ "Welcome Nextmind!" .

ar.snap.com . Retrieved 31 May 2024 .

^ "Brain-computer Interface (BCI), explore neuroscience - PiEEG" .

PiEEG .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2024 .

^ "Roadmap - BNCI Horizon 2020" .

bnci-horizon-2020.eu . Retrieved 5 May 2019 .

^ Brunner C, Birbaumer N, Blankertz B, Guger C, Kübler A, Mattia D, et al. (2015).

"BNCI Horizon 2020: towards a roadmap for the BCI community" .

Brain-Computer Interfaces .

2 : 1– 10.

doi : 10.1080/2326263X.2015.1008956 .

hdl : 1874/350349 .

S2CID 15822773 .

^ Allison BZ, Dunne S, Leeb R, Millan J, Nijholt A (2013).

Towards Practical Brain-Computer Interfaces: Bridging the Gap from Research to Real-World Applications . Berlin Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-642-29746-5 .

^ Edlinger G, Allison BZ, Guger C (2015). "How many people could use a BCI system?". In Kansaku K, Cohen L, Birbaumer N (eds.).

Clinical Systems Neuroscience . Tokyo: pringer Verlag Japan. pp.

33– 66.

ISBN 978-4-431-55037-2 .

^ Chatelle C, Chennu S, Noirhomme Q, Cruse D, Owen AM, Laureys S (2012). "Brain-computer interfacing in disorders of consciousness".

Brain Injury .

26 (12): 1510– 1522.

doi : 10.3109/02699052.2012.698362 .

hdl : 2268/162403 .

PMID 22759199 .

S2CID 6498232 .

^ Boly M, Massimini M, Garrido MI, Gosseries O, Noirhomme Q, Laureys S, Soddu A (2012). "Brain connectivity in disorders of consciousness".

Brain Connectivity .

2 (1): 1– 10.

doi : 10.1089/brain.2011.0049 .

hdl : 2268/131984 .

PMID 22512333 .

S2CID 6447538 .

^ Gibson RM, Fernández-Espejo D, Gonzalez-Lara LE, Kwan BY, Lee DH, Owen AM, Cruse D (2014).

"Multiple tasks and neuroimaging modalities increase the likelihood of detecting covert awareness in patients with disorders of consciousness" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

8 : 950.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00950 .

PMC 4244609 .

PMID 25505400 .

^ Risetti M, Formisano R, Toppi J, Quitadamo LR, Bianchi L, Astolfi L, et al. (2013).

"On ERPs detection in disorders of consciousness rehabilitation" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

7 : 775.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00775 .

PMC 3834290 .

PMID 24312041 .

^ Silvoni S, Ramos-Murguialday A, Cavinato M, Volpato C, Cisotto G, Turolla A, et al. (October 2011). "Brain-computer interface in stroke: a review of progress".

Clinical EEG and Neuroscience .

42 (4): 245– 252.

doi : 10.1177/155005941104200410 .

PMID 22208122 .

S2CID 37902399 .

^ Leamy DJ, Kocijan J, Domijan K, Duffin J, Roche RA, Commins S, et al. (January 2014).

"An exploration of EEG features during recovery following stroke - implications for BCI-mediated neurorehabilitation therapy" .

Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation .

11 : 9.

doi : 10.1186/1743-0003-11-9 .

PMC 3996183 .

PMID 24468185 .

^ Tung SW, Guan C, Ang KK, Phua KS, Wang C, Zhao L, et al. (July 2013). "Motor imagery BCI for upper limb stroke rehabilitation: An evaluation of the EEG recordings using coherence analysis".

2013 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) . Vol. 2013. pp.

261– 264.

doi : 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6609487 .

ISBN 978-1-4577-0216-7 .

PMID 24109674 .

S2CID 5071115 .

^ Bai Z, Fong KN, Zhang JJ, Chan J, Ting KH (April 2020).

"Immediate and long-term effects of BCI-based rehabilitation of the upper extremity after stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis" .

Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation .

17 (1) 57.

doi : 10.1186/s12984-020-00686-2 .

PMC 7183617 .

PMID 32334608 .

^ Remsik A, Young B, Vermilyea R, Kiekhoefer L, Abrams J, Evander Elmore S, et al. (May 2016).

"A review of the progression and future implications of brain-computer interface therapies for restoration of distal upper extremity motor function after stroke" .

Expert Review of Medical Devices .

13 (5): 445– 454.

doi : 10.1080/17434440.2016.1174572 .

PMC 5131699 .

PMID 27112213 .

^ Monge-Pereira E, Ibañez-Pereda J, Alguacil-Diego IM, Serrano JI, Spottorno-Rubio MP, Molina-Rueda F (September 2017).

"Use of Electroencephalography Brain-Computer Interface Systems as a Rehabilitative Approach for Upper Limb Function After a Stroke: A Systematic Review" .

PM&R .

9 (9): 918– 932.

doi : 10.1016/j.pmrj.2017.04.016 .

PMID 28512066 .

S2CID 20808455 .

^ Sabathiel N, Irimia DC, Allison BZ, Guger C, Edlinger G (17 July 2016). "Paired Associative Stimulation with Brain-Computer Interfaces: A New Paradigm for Stroke Rehabilitation".

Foundations of Augmented Cognition: Neuroergonomics and Operational Neuroscience . Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 9743. pp.

261– 272.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-39955-3_25 .

ISBN 978-3-319-39954-6 .

^ Riccio A, Pichiorri F, Schettini F, Toppi J, Risetti M, Formisano R, et al. (2016). "Interfacing brain with computer to improve communication and rehabilitation after brain damage".

Brain-Computer Interfaces: Lab Experiments to Real-World Applications . Progress in Brain Research. Vol. 228. pp.

357– 387.

doi : 10.1016/bs.pbr.2016.04.018 .

ISBN 978-0-12-804216-8 .

PMID 27590975 .

^ Várkuti B, Guan C, Pan Y, Phua KS, Ang KK, Kuah CW, et al. (January 2013). "Resting state changes in functional connectivity correlate with movement recovery for BCI and robot-assisted upper-extremity training after stroke".

Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair .

27 (1): 53– 62.

doi : 10.1177/1545968312445910 .

PMID 22645108 .

S2CID 7120989 .

^ Young BM, Nigogosyan Z, Remsik A, Walton LM, Song J, Nair VA, et al. (2014).

"Changes in functional connectivity correlate with behavioral gains in stroke patients after therapy using a brain-computer interface device" .

Frontiers in Neuroengineering .

7 : 25.

doi : 10.3389/fneng.2014.00025 .

PMC 4086321 .

PMID 25071547 .

^ a b Yuan K, Chen C, Wang X, Chu WC, Tong RK (January 2021).

"BCI Training Effects on Chronic Stroke Correlate with Functional Reorganization in Motor-Related Regions: A Concurrent EEG and fMRI Study" .

Brain Sciences .

11 (1): 56.

doi : 10.3390/brainsci11010056 .

PMC 7824842 .

PMID 33418846 .

^ Mrachacz-Kersting N, Voigt M, Stevenson AJ, Aliakbaryhosseinabadi S, Jiang N, Dremstrup K, Farina D (November 2017). "The effect of type of afferent feedback timed with motor imagery on the induction of cortical plasticity".

Brain Research .

1674 : 91– 100.

doi : 10.1016/j.brainres.2017.08.025 .

hdl : 10012/12325 .

PMID 28859916 .

S2CID 5866337 .

^ Opie N (2 April 2019).

"Research Overview" .

University of Melbourne Medicine . University of Melbourne . Retrieved 5 December 2019 .

^ Oxley TJ, Opie NL, John SE, Rind GS, Ronayne SM, Wheeler TL, et al. (March 2016). "Minimally invasive endovascular stent-electrode array for high-fidelity, chronic recordings of cortical neural activity".

Nature Biotechnology .

34 (3): 320– 327.

doi : 10.1038/nbt.3428 .

PMID 26854476 .

S2CID 205282364 .

^ "Synchron begins trialling Stentrode neural interface technology" . Verdict Medical Devices. 22 September 2019 . Retrieved 5 December 2019 .

^ Radzik I, Miziak B, Dudka J, Chrościńska-Krawczyk M, Czuczwar SJ (June 2015). "Prospects of epileptogenesis prevention".

Pharmacological Reports .

67 (3): 663– 668.

doi : 10.1016/j.pharep.2015.01.016 .

PMID 25933984 .

S2CID 31284248 .

^ Ritaccio A, Brunner P, Gunduz A, Hermes D, Hirsch LJ, Jacobs J, et al. (December 2014).

"Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Advances in Electrocorticography" .

Epilepsy & Behavior .

41 : 183– 192.

doi : 10.1016/j.yebeh.2014.09.015 .

PMC 4268064 .

PMID 25461213 .

^ Kim DH, Viventi J, Amsden JJ, Xiao J, Vigeland L, Kim YS, et al. (June 2010).

"Dissolvable films of silk fibroin for ultrathin conformal bio-integrated electronics" .

Nature Materials .

9 (6): 511– 517.

Bibcode : 2010NatMa...9..511K .

doi : 10.1038/nmat2745 .

PMC 3034223 .

PMID 20400953 .

^ Boppart SA, Wheeler BC, Wallace CS (January 1992). "A flexible perforated microelectrode array for extended neural recordings".

IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering .

39 (1): 37– 42.

doi : 10.1109/10.108125 .

PMID 1572679 .

S2CID 36593459 .

^ Thompson CH, Zoratti MJ, Langhals NB, Purcell EK (April 2016).

"Regenerative Electrode Interfaces for Neural Prostheses" .

Tissue Engineering. Part B, Reviews .

22 (2): 125– 135.

doi : 10.1089/ten.teb.2015.0279 .

PMID 26421660 .

^ a b Rabaey JM (September 2011). "Brain-machine interfaces as the new frontier in extreme miniaturization".

2011 Proceedings of the European Solid-State Device Research Conference (ESSDERC) . pp.

19– 24.

doi : 10.1109/essderc.2011.6044240 .

ISBN 978-1-4577-0707-0 .

S2CID 47542923 .

^ Warneke B, Last M, Liebowitz B, Pister KS (January 2001). "Smart Dust: communicating with a cubic-millimeter computer".

Computer .

34 (1): 44– 51.

doi : 10.1109/2.895117 .

ISSN 0018-9162 .

S2CID 21557 .

Further reading [ edit ] Brouse, Andrew.

"A Young Person's Guide to Brainwave Music: Forty years of audio from the human EEG" .

eContact! 14.2 – Biotechnological Performance Practice / Pratiques de performance biotechnologique (July 2012). Montréal: CEC .

Gupta, Cota Navin and Ramaswamy Palanappian.

"Using High-Frequency Electroencephalogram in Visual and Auditory-Based Brain-Computer Interface Designs" .

eContact! 14.2 – Biotechnological Performance Practice / Pratiques de performance biotechnologique (July 2012). Montréal: CEC .

Ouzounian, Gascia.

"The Biomuse Trio in Conversation: An Interview with R. Benjamin Knapp and Eric Lyon" .

eContact! 14.2 – Biotechnological Performance Practice / Pratiques de performance biotechnologique (July 2012). Montréal: CEC .

20 Years of Brain-Machine Interface Research . Nicolelis Lab Series. Vol. 1. 2019. p. 452.

20 Years of Brain-Machine Interface Research . Nicolelis Lab Series. Vol. 2. 2019. p. 436.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Brain-computer interfaces .

Scholia has a topic profile for Brain–computer interface .

Wandelt, Sarah K.; Bjånes, David A.; Pejsa, Kelsie; Lee, Brian; Liu, Charles; Andersen, Richard A. (13 May 2024).

"Representation of internal speech by single neurons in human supramarginal gyrus" .

Nature Human Behaviour .

8 (6): 1136– 1149.

doi : 10.1038/s41562-024-01867-y .

ISSN 2397-3374 .

PMC 11199147 .

PMID 38740984 .

The Unlock Project CIA - Wireless BCI v t e Brain–computer interface Technologies Biomechatronics Brain implant BrainGate Brainport Cyberware Exocortex Intelligence amplification Isolated brain Neuroprosthetics Neurotechnology Optogenetics Sensory substitution Stentrode Synthetic telepathy Scientific phenomena Electrocorticography (ECoG) Neural ensemble Neuroplasticity Disciplines Cognitive science Cognitive neuroscience Computational neuroscience NBIC Neural engineering Neuroscience Speculative Brain transplant Cyborg Mind uploading People Charles Stross Douglas Engelbart Hugh Herr J. C. R. Licklider Kevin Warwick Matt Nagle Merlin Donald Miguel Nicolelis Peter Kyberd Steve Mann Vernor Vinge Yoky Matsuoka Edward Boyden Other Virtual reality Human enhancement Neurohacking Simulation hypothesis Transhumanism Walk Again Project Category Commons v t e Neuroscience Outline History Basic science Behavioral epigenetics Behavioral genetics Brain mapping Brain-reading Cellular neuroscience Computational neuroscience Connectomics Imaging genetics Integrative neuroscience Molecular neuroscience Neural decoding Neural engineering Neuroanatomy Neurobiology Neurochemistry Neuroendocrinology Neurogenetics Neuroinformatics Neurometrics Neuromorphology Neurophysics Neurophysiology Systems neuroscience Clinical neuroscience Behavioral neurology Clinical neurophysiology Epileptology Neurocardiology Neuroepidemiology Neurogastroenterology Neuroimmunology Neurointensive care Neurology Neuro-oncology Neuro-ophthalmology Neuropathology Neuropharmacology Neuroprosthetics Neuropsychiatry Neuroradiology Neurorehabilitation Neurosurgery Neurotology Neurovirology Nutritional neuroscience Psychiatry Cognitive neuroscience Affective neuroscience Behavioral neuroscience Chronobiology Molecular cellular cognition Motor control Neurolinguistics Neuropsychology Sensory neuroscience Social cognitive neuroscience Interdisciplinary fields Consumer neuroscience Cultural neuroscience Educational neuroscience Evolutionary neuroscience Global neurosurgery Neuroanthropology Neural engineering Neurobiotics Neurocinema Neurocriminology Neuroeconomics Neuroepistemology Neuroesthetics Neuroethics Neuroethology Neurohistory Neurolaw Neuromarketing Neuromorphic engineering Neuroscience of music Neurophenomenology Neurophilosophy Neuropolitics Neurorobotics Neurotheology Paleoneurobiology Social neuroscience Concepts Brain–computer interface Development of the nervous system Neural network (artificial) Neural network (biological) Detection theory Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring Neurochip Neurodegenerative disease Neurodevelopmental disorder Neurodiversity Neurogenesis Neuroimaging Neuroimmune system Neuromanagement Neuromodulation Neuroplasticity Neurotechnology Neurotoxin Self-awareness Category Commons v t e Neuropsychology Topics Brain–computer interface Brain regions Clinical neuropsychology Cognitive neuroscience Human brain Misconceptions Neuroanatomy Neurophysiology Phrenology Traumatic brain injury Brain functions Arousal Attention Consciousness Decision making Executive functions Learning Memory Motor coordination Natural language Perception Planning Problem solving Thought People Arthur Lester Benton David Bohm António Damásio Phineas Gage Norman Geschwind Elkhonon Goldberg Kurt Goldstein Donald O. Hebb Kenneth Heilman Edith Kaplan Muriel Lezak Benjamin Libet Rodolfo Llinás Alexander Luria Brenda Milner Karl H. Pribram Oliver Sacks Roger Wolcott Sperry H. M.

K. C.

Tests Bender-Gestalt Test Benton Visual Retention Test Clinical Dementia Rating Continuous Performance Task Glasgow Coma Scale Hayling and Brixton tests Johari window Lexical decision task Mini–mental state examination Stroop effect Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wisconsin card sorting Category Commons Philosophy portal Psychology portal v t e Emerging technologies Fields Information and communications Internet of things Artificial intelligence Applications of artificial intelligence Machine translation Machine vision Mobile translation Progress in artificial intelligence Speech recognition Atomtronics Carbon nanotube field-effect transistor Cybermethodology Augmented reality Fourth-generation optical discs 3D optical data storage Holographic data storage GPGPU software Memory CBRAM ECRAM FRAM Millipede MRAM NRAM PRAM Racetrack memory RRAM SONOS UltraRAM Optical computing RFID Chipless RFID Software-defined radio Three-dimensional integrated circuit Neuroscience Artificial brain Brain–computer interface Electroencephalography Mind uploading Brain-reading Neuroinformatics Neuroprosthetics Brain implant Exocortex Retinal implant Visual prosthesis Neurotechnology Topics Automation Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive innovation Ephemeralization Ethics AI Bioethics Cyberethics Neuroethics Robot ethics Exploratory engineering Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Future-oriented technology analysis Horizon scanning Moore's law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology in science fiction Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism List Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9ppml
Cached time: 20250814235908
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.118 seconds
Real time usage: 2.297 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14214/1000000
Revision size: 144626/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 616311/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8655/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 861914/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.377/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7030451/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1952.091      1 -total
 72.38% 1412.857      2 Template:Reflist
 44.39%  866.548    125 Template:Cite_journal
 10.21%  199.316     39 Template:Cite_web
  6.08%  118.653      5 Template:Navbox
  4.90%   95.564     17 Template:Cite_book
  4.59%   89.579      1 Template:BCI
  4.01%   78.299      7 Template:Citation_needed
  3.62%   70.746      8 Template:Fix
  3.09%   60.324     13 Template:Cite_news Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:623686:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814235908 and revision id 1305137475. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brain–computer_interface&oldid=1305137475 " Categories : Brain–computer interface DARPA projects Human–computer interaction Implants (medicine) Neuroprosthetics Neural engineering User interface techniques Computing input devices Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from December 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 07:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Brain–computer interface 38 languages Add topic

