Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Short history 2 Parts of study 3 Theories of suicide 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Suicidology 17 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study of suicide and self-destructive behaviors Suicide Social aspects ACEs Altruistic Bullying List of suicides attributed to bullying Copycat Dysfunctional family Emotional isolation Epidemic Identity performance Legislation Loneliness Philosophy Religious views Right to die School bullying Shame Social alienation Social defeat Social exclusion Social invisibility Social isolation Social rejection Social media and suicide Social support Toxic workplace Voluntary euthanasia Workplace bullying Crisis Assessment of risk Beck Hopelessness Scale Crisis hotline ( list ) IS PATH WARM?

SAD PERSONS scale Intervention Prevention Suicide attempt Suicide watch Types and methods Assisted Bullying and suicide ( list ) Cop Copycat Euthanasia device Familicide Forced Hanging Honor Jauhar Jumping Mass Murder–suicide Pact Internet Pilot Prayopavesa Prisoner suicide Rail Sallekhana Sati Self-sacrifice Senicide Seppuku Sokushinbutsu Suicide attack Suicide bag Vatakkiruttal Vehicle collision Epidemiology Gender differences LGBTQ people Mormon Methods Rate by country Seasonal effects Suicidal person Youth mental health crisis Youth suicide History List of suicides LGBTQ suicides Suicide in antiquity List of suicides in the 21st century In warfare Banzai charge Kamikaze Suicide mission Related phenomena Anguish Alcoholism Anhedonia Animal loss Anxiety disorder Asperger syndrome Autism spectrum Conditions comorbid to autism Biology of depression Epigenetics of depression Causes of mental disorders Chronic condition Chronic pain Coping Coping planning Depression (mood) Diseases of despair Diseases of poverty Echo chamber Existential crisis Financial crisis Grief suicide bereavement Ideation Interpersonal relationships Locations Major depressive disorder Mental disorder Mental health first aid Neurodevelopmental disorder Non-suicidal self-injury Perfectionism Personal finance Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Poverty Psychological first aid Psychological stress Psychological trauma Schizophrenia Self-harm Self-hatred Substance abuse Suffering Suicidal ambivalence Suicide and the Internet Suicide and trauma Suicide awareness Suicide in colleges in the United States Suicide in music subcultures Suicide note Suicide survivor Suicide terminology Suicide tourism Suicidology Warning signs of suicide By country Rate by country Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Cameroon Canada China France Greenland India Iran Ireland Japan Lesotho Lithuania Nepal Pakistan Romania Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom United States Organizations Compassion & Choices Death with Dignity National Center Dignitas Exit International Final Exit Network Hemlock Society v t e Socrates about to take the poison cup (detail from The Death of Socrates ) Suicidology is the scientific study of suicidal behaviour , the causes of suicidality and suicide prevention .

[ 1 ] Every year, about one million people die by suicide, which is a mortality rate of sixteen per 100,000 or one death every forty seconds.

[ 2 ] Suicidologists believe that suicide is largely preventable with the right actions, knowledge about suicide, and a change in society's view of suicide to make it more acceptable to talk about suicide. Suicidology draws from many fields of social science, primarily psychology and sociology but also medicine, philosophy and public health.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Short history [ edit ] Most suicidologists think about the history of suicide in terms of the history of public opinion on suicide, which has been heavily influenced by cultural, legal and religious norms.

[ 5 ] Ancient Greece held divided views on suicide: tolerated and even lauded when committed by patricians (generals and philosophers) but condemned if committed by plebeians (common people) or slaves. Roman society viewed suicide  neutrally or positively, valuing life less highly.

[ clarification needed ] During early Christianity , excessive martyrdom and a penchant toward suicide frightened church elders sufficiently for them to introduce a serious deterrent. Suicide was thought of as a crime because it precluded possibility of repentance, and it violated the sixth commandment which is Thou shall not kill .

[ 5 ] During this time, St.

Thomas Aquinas emphasized that suicide was a mortal sin because it disrupted God 's power over man's life and death. This belief took hold and for hundreds of years thereafter played an important part in the Western view of suicide.

[ 5 ] Over the last 200 years, the main focus of interventions to prevent suicide has moved from appeals to religious beliefs, which may hold less weight in the modern day, to efforts at understanding and preventing the psychological and social influences that lead to suicide.

[ 6 ] Parts of study [ edit ] There are many points of study within suicidology. Suicidology studies not only death by suicide  but also suicidal ideation , self harm , parasuicide and self-destructive behaviors and attitudes.

[ 1 ] Suicidal ideation is when someone is having thoughts or showing gestures of suicide. This may be passive or active, depending on how much agency they involve. For example, saying that "life is not worth living any more" would be passively suicidal, while saying "I'm going to kill myself by jumping off a bridge" would be actively suicidal.

Self harm is when someone causes deliberate harm to themself. An example of this would be if someone were to take an overdose of medicine and live. Parasuicide is considered to a form of self harm involving suicidal behavior, but without the intention to die.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Self-destructive behaviors are anything that cause harm to oneself. This can be intentional or unintentional. Some examples are alcoholism, risky sports, some sexual disorders, and eating disorders.

[ 1 ] By way of a suicide note the person who is going to commit suicide has the last word. It is also a way for the person to explain, bring closure (or not), to give guilt, to dictate wishes, to control, to forgive or to blame. Here is a list of the parts that might go into a suicide note.

Possible attributes of a suicide note A need to control and direct A plea for forgiveness An absolution Ambivalence and uncertainty Poignant despair Remorse and regret Being a savior/being saved Altruism Lack of pleasure Self-criticism [ 9 ] Theories of suicide [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: More recent theories and more citations. You can help by adding to it .

( August 2025 ) This Theories of suicide needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this Theories of suicide. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Suicidology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) One of the first to contribute to the study of suicidology is Edwin S. Shneidman .

[ 10 ] Shneidman is considered to be the father of suicidology. Shneidman's definition of suicide is a conscious act of self-induced annihilation, best understood as a multidimensional malaise in a needful individual who defines an issue for which suicide is perceived as the best solution.  He thought of suicide as psychache or intolerable psychological pain.

[ citation needed ] Another notable person in the field of suicidology is Emile Durkheim .

[ 11 ] To Durkheim the word suicide is applied to all cases of death resulting directly or indirectly from a positive or negative act of the victim himself, which he knows will produce this result. Basically he saw suicide as an external and constraining social fact independent of individual psychopathology.

[ citation needed ] In David J. Mayo's definition there were four elements to suicide: [ citation needed ] A suicide has taken place only if a death has occurred.

The death must be of one's own doing.

The agency of suicide can be active or passive.

It implies intentionally ending one's own life.

Sigmund Freud and Karl Menninger had similar views on suicide. Their definition of suicide had three different aspects. One was a murder involving hatred or the wish to kill. The second one was a murder by the self often involving guilt or the wish to be killed. The last one is the wish to die. They thought of suicide being a murderous death wish that was turned back upon one's own self.

[ citation needed ] Freud also believed that we had two opposing basic instincts—life (Eros) and death (Thanatos)—and all instincts sought tension reduction.

[ 5 ] He also believed that suicide is more likely in advanced civilizations requiring greater repression of sexual and aggressive energy.

[ citation needed ] Jean Baechler 's definition of suicide was that suicide denotes all behavior that seeks and finds the solution to an existential problem by making an attempt on the life of the subject.

Another worker in the field of suicidology was Joseph H. Davis. The definition he gave for suicide is a fatal willful self-inflicted life-threatening act without apparent desire to live; implicit are two basic components lethality and intent.

[ citation needed ] Albert Camus also did some work in this field. He believed that whether one can live or chooses to live is the only truly serious philosophical problem. He also claimed that man created a god in order to be able to live without a wish to kill himself and that the only human liberty is to come to terms with death. He introduced Darwinian thought into his teachings.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] American Association of Suicidology Depression (mood) Epidemiology of depression Epidemiology of suicide Euthanasia Gender differences in suicide List of countries by suicide rate List of suicides Major depressive disorder Mental health first aid Mood disorder Philosophy of suicide Prevalence of mental disorders Psychiatry Psychology Suicide attempt Suicide crisis Suicide prevention References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Maris, Ronald; Berman, Alan; Silverman, Mortan (2000).

Comprehensive Textbook of Suicidology . New York: The Guilford Press. p. 3.

^ "Suicide prevention (SUPRE)" . WHO. Archived from the original on 2004-07-01 . Retrieved 2011-03-31 .

^ Soubrier, Jean Pierre (October 2004).

"Looking back and ahead. Suicidology and suicide prevention: do we have perspectives?" .

World Psychiatry .

3 (3): 159– 160.

ISSN 1723-8617 .

PMC 1414702 .

PMID 16633486 .

^ Berman, Alan L.; Silverman, Morton M.; Leo, Diego De; Reidenberg, Daniel (2021-03-12).

"Defining Suicidology and the Titling of Suicidologist?" .

Crisis .

42 (3): 165– 170.

doi : 10.1027/0227-5910/a000790 .

ISSN 0227-5910 .

^ a b c d Stillion, Judith; McDowell, Eugene (1996).

Suicide Across the Lifespan: Premature Exits (2nd ed.). Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9781317711797 .

^ Shneidman, Edwin (2001).

Comprehending Suicide Landmarks in 20th-Century Suicidology . Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. pp.

5– 15.

^ Ferreira de Castro, E.; Cunha, M. A.; Pimenta, F.; Costa, I. (January 1998).

"Parasuicide and mental disorders" .

Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica .

97 (1): 25– 31.

doi : 10.1111/j.1600-0447.1998.tb09958.x .

ISSN 0001-690X .

PMID 9504699 .

^ Welch, S. S. (March 2001).

"A review of the literature on the epidemiology of parasuicide in the general population" .

Psychiatric Services (Washington, D.C.) .

52 (3): 368– 375.

doi : 10.1176/appi.ps.52.3.368 .

ISSN 1075-2730 .

PMID 11239107 .

^ Shneidman, Edwin (2004).

Autopsy of a Suicidal Mind . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

3 –21.

ISBN 978-0-19-517273-7 .

^ Edwin Shneidman ^ Emile Durkheim External links [ edit ] Look up suicidology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Samaritans Suicide info The Irish Association of Suicidology The National Suicide Research Foundation of Ireland The American Association of Suicidology Journals related to suicidology Crisis: The Journal of Crisis Intervention and Suicide Prevention v t e Suicide Suicide crisis Assessment of suicide risk Crisis hotline list Suicidal ideation Suicide intervention Suicidology Suicide prevention Suicide watch Warning signs Social aspects Advocacy Altruistic Awareness Interpersonal theory Legislation Philosophy of suicide Religious views Euthanasia Right to die Social media and suicide Suicide survivor bereavement Literature Terminology Suicide and the Internet Suicide types Assisted suicide list Bullying and suicide list Charcoal-burning Copycat Epidemic Familicide Forced Gunshot Hanging Honor Immolation Jumping from height locations Mass Murder–suicide Vatakkiruttal Seppuku Sokushinbutsu Sallekhana Sati Prayopavesa By train London Underground Self-sacrifice Banzai charge Kamikaze Senicide Suicide attack By cop By pilot Pact Suicide pill Vehicular Epidemiology Sex differences List of countries by suicide rate Antidepressants and suicide risk History Suicide in antiquity List of suicides heads of state and government in the 21st century Related Animal suicide Caring letters Consensual homicide Last words Self-harm Suicide methods Suicide note Suicide attempt Suicide prevention contract Tourism By demographic Autistic people Doctors LGBTQ people list Mormon Military Music subcultures Prisoners Youth By country Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Belarus Bhutan Cameroon Canada China France Denmark Greenland Greece Guyana Hong Kong student India youth farmers Iran Ireland Japan Kazakhstan Lesotho Lithuania Mexico Mozambique Nepal Nigeria Pakistan Romania Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore South Korea LGBT youth Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Assisted suicide United States Assisted suicide college farmers military veteran Native American teenage Uruguay v t e Death In medicine Cell death Necrosis Avascular necrosis Coagulative necrosis Liquefactive necrosis Gangrenous necrosis Caseous necrosis Fat necrosis Fibrinoid necrosis Temporal lobe necrosis Programmed cell death AICD Anoikis Apoptosis Autophagy Intrinsic apoptosis Necroptosis Paraptosis Parthanatos Phenoptosis Pseudoapoptosis Pyroptosis Autolysis Autoschizis Eschar Immunogenic cell death Ischemic cell death Pyknosis Karyorrhexis Karyolysis Mitotic catastrophe Suicide gene Abortion Accidental death Autopsy Brain death Brainstem death Clinical death DOA Death by natural causes Death rattle Dysthanasia End-of-life care Euthanasia Lazarus sign Lazarus syndrome Medical declaration of death Organ donation Terminal illness Unnatural death Lists Causes of death by rate Notable deaths by year Expressions related to death Natural disasters People by cause of death Premature obituaries Preventable causes of death Unusual deaths List of ways people dishonor the dead List of ways people honor the dead Mortality Birthday effect Child mortality Excess mortality Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality Infant mortality Karoshi Maternal death Maternal mortality in fiction Memento mori Micromort Mortality rate RAMR Mortality salience Perinatal mortality After death Body Stages Pallor mortis Livor mortis Algor mortis Rigor mortis Putrefaction Decomposition Skeletonization Fossilization Preservation Cryopreservation Cryonics Neuropreservation Embalming Maceration Mummification Plastination Prosection Taxidermy Disposal Burial Natural burial Sky burial Ocean burial Cremation Dismemberment Excarnation Promession Resomation Beating heart cadaver Body donation Cadaveric spasm Coffin birth Death erection Dissection Gibbeting Postmortem caloricity Post-mortem interval Other aspects Carrion Cemetery Consciousness after death Afterlife Tukdam Customs Crematorium Desecration of graves Eternal oblivion Examination Funeral Grief Internet Midwife Mourning Online mourning Obituary Reincarnation Palingenesis Saṃsāra Resurrection Underworld Viewing Vigil Wake Paranormal Ghosts Near-death experience Near-death studies Necromancy Out-of-body experience Reincarnation research Séance Legal Abortion law Administration Capital punishment Cause of death Civil death Coroner Death-qualified jury Death certificate Declared death in absentia Death row Dying declaration Inquest Legal death Murder Necropolitics Prohibition of dying Right to die Suspicious death Trust law Will Fields Death tech [ pt ] Forensic pathology Funeral director Mortuary science Necrobiology Post-mortem chemistry Post-mortem photography Taphonomy Biostratinomy Thanatology Other Apparent death Chinese burial money Coins for the dead Dark tourism Darwin Awards Death and culture Death anniversary Death anxiety Death deity Personification of death Dying-and-rising god Psychopomp Death camp Death drive Death education Death from laughter Death hoax Death knell Death march Death messenger Death notification Death panel Death poem Death pose Death-positive movement Death squad Death threat Death trajectory Dignified death Extinction Festival of the Dead Fascination with death Hierarchy of death Homicide Immortality Last rites Longevity Martyr Museum of Death Necronym Necrophilia Necrophobia Philosophy of death Predation Sacrifice human Suicide Assisted suicide Thanabot [ ca ] Thanatosensitivity Category Outline v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Allied health professions Anesthesia technician Aquatic therapist Athletic trainer Audiologist Cardiac physiologist Clinical psychologist Dental hygienist Dietitian Emergency medical services Hemodialysis technician Massage therapist Medical assistant Medical coder Medical physicist Medical technologist Medical transcription Music and arts therapist Nutritionist Occupational therapist Optometrist Orthotist Pharmacy technician Phlebotomist Physiotherapist Prosthetist Public health Radiation therapist Radiographer Respiratory therapist Social worker Speech therapist NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐f8cf4699‐95gfd
Cached time: 20250813203254
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.626 seconds
Real time usage: 1.114 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3222/1000000
Revision size: 11150/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 175660/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5341/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83660/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.333/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7107784/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  562.736      1 -total
 24.00%  135.049      1 Template:Reflist
 20.64%  116.155      7 Template:Navbox
 15.68%   88.262      4 Template:Cite_book
 14.50%   81.586      1 Template:Suicide_sidebar
 14.11%   79.394      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.01%   56.306      1 Template:Short_description
  8.37%   47.082      2 Template:Ambox
  8.26%   46.464      1 Template:Psychology
  8.20%   46.119      6 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3809560:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813203254 and revision id 1305735994. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suicidology&oldid=1305735994 " Categories : Suicide Psychiatric research Interdisciplinary subfields of sociology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2022 Articles to be expanded from August 2025 All articles to be expanded Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 20:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Suicidology 17 languages Add topic

