Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United States 2 United Kingdom 3 Japan 4 List 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents National academy 10 languages العربية বাংলা Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Magyar 日本語 Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from National Academies ) Organizational body A national academy is an organizational body, usually operating with state financial support and approval, that co-ordinates scholarly research activities and standards for academic disciplines , and serves as public policy advisors, research institutes , think tanks , and public administration consultants for governments or on issues of public importance, most frequently in the sciences but also in the humanities . Typically the country's learned societies in individual disciplines will liaise with or be coordinated by the national academy. National academies play an important organisational role in academic exchanges and collaborations between countries.

The extent of official recognition of national academies varies between countries. In some cases they are explicitly or de facto an arm of government; in others, as in the United Kingdom , they are voluntary, non-profit bodies with which the government has agreed to negotiate, and which may receive government financial support while retaining substantial independence. In some countries, a single academy covers all disciplines. In others, there are several academies, which work together more or less closely; for example, France , where the Institut de France groups five self-governing Academies, or Australia . In many states, they are organized in academies of science . In the countries of the former Soviet Union , and in the People's Republic of China , the national academies have considerable power over policy and personnel in their areas. There is, however, a growing consensus among international federations of learned academies that bona fide national (or learned) academies need to adhere to certain criteria: The fellowship is elected, on the basis of excellence, by existing fellows (members) The number of fellows is restricted either to a total number or to a rate of accretion The governance of the academy is democratic and "bottom up". The fellowship is the ultimate source of the academy's authority The academy is independent of government, industry and professional associations. Most, if not all, academies derive some financial support from some or all of these other organisations but this support needs to be given in a manner that does not compromise the academy's independence.

United States [ edit ] In 1863, President of the United States Abraham Lincoln incorporated the United States National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM). The affiliated organizations were granted congressional charters to operate under the National Academy of Sciences. In 1916 President Woodrow Wilson reincorporated the organization under the National Research Council to foster scientific research emphasizing American industries. Today NASEM is composed of three non-profit member organizations: the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), the National Academy of Engineering (NAE), and the National Academy of Medicine (NAM) (after 2015; formerly Institute of Medicine (IoM)). The U.S. national academies also serve as public policy advisors, research institutes , think tanks , and public administration consultants on issues of public importance or on request by the government.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Name Year founded Area of focus President Notes National Academy of Sciences 1863 Science Marcia McNutt National Academy of Engineering 1964 Engineering John L. Anderson National Academy of Medicine 1970 Medicine Victor Dzau Established as the Institute of Medicine (1970–2015) United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom four national academies are the major learned societies of England: the Academy of Medical Sciences , British Academy , the Royal Academy of Engineering and the Royal Society .

[ 4 ] In addition, there are the Learned Society of Wales in Wales and the Royal Society of Edinburgh in Scotland . The UK Young Academy is for young scientists.

Name Country Year founded Area of focus Patron or President Notes Royal Society England 1660 Hard sciences , soft sciences Charles III [ 5 ] The Invisible College was a precursor to the Royal Society of London. In 1660, the informal committee of 12 philosophers formed the College for the Promoting of Physico-Mathematical Experimental Learning.

Royal Society of Edinburgh Scotland 1783 Hard sciences , soft sciences , arts , humanities , medicine , social sciences Professor Dame Anne Glover as President The Royal Society was founded during the Scottish Enlightenment as the Edinburgh Society for Improving Arts and Sciences.

British Academy England 1902 Humanities and social sciences Professor Julia Black CBE FBA as President The British Academy was first proposed in 1899 as the British Academy for the Promotion of Historical, Philosophical and Philological Studies. The name was subsequently shortened and incorporated in 1901, receiving royal charter from King Edward VII in 1902.

Royal Academy of Engineering England 1976 Engineering Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh was Senior Fellow until his death [ 6 ] Anne, Princess Royal and Prince Edward, Duke of Kent as Royal Fellows [ 7 ] Sir James McDonald as President [ 8 ] The Fellowship of Engineering was conceived in the late 1960s under Harold Wilson , and subsequently established in 1976. It was granted royal charter in 1983 and renamed the Royal Academy of Engineering in 1992.

Academy of Medical Sciences England 1998 Biomedical and health research Professor Dame Anne Johnson as President The academy was established by a working group chaired by Michael Atiyah .

Learned Society of Wales Wales 2010 Hard sciences , soft sciences , arts , humanities , medicine , social sciences Hywel R. Thomas as President; Charles, Prince of Wales as Patron UK Young Academy United Kingdom & Ireland 2022 Young scientists The academy was established by seven UK/Irish academies.

Japan [ edit ] In Japan, all of the national academies were established during the early years of the Showa Era . The two premier national academies in the country are the Science Council of Japan and The Japan Academy . Representing the artistic profession and literature is the Japan Art Academy .

The Science Council of Japan (SCJ) was founded by American physicist Harry C. Kelly in 1949 during the Allied occupation of Japan as a special organisation under the Prime Minister's jurisdiction, operating independently from the Government of Japan to promoting and enhancing scientific research in the country. The SCJ represents all Japanese scientists, researchers and engineers from multiple fields from the natural sciences to the humanities, making necessary policy recommendations relating to science and technology to the national government. The SCJ has 210 Council Members stipulated by a mandated quota as well as 2,000 Associate Members nationwide.

Name Year founded Area of focus President Notes Science Council of Japan 日本学術会議 1949 Social sciences , natural sciences , engineering , medicine , humanities Takaaki Kajita The Japan Academy 日本学士院 1947 Social sciences , natural sciences , engineering , medicine , humanities Takeshi Sasaki The Japan Academy was originally established as the Tokyo Academy, becoming the Imperial Academy later in 1907. The Academy awards three prestigious awards: The Imperial Prize, The Duke of Edinburgh Prize, and The Japan Academy Prize.

Japan Art Academy 日本芸術院 1937 Fine art , literature , music , drama , dance Man Nomura List [ edit ] Main category: National academies See also: List of academies of sciences Albania : Academy of Sciences of Albania Armenia : Armenian National Academy of Sciences Australia : Australian Academy of Science , Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering , Australian Academy of the Humanities , Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia , National Academies Forum Austria : Austrian Academy of Sciences Azerbaijan : Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences Belarus : National Academy of Sciences of Belarus Belgium : Royal Academy of French Language and Literature of Belgium , Royal Academy of Dutch Language and Literature ; see also Academies of Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina : Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil : Brazilian Academy of Sciences Bulgaria : Bulgarian Academy of Sciences Canada : Royal Society of Canada , Canadian Academy of Health Sciences , Canadian Academy of Engineering Cambodia : Royal Academy of Cambodia Chile : Academia Chilena de Ciencias [ es ] China : Chinese Academy of Sciences , Chinese Academy of Social Sciences , Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences , Chinese Academy of Engineering , Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Hong Kong : Hong Kong Academy of the Humanities Costa Rica – Academia Nacional de Ciencias (Costa Rica) Côte d'Ivoire – Académie des sciences, des arts, des cultures d'Afrique et des diasporas africaines Croatia : Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts Czech Republic : Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic Denmark : Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters Estonia : Estonian Academy of Sciences Ethiopia : Imperial Academy (former) Finland : The Finnish Academy of Science and Letters ( Finnish : Suomalainen tiedeakatemia ) is a Finnish-speaking academy, while The Finnish Society of Science and Letters ( Swedish : Finska vetenskaps-societeten , Finnish : Suomen tiedeseura ) is bilingual. In the field of engineering, the Finnish Academy of Technology ( Finnish : Teknillisten tieteiden akatemia , Swedish : Akademin för Tekniska Vetenskaper ) is bilingual while the Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences in Finland ( Swedish : Svenska tekniska vetenskapsakademien i Finland ) Swedish-speaking. The Academy of Finland is not an academy in the sense of this article, but the state research funding agency.

France : The Institut de France comprises five academies, including the Académie française and French Academy of Sciences .

Georgia (country) : Georgian National Academy of Sciences Germany : Leopoldina Ghana : Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences Greece : Academy of Athens Hungary : Hungarian Academy of Sciences ( Hungarian : Magyar Tudományos Akadémia ) [ 9 ] India : The National Academy of Sciences, India ; Indian National Science Academy ; Indian Academy of Sciences ; Indian National Academy of Engineering ; Sahitya Akademi ; National Bal Bhawan ; Lalit Kala Akademi Indonesia : Indonesian Academy of Sciences ( Indonesian : Akademi Ilmu Pengetahuan Indonesia ) Iran : Academy of Persian Language and Literature ; Academy of Sciences of Iran ; Iranian Academy of the Arts ; Iranian Academy of Medical Sciences Ireland : Royal Irish Academy Israel : Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities Italy : Accademia dei Fisiocritici (National Academy of Sciences of Siena), Accademia dei Lincei for sciences, Accademia della Crusca for Italian language, Accademia nazionale delle scienze (detta dei XL); a general and supreme national academy was the Accademia d'Italia during the Fascist period.

Kosovo : Academy of Sciences and Arts of Kosovo Latvia : Latvian Academy of Sciences Lithuania : Lithuanian Academy of Sciences Montenegro : Montenegrin Academy of Sciences and Arts Morocco : Academy of the Kingdom of Morocco Netherlands : Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences North Korea : Academy of Sciences of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea [ 10 ] North Macedonia : Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts Norway : Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters Pakistan : Pakistan Academy of Letters , Pakistan Academy of Sciences Philippines : National Academy of Science and Technology Poland : Polish Academy of Sciences , Polish Academy of Learning Portugal : Academia das Ciências de Lisboa Romania : The Romanian Academy covers the scientific, artistic and literary domains.

Russia : The Russian Academy of Sciences is the main organising body for fundamental sciences and humanities. There are also five independent specialised national academies: Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Russian Academy of Architecture and Construction Sciences , Russian Academy of Education, Russian Academy of Agriculture Sciences, and Russian Academy of Arts . These are government-funded, but self-governing.

San Marino : International Academy of Sciences San Marino Scotland : Royal Society of Edinburgh Serbia : Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts Slovenia : Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts South Africa : Academy of Science of South Africa Spain : The Royal Academy is the main reference body for the Spanish language .

Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando covers the artistic fields; Real Academia de la Historia is the organising body for History; the Royal Academy of Moral and Political Sciences covers the humanities; Royal Academy of Exact, Physical and Natural Sciences covers natural sciences and mathematics; Real Academia de Jurisprudencia y Legislación covers the field of law.

Sri Lanka : National Academy of Sciences of Sri Lanka Sudan : Sudanese National Academy of Sciences Sweden : Swedish Academy for language, Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences Taiwan (Republic of China): Academia Sinica Thailand : Royal Institute of Thailand Turkey : Turkish Academy of Sciences is funded by the government but maintains autonomy Ukraine : National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine . Other state organizations also include National Academy of Arts of Ukraine , National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine , National Academy of Agrarian Sciences of Ukraine , National Academy of Legal Sciences of Ukraine , National Academy of Pedagogical Sciences of Ukraine , Minor Academy of Sciences of Ukraine .

United Kingdom : the Royal Society is recognised as the national academy for the sciences, the British Academy for the social sciences and the humanities, the Royal Academy of Engineering for engineering, and the Academy of Medical Sciences for medicine; the UK Young Academy is for young scientists.

United States : The National Academies of the United States include four organisations: the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), the National Academy of Engineering (NAE), the National Academy of Medicine (NAM), and the National Research Council (NRC).  See also American Academy of Arts and Sciences , American Academy of Arts and Letters , American Academy of Diplomacy , Academy of American Poets , National Academy of Design .

Vatican City : Pontifical Academy of Sciences Vietnam : Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology (VAST) Within most countries, the unqualified phrase "National Academy" will normally refer to that country's academy.  For example, within the United States, the plural phrase "National Academies" is widely understood to refer to the U.S. National Academies.

See also [ edit ] Academy of Medicine (disambiguation) Academy of Sciences International Science Council References [ edit ] ^ "Policy and Global Affairs Units" .

www.nationalacademies.org .

Archived from the original on 2020-06-05 . Retrieved 2020-06-05 .

^ "Cooperative Research Programs Division" .

www.trb.org .

Archived from the original on 2020-06-07 . Retrieved 2020-06-05 .

^ Blair, Peter D. (2016-06-07).

"The evolving role of the US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in providing science and technology policy advice to the US government" .

Palgrave Communications .

2 (1): 1– 7.

doi : 10.1057/palcomms.2016.30 .

ISSN 2055-1045 .

S2CID 148496966 .

^ "Joint Academies' Statement: Building a Stronger Future" . The Academy of Medical Sciences.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2017 . Retrieved 26 September 2017 .

^ "Royal Fellows" .

Royal Society . Archived from the original on 24 April 2014 . Retrieved 6 November 2019 .

^ "Senior Fellow" .

Royal Academy of Engineering .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 1 September 2021 .

^ "Royal Fellows" .

Royal Academy of Engineering .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 1 September 2021 .

^ "President of the Royal Academy of Engineering" .

Royal Academy of Engineering .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2017 . Retrieved 1 September 2021 .

^ "MTA: Címlap" . Archived from the original on 2006-05-15.

^ Hoare, James E. (2012).

"Academy of Sciences" .

Historical Dictionary of Democratic People's Republic of Korea . Lanham: Scarecrow Press. p. 36.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7987-4 .

Archived from the original on 2023-07-07 . Retrieved 2017-02-06 .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐8p4gx
Cached time: 20250814232252
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.527 seconds
Real time usage: 0.701 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6907/1000000
Revision size: 21457/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 51026/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8893/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 36919/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.249/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15821824/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  538.400      1 -total
 27.03%  145.547      1 Template:Reflist
 26.10%  140.534     67 Template:Flag
 21.75%  117.084      8 Template:Lang
 20.78%  111.890      8 Template:Cite_web
 12.65%   68.124      1 Template:Short_description
  6.68%   35.953      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.31%   28.580     67 Template:Flag/core
  4.19%   22.583      4 Template:Main_other
  3.83%   20.605      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:377973:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814232252 and revision id 1304944189. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_academy&oldid=1304944189 " Category : National academies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Finnish-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 03:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National academy 10 languages Add topic

