Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Religious definition 2 Modern philosophy 3 Contemporary philosophy 4 Comparison to religious definitions 5 Colloquial usage 6 Comparison to immanence 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Transcendence (philosophy) 47 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Latina Latviešu Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept designating the extra-categorical attributes of beings In philosophy , transcendence is the basic ground concept from the word's literal meaning (from Latin ), of climbing or going beyond, albeit with varying connotations in its different historical and cultural stages. It includes philosophies , systems, and approaches that describe the fundamental structures of being, not as an ontology (theory of being), but as the framework of emergence and validation of knowledge of being. These definitions are generally grounded in reason and empirical observation and seek to provide a framework for understanding the world that is not reliant on religious beliefs or supernatural forces.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] "Transcendental" is a word derived from the scholastic , designating the extra-categorical attributes of beings.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Religious definition [ edit ] See also: Transcendence (religion) In religion , transcendence refers to the aspect of God's nature and power which is wholly independent of the material universe, beyond all physical laws. This is contrasted with immanence , where a god is said to be fully present in the physical world and thus accessible to creatures in various ways. In religious experience ,  transcendence is a state of being that has overcome the limitations of physical existence and by some definitions has also become independent of it. This is typically manifested in prayer , séance , meditation , psychedelics and paranormal "visions".

It is affirmed in various religious traditions' concept of the divine , which contrasts with the notion of a god (or, the Absolute ) that exists exclusively in the physical order (immanentism), or indistinguishable from it ( pantheism ). Transcendence can be attributed to the divine not only in its being, but also in its knowledge. Thus, God may transcend both the universe and knowledge (is beyond the grasp of the human mind). Although transcendence is defined as the opposite of immanence, the two are not necessarily mutually exclusive . Some theologians and metaphysicians of various religious traditions affirm that a god is both within and beyond the universe ( panentheism ); in it, but not of it; simultaneously pervading it and surpassing it.

Modern philosophy [ edit ] Further information: Transcendental idealism and Transcendental arguments The Ethics of Baruch Spinoza used the expression "transcendental terms" (in Latin : termini transcendentales ) to indicate concepts like Being, Thing, Something, [ 6 ] which are so general not to be included in the definitions of species, genus and category . In modern philosophy , Immanuel Kant introduced a new term, transcendental , thus instituting a new, third meaning. In his theory of knowledge , this concept is concerned with the condition of possibility of knowledge itself. He also opposed the term transcendental to the term transcendent , the latter meaning "that which goes beyond" (transcends) any possible knowledge of a human being.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] For him transcendental meant knowledge about our cognitive faculty with regard to how objects are possible a priori . "I call all knowledge transcendental if it is occupied, not with objects, but with the way that we can possibly know objects even before we experience them." [ 9 ] Therefore, metaphysics , as a fundamental and universal theory, turns out to be an epistemology . Transcendental philosophy, consequently, is not considered a traditional ontological form of metaphysics.

Kant equated transcendental with that which is "... in respect of the subject's faculty of cognition." [ 10 ] Something is transcendental if it plays a role in the way in which the mind "constitutes" objects and makes it possible for us to experience them as objects in the first place. Ordinary knowledge is knowledge of objects; transcendental knowledge is knowledge of how it is possible for us to experience those objects as objects. This is based on Kant's acceptance of David Hume 's argument that certain general features of objects (e.g. persistence, causal relationships) cannot be derived from the sense impressions we have of them. Kant argues that the mind must contribute those features and make it possible for us to experience objects as objects. In the central part of his Critique of Pure Reason , the "Transcendental Deduction of the Categories", Kant argues for a deep interconnection between the ability to have consciousness of self and the ability to experience a world of objects. Through a process of synthesis, the mind generates both the structure of objects and its own unity.

A metaphilosophical question discussed by many Kantian scholars is what transcendental reflection is and how transcendental reflection is itself possible. Valentin Balanovskiy shows that this is a special instrument inherent in our consciousness, something by what individuals can distinguish themselves from any other objects of reality.

[ 11 ] Stephen Palmquist argues that Kant's solution to this problem is an appeal to faith .

[ 12 ] For Kant, the "transcendent", as opposed to the "transcendental", is that which lies beyond what our faculty of knowledge can legitimately know.

Hegel 's counter-argument to Kant was that to know a boundary is also to be aware of what it bounds and as such what lies beyond it – in other words, to have already transcended it.

Contemporary philosophy [ edit ] In phenomenology , the "transcendent" is that which transcends our own consciousness: that which is objective rather than only a phenomenon of consciousness.

Jean-Paul Sartre also speaks of transcendence in his works. In Being and Nothingness , Sartre uses transcendence to describe the relation of the self to the object-oriented world, as well as our concrete relations with others. For Sartre, the for-itself is sometimes called a transcendence. Additionally, if the other is viewed strictly as an object, much like any other object, then the other is, for the for-itself, a transcendence-transcended. When the for-itself grasps the other in the others world, and grasps the subjectivity that the other has, it is referred to as transcending-transcendence. Thus, Sartre defines relations with others in terms of transcendence.

[ 13 ] Contemporary transcendental philosophy is developed by German philosopher Harald Holz with a holistic approach. Holz distanced transcendental philosophy from the convergence of neo-Kantianism . He critically discussed transcendental pragmatism and the relation between transcendental philosophy, neo-empiricism , and so-called postmodernism .

Comparison to religious definitions [ edit ] Philosophical definitions of transcendence often emphasize the idea of going beyond or exceeding the limits of human experience, and may focus on concepts such as rationality, consciousness, or the nature of reality. These definitions are generally grounded in reason and empirical observation, and seek to provide a framework for understanding the world that is not reliant on religious beliefs or supernatural forces. Religious definitions of transcendence, on the other hand, often emphasize the idea of connecting with something beyond the self or the material world, and may focus on concepts such as God, the soul, or the afterlife. These definitions are often grounded in faith and revelation, and may be seen as offering a way to access a higher or divine reality that cannot be directly observed or explained through reason alone.

While there may be some overlap between these two definitions of transcendence, they are ultimately grounded in different epistemological frameworks and ways of understanding the world. Therefore, the scope derived from the philosophical definition of transcendence could contain the scope derived from the religious definition of transcendence, but not vice versa. This is because the philosophical definition of transcendence is broader and more abstract than the religious definition, which is more specific and focused on a particular faith or belief system.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Colloquial usage [ edit ] In everyday language, "transcendence" means "going beyond", and "self-transcendence" means going beyond a prior form or state of oneself.

Mystical experience is thought of as a particularly advanced state of self-transcendence, in which the sense of a separate self is abandoned. " Self-transcendence " is believed to be psychometrically measurable, and (at least partially) inherited, and has been incorporated as a personality dimension in the Temperament and Character Inventory .

[ 14 ] The discovery of this is described in the book The God Gene by Dean Hamer , although this has been criticized by commentators such as Carl Zimmer .

Comparison to immanence [ edit ] The doctrine or theory of immanence holds that the divine encompasses or is manifested in the material world. It is held by some philosophical and metaphysical theories of divine presence. Immanence is usually applied in monotheistic, pantheistic, pandeistic, or panentheistic faiths to suggest that the spiritual world permeates the mundane. It is often contrasted with theories of transcendence, in which the divine is seen to be outside the material world.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] God gene Ignoramus et ignorabimus Immanence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Materialism Meta Transcendental empiricism Transcendental hermeneutic phenomenology Transcendental humanism Transcendental materialism Transcendental Meditation Transcendental naturalism Transcendental nihilism Transcendental nominalism Transcendental realism Transcendental Thomism Transcendentalism Transcendentals Tzimtzum , the traditional kabbalistic understanding References [ edit ] ^ a b "Transcendence and Immanence, Chin-Tai Kim, Journal of the American Academy of Religion, Vol. 55, No. 3 (Autumn, 1987), pp. 537-549 (13 pages)" .

JSTOR 1464069 .

^ a b "Transcendence in Philosophy and in Everyday Life, Author(s): JOHN LACHS Source: The Journal of Speculative Philosophy, 1997, New Series, Vol. 11, No. 4 (1997), pp. 247-255 Published by: Penn State University Press" .

JSTOR 25670227 .

^ a b "Referential Transcendence, Author(s): Roy Wood Sellars, Source: Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Sep., 1961, Vol. 22, No. 1 (Sep., 1961), pp. 1-15 Published by: International Phenomenological Society" .

JSTOR 2104604 .

^ Caygill, Howard .

A Kant Dictionary . (Blackwell Philosopher Dictionaries), Blackwell Publishing Ltd., 2000, p. 398 ^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Transcendentalism" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 25 September 2022 .

^ "Baruch Spinoza's Ethics, Part, II, Proposition 40, Scholium 1" (in Latin and English).

^ cf.

Critique of Pure Reason or Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics ^ In Parerga and Paralipomena , Volume 2, Chapter 10, § 141, Schopenhauer presented the difference between transcendent and immanent in the form of a dialogue. The dialogists were Thrasymachos, a student of German Idealism , and Philalethes, a Kantian Transcendental Idealist . "Thrasymachos: … I know these expressions from my professor, but only as predicates of a loving God with whom his philosophy was exclusively concerned, as is only right and proper. Namely, if God is situated within the world, he is immanent; if he resides somewhere outside, he is transcendent. … Philalethes: Transcendent knowledge is that which, going beyond all possibility of experience, strives to determine the nature of things as they are in themselves; immanent knowledge, on the other hand, is that which keeps within the bounds of the possibility of experience, but thus can speak only of phenomena." In Schopenhauer’s German: "Thrasymachos: … Mir sind diese Ausdrücke zwar auch bekannt, von meinem Professor her, aber nur als Prädikate des lieben Gottes, mit welchem seine Philosophie, wie sich das eben auch geziemt, es ausschließlich zu tun hatte. Steckt nämlich der in der Welt drinne, so ist er immanent: sitzt er aber irgendwo draußen, so ist er transzendent …. Philalethes: Transzendente Erkenntnis ist die, welche, über alle Möglichkeit der Erfahrung hinausgehend, das Wesen der Dinge, wie sie an sich selbst sind, zu bestimmen anstrebt; immanente Erkenntnis hingegen die, welche sich innerhalb der Schranken der Möglichkeit der Erfahrung hält, daher aber auch nur von Erscheinungen reden kann." ^ "I call all cognition transcendental that is occupied not so much with objects but rather with our mode of cognition of objects insofar as this is to be possible a priori . A system of such concepts would be called transcendental philosophy ." Kant, Immanuel.

Critique of Pure Reason . Edited and translated by Paul Guyer and Allen Wood, Cambridge University Press, 1998. p. 149 (B25) ^ Kant, Immanuel, Critique of Judgment , Introduction, V ^ Balanovskiy, Valentin (2018).

"What is Kant's Transcendental Reflection?" .

Proceedings of the XXIII World Congress of Philosophy .

75 : 17– 27.

doi : 10.5840/wcp232018751730 .

ISBN 978-1-63435-038-9 .

^ Stephen Palmquist , "Faith as Kant's Key to the Justification of Transcendental Reflection", The Heythrop Journal 25:4 (October 1984), pp.442-455. A revised version of this paper appeared as Chapter V in Palmquist's book, Kant's System of Perspectives (Lanham: University Press of America, 1993).

^ Sartre, Jean-Paul. Being and Nothingness. Trans. Hazel E. Barnes. New York: Washington Square Press, 1956.

^ Cloninger, C.R.; Svrakic, DM; Przybeck, TR (December 1993). "A psychobiological model of temperament and character".

Archives of General Psychiatry .

50 (12): 975– 90.

doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.1993.01820240059008 .

PMID 8250684 .

^ "Transcendence and Immanence, Chin-Tai Kim, Journal of the American Academy of Religion, Vol. 55, No. 3 (Autumn, 1987), pp. 537-549 (13 pages)" .

JSTOR 1464069 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Kluger, Jeffrey (17 October 2004).

"Is God in Our Genes?" .

Time . Archived from the original on 10 November 2006 . Retrieved 29 May 2007 .

Razavi, Mehdi Amin (1997).

Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination .

Routledge .

ISBN 0-7007-0412-4 .

External links [ edit ] Aldous Huxley on Self-Transcedence - The Epilog of The Devils of Loudun Stephen Palmquist, Kant's System of Perspectives (Lanham: University Press of America, 1993). See especially Part Two.

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal Portals : Philosophy Religion Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐94d6s
Cached time: 20250816101630
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.429 seconds
Real time usage: 0.524 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2388/1000000
Revision size: 17063/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 171687/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2968/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66886/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.234/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5929480/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  391.221      1 -total
 26.74%  104.620      1 Template:Reflist
 25.51%   99.788      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 24.96%   97.661      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 19.99%   78.190      6 Template:Cite_web
 16.24%   63.539      1 Template:Short_description
 11.07%   43.294      9 Template:Navbox
  8.76%   34.252      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.49%   29.308      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.35%   24.852      1 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1666427:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816101630 and revision id 1294429609. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transcendence_(philosophy)&oldid=1294429609 " Categories : A priori The arts Concepts in aesthetics Concepts in epistemology Metaphysical properties Concepts in the philosophy of mind Kantianism Nonduality Ontology Panentheism Pantheism Perennial philosophy Philosophy of religion Religious philosophical concepts Thought Transcendentalism Unitarian Universalism Hidden categories: CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2018 This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 17:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transcendence (philosophy) 47 languages Add topic

