Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Process 2 Painting 3 RYB 4 CMY and CMYK color models and printing processes 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Subtractive color 24 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Frysk Italiano Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Shqip Simple English Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Light passing through successive filters This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Subtractive color mixing An 1877 color photo by Louis Ducos du Hauron , a French pioneer of color photography . The overlapping subtractive yellow, cyan and red (magenta) image elements can be seen clearly along the edges of the image.

Subtractive color or subtractive color mixing predicts the spectral power distribution of light after it passes through successive layers of partially absorbing media. This idealized model is the essential principle of how dyes and pigments are used in color printing and photography, where the perception of color is elicited after white light passes through microscopic "stacks" of partially absorbing media, allowing some wavelengths of light to reach the eye and not others. It is also a concept seen in painting, wherein the colors are mixed or applied in successive layers, though predicting realistic results (such as blue and yellow mixing to produce green instead of gray) requires more complex models such as Kubelka–Munk theory .

Process [ edit ] The subtractive color mixing model predicts the resultant spectral power distribution of light filtered through overlaid partially absorbing materials on a reflecting or transparent surface. Each layer partially absorbs some wavelengths of light from the illumination spectrum while letting others pass through, resulting in a colored appearance. The resultant spectral power distribution is predicted by sequentially taking the product of the spectral power distributions of the incoming light and transmissivity at each filter.

[ 1 ] Painting [ edit ] The subtractive model also predicts the color resulting from a mixture of paints, or similar medium such as fabric dye, whether applied in layers or mixed together prior to application. In the case of paint mixed before application, incident light interacts with many different pigment particles at various depths inside the paint layer before emerging.

[ 2 ] Art supply manufacturers offer colors that successfully fill the roles of the subtractive primary colors magenta and cyan. For example, the phthalocyanine blues , which became available during the 1930s, and quinacridone magenta, first offered during the 1950s, together with yellow produce more highly-saturated violets and greens than do the traditional red and blue.

RYB [ edit ] Main article: RYB color model An RYB color wheel RYB (red, yellow, blue) is the traditional set of primary colors used for mixing pigments. It is used in art and art education, particularly in painting . It predated modern scientific color theory .

Red, yellow, and blue are the primary colors of the RYB color "wheel" . The secondary colors, violet (or purple), orange, and green (VOG) make up another triad, conceptually formed by mixing equal amounts of red and blue, red and yellow, and blue and yellow, respectively.

Classification of pigment colors The RYB primary colors became the foundation of 18th-century theories of color vision as the fundamental sensory qualities blended in the perception of all physical colors and equally in the physical mixture of pigments or dyes. These theories were enhanced by 18th-century investigations of a variety of purely psychological color effects, in particular, the contrast between "complementary" or opposing hues produced by color afterimages and in the contrasting shadows in colored light. These ideas and many personal color observations were summarized in two founding documents in color theory: the Theory of Colours (1810) by the German poet and government minister Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , and The Law of Simultaneous Color Contrast (1839) by the French industrial chemist Michel Eugène Chevreul .

In late 19th and early to mid-20th-century commercial printing, use of the traditional RYB terminology persisted even though the more versatile CMY (cyan, magenta, yellow) triad had been adopted, with the cyan sometimes referred to as "process blue" and the magenta as "process red".

CMY and CMYK color models and printing processes [ edit ] Main articles: CMY color model and CMYK color model Cyan, magenta and yellow color filters In color printing , the usual primary colors are cyan , magenta and yellow (CMY). Cyan is the complement of red, meaning that the cyan serves as a filter that absorbs red. The amount of cyan ink applied to a white sheet of paper controls how much of the red light in white light will be reflected back from the paper. Ideally, the cyan ink is completely transparent to green and blue light and has no effect on those parts of the spectrum . Magenta is the complement of green , and yellow the complement of blue . Combinations of different amounts of the three inks can produce a wide range of colors with good saturation .

In inkjet color printing and typical mass production photomechanical printing processes , a black ink K (Key) component is included, resulting in the CMYK color model . The black ink serves to cover unwanted tints in dark areas of the printed image, which result from the imperfect transparency of commercially practical CMY inks; to improve image sharpness, which tends to be degraded by imperfect registration of the three color elements; and to reduce or eliminate consumption of the more expensive color inks where only black or gray is required.

Purely photographic color processes almost never include a K component, because in all common processes the CMY dyes used are much more perfectly transparent, there are no registration errors to camouflage, and substituting a black dye for a saturated CMY combination, a trivial prospective cost-benefit at best, is technologically impractical in non-electronic analog photography .

See also [ edit ] Additive color Color mixing Color motion picture film Color space Color theory Primary color References [ edit ] ^ Levoy, Marc.

"Additive versus subtractive color mixing" .

graphics.stanford.edu . Retrieved 4 November 2020 .

On the other hand, if you reflect light from a colored surface, or if you place a colored filter in front of a light, then some of the wavelengths present in the light may be partially or fully absorbed by the colored surface or filter. If we characterize the light as an SPD, and we characterize absorption by the surface or filter using a spectrum of reflectivity or transmissivity, respectively, i.e. the percentage of light reflected or transmitted at each wavelength, then the SPD of the outgoing light can be computed by multiplying the two spectra. This multiplication is (misleadingly) called subtractive mixing.

^ Williamson, Samuel J; Cummins, Herman Z (1983).

Light and Color in Nature and Art . New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp.

28– 30.

ISBN 0-471-08374-7 .

Thus subtractive color mixing laws that successfully describe how light is altered by nonspectral filters also describes how light is altered by pigments.

Further reading [ edit ] Berns, Roy S. (2000).

Billmeyer and Saltzman's Principles of Color Technology (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley.

ISBN 0-471-19459-X .

Stroebel, Leslie; John, Compton; Ira, Current; Richard, Zakia (2000).

Basic Photographic Materials and Processes (2nd ed.). Boston: Focal Press.

ISBN 0-240-80405-8 .

Wyszecki, Günther & W. S. Stiles (1982).

Color Science: Concept and Methods, Quantitative Data and Formulae . New York: Wiley.

ISBN 0-471-02106-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Subtractive colors .

Stanford University CS 178 interactive Flash demo comparing additive and subtractive color mixing.

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐s5f47
Cached time: 20250812015257
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.313 seconds
Real time usage: 0.410 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1128/1000000
Revision size: 8585/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 58712/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1008/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 27534/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.202/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5738702/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  344.332      1 -total
 26.36%   90.766      5 Template:Navbox
 25.30%   87.126      1 Template:Color_topics
 24.27%   83.570      1 Template:Reflist
 19.29%   66.437      1 Template:Cite_web
 16.98%   58.465      1 Template:Short_description
 12.68%   43.649      1 Template:More_footnotes
 10.99%   37.845      1 Template:Ambox
 10.60%   36.488      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.06%   34.624      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:479968:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015257 and revision id 1300164021. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subtractive_color&oldid=1300164021 " Categories : Color Color space Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 16:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subtractive color 24 languages Add topic

