Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Goals 2 Postharvest shelf life 3 Postharvest physiology 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Postharvest 8 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Português Tagalog Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Postharvest physiology ) Stage of crop production immediately after harvest See also: Post-harvest losses (disambiguation) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Postharvest" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Drying and bagging of peanuts in Jiangxia District , Hubei , China In agriculture , postharvest handling is the stage of crop production immediately following harvest , including cooling, cleaning, sorting and packing. The instant a crop is removed from the ground , or separated from its parent plant , it begins to deteriorate. Postharvest treatment largely determines final quality, whether a crop is sold for fresh consumption, or used as an ingredient in a processed food product.

Goals [ edit ] Drying chili peppers .

Milyanfan , Kyrgyzstan The most important goals of post-harvest handling are to keep the product cool and safe, to avoid moisture loss and slow down undesirable chemical changes, and avoiding physical damage such as bruising , to delay spoilage .

[ 1 ] Sanitation is also an important factor, to reduce the possibility of pathogens that could be carried by fresh produce, for example, as residue from contaminated washing water.

After the field, post-harvest processing is usually continued in a packing house . This can be a simple shed, providing shade and running water, or a large-scale, sophisticated, mechanised facility, with conveyor belts , automated sorting and packing stations, walk-in coolers and the like. In mechanised harvesting, processing may also begin as part of the actual harvest process, with initial cleaning and sorting performed by the harvesting machinery.

Initial post-harvest storage conditions are critical to maintaining quality. Each crop has an optimum range of storage temperature and humidity. Also, certain crops cannot be effectively stored together, as unwanted chemical interactions can result. Various methods of high-speed cooling, and sophisticated refrigerated and atmosphere-controlled environments, are employed to prolong freshness, particularly in large-scale operations.

Postharvest shelf life [ edit ] Once harvested, vegetables and fruits are subject to the active process of degradation. Numerous biochemical processes continuously change the original composition of the crop until it becomes unmarketable. The period during which consumption is considered acceptable is defined as the time of "postharvest shelf life".

[ citation needed ] Postharvest shelf life is typically determined by objective methods that determine the overall appearance, taste, flavor, and texture of the commodity. These methods usually include a combination of sensorial , biochemical , mechanical, and colorimetric ( optical ) measurements. A recent study attempted (and failed) to discover a biochemical marker and fingerprint methods as indices for freshness.

[ citation needed ] Postharvest physiology [ edit ] Postharvest physiology is the scientific study of the plant physiology of living plant tissues after picking. It has direct applications to postharvest handling in establishing the storage and transport conditions that best prolong shelf life.

An example of the importance of the field to post-harvest handling is the discovery that ripening of fruit can be delayed, and thus their storage prolonged, by preventing fruit tissue respiration. This insight allowed scientists to bring to bear their knowledge of the fundamental principles and mechanisms of respiration, leading to post-harvest storage techniques such as cold storage, gaseous storage, and waxy skin coatings.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Post-harvest losses (fruit and vegetables) Post-harvest losses (grains) References [ edit ] ^ Janet Bachmann and Richard Earles (August 2000).

"Postharvest Handling of Fruits and Vegetables" . NCAT.

Archived from the original on 2002-02-11.

External links [ edit ] Postharvest Biology and Technology Journal ( ISSN 0925-5214 ) Writtle Postharvest Unit; Research & Training Postharvest Technology Research & Information Center Dixie, G. (2005).

"Horticultural Marketing" (PDF) . FAO, Rome. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-05-28.

Lopez-Camelo, Andres. Manual for the preparation and sale of fruits and vegetables – from farm to market. FAO, Rome 2004 FAO Information Network on Post-harvest Operations INPho v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postharvest&oldid=1274860989#Postharvest_physiology " Categories : Horticulture Crops Harvest Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 17:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postharvest 8 languages Add topic

