Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 Sendivogius in fiction 4 Writings 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Michael Sendivogius 26 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano ქართული مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Polish alchemist, philosopher, and medical doctor (1566–1636) Michael Sendivogius Born ( 1566-02-02 ) 2 February 1566 Łukowica , Kingdom of Poland (now Poland ) Died 1636 (1636-00-00) (aged 69–70) Kravaře , Crown of Bohemia , Holy Roman Empire (now the Czech Republic ) Nationality Polish Other names Sędziwój, Sędzimir Alma mater University of Vienna , University of Altdorf , University of Leipzig , University of Cambridge Occupation(s) Alchemist , philosopher , writer, and medical doctor Known for The concept of central nitre Michael Sendivogius ( / ˌ s ɛ n d ɪ ˈ v oʊ dʒ i ə s / ; Polish : Michał Sędziwój ; 2 February 1566 – 1636) was a Polish alchemist , philosopher , and physician. A pioneer of chemistry, he developed ways of purifying and creating various acids , metals , and other chemicals.

He discovered that air is not a single substance and contains a life-giving substance – later called oxygen – 170 years before Scheele's discovery of the element. He correctly identified this "food of life" with the gas (also oxygen) given off by heating nitre ( saltpetre ).

[ 1 ] This substance, the "central nitre", had a central position in Sendivogius' schema of the universe.

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Alchemist Sendivogius , demonstrating alchemy to King Sigismund III of Poland , oil on board by Jan Matejko (1867).

Little is known of his early life: he was born into a noble family that was part of the Clan of Ostoja .

[ 3 ] His father sent him to study in university of Kraków but Sendivogius visited also most of the European countries and universities; he studied at Vienna , Altdorf , Leipzig and Cambridge . His acquaintances included John Dee and Edward Kelley . It was thanks to him that King Stephen Báthory agreed to finance their experiments.

[ 4 ] In the 1590s, he was active in Prague , at the famously open-minded court of Emperor Rudolf II .

Ostoja In Poland, he appeared at the court of King Sigismund III Vasa around 1600, and quickly achieved great fame, as the Polish king was himself an alchemy enthusiast and even conducted experiments with Sendivogius. In Kraków 's Wawel castle, the chamber where his experiments were performed is still intact. The more conservative Polish nobles soon came to dislike him for encouraging the king to expend vast sums of money on chemical experimentation. The more practical aspects of his work in Poland involved the design of mines and metal foundries . His widespread international contacts led to his employment as a diplomat from about 1600.

In his later years, Sendivogius spent more time in Bohemia and Moravia (now in the Czech Republic ), where he had been granted lands by the Habsburg emperor. Near the end of his life, he settled in Prague , in the court of Rudolf II, where he gained even more fame as a designer of metal mines and foundries . However the Thirty Years' War of 1618-48 had effectively ended the golden age of alchemy: the rich patrons now spent their money on financing war rather than chemical speculation, and he died in relative obscurity.

Works [ edit ] Daniel Stolcius in his Viridarium Chymicum (1624) praises Sendivogius as the author of twelve books.

[ 5 ] The most famous of these was his "New Chemical Light", published in 1604. Besides a relatively clear exposition of his theory on the existence of a "food of life" in air, his books contain various scientific, pseudo-scientific and philosophical theories, and were repeatedly translated and widely read among such worthies as Isaac Newton into the 18th century.

Sendivogius in fiction [ edit ] Illustration from the book Sędziwój by Józef Bohdan Dziekoński, 1896 edition The first appearance of this character in fiction was in the 1845 book Sędziwoj by Józef Bohdan Dziekoński [ pl ] , a writer during the times of romanticism in Poland .

[ 6 ] In early 2000s he appeared in several books by the Polish writer Andrzej Pilipiuk ( Kuzynki 2003, Księżniczka 2004, Dziedziczki 2005).

[ 7 ] Sendivogius is also a character in the novel of Gustav Meyrink (part of Goldmachergeschichten, August Scherl Verlag, Berlin 1925 ), a German author from Prague, Bohemia, who often wrote about alchemy and alchemists.

The Polish 19th-century realist painter Jan Matejko depicted Sendivogius demonstrating a transmutation of a base metal into gold before King Sigismund III Vasa .

[ 8 ] He was also shown (thinly disguised) as the Alchemist Sendivogius in a Polish TV series Alchemik Sendivius in the 1980s.

[ 9 ] Writings [ edit ] De Lapide Philosophorum Tractatus duodecim e naturae fonte et manuali experientia deprompti . 1604.

Also known as Novum Lumen Chymicum (New Chemical Light), the first Latin editions were published simultaneously in Prague and Frankfurt.

[ 5 ] Dialogus Mercuriii, Alchemistae et Naturae . Cologne, 1607.

Tractatus de sulphure altero naturae principio . Cologne, 1616.

See also [ edit ] Alchemy in art and entertainment References [ edit ] ^ "MICHAEL SENDIVOGIUS, ROSICRUCIAN, and FATHER OF STUDIES OF OXYGEN" ^ Allen G. Debus, Chemistry and Medical Debate: Van Helmont to Boerhaave , Science History Publication, 2001, p. 13 n. 19.

^ Miguel López-Pérez (ed.), Chymia: Science and Nature in Medieval and Early Modern Europe , Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2010, p. 197.

^ Praktyk i mistyk , Andrzej Datko, Wiedza i życie (2012-06-12) (in Polish) ^ a b Prinke, Rafal T. (1990).

"Michael Sendivogius and Christian Rosenkruetz The Unexpected Possibilities" .

The Hermetic Journal : 72– 98.

^ Wybory popkultury: Relacje kultury popularnej z polityką, ideologią i społeczeństwem (in Polish). Stowarzyszenie Badaczy Popkultury i Edukacji Popkulturowej Trickster. 2015-01-18. p. 28.

ISBN 978-83-64863-00-4 .

^ Kaczor, Katarzyna (2014).

Bogactwo polskich światów fantasy. Od braku nadziei ku eukatastrophe (in Polish). Gdański Klub Fantastyki.

ISBN 978-83-938843-0-8 .

^ Ciciora, Barbara (2005).

Jan Matejko (in Polish). Bosz. p. 42.

ISBN 978-83-89747-16-7 .

^ "ALCHEMIK SENDIVIUS" .

www.filmweb.pl . Filmweb . Retrieved 2024-01-08 .

Prinke, Rafał T. “ Beyond Patronage: Michael Sendivogius and the Meanings of Success in Alchemy ” In Chymia: Science and Nature in Medieval and Early Modern Europe, edited by Miguel López Pérez, Didier Kahn, and Mar Rey Bueno. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2010.

Prinke, Rafal T.

MICHAEL SENDIVOGIUS and CHRISTIAN ROSENKREUTZ The Unexpected Possibilities , The Hermetic Journal (1990), 72-98.

Prinke, Rafał T. “Nolite Me Inquirere (Nechtějte se po mně ptáti): Michael Sendivogius.” In Alchymie a Rudolf II: Hledání Tajemství Přírody ve Střední Evropě v 16. a 17. Století , edited by Ivo Purš and Vladimír Karpenko, 317–35. Praha: Artefactum, 2011.

Sendivogius, Michael.

The Alchemical Letters of Michael Sendivogius to the Rosicrucian Society . Holmes Pub Group Llc.

ISBN 1-55818-404-X Szydło, Zbigniew .

Water which does not wet hands. The alchemy of Michael Sendivogius . London-Warsaw, 1994.

Polish edition: Woda, która nie moczy rąk. Alchemia Michała Sędziwoja.

. Wydawnictwa Naukowo-Techniczne: Warszawa, 1997.

Malgouyres, Philippe La Science de l’émerveillement. Artistes et intellectuels à la cour de Rodolphe II (1552-1612), Paris, Mare & Martin, 2025, 978-2-36222-125-5, p. 127-137 External links [ edit ] Sendivogius.pl , website about the life and works of MIchal Sedziwoj MICHAEL SENDIVOGIUS and CHRISTIAN ROSENKREUTZ: The Unexpected Possibilities online LETTERS OF MICHAEL SENDIVOGIUS TO THE ROSEYCRUSIAN SOCIETY FOUND IN AN OLD MANUSCRIPT BY EBENEZER SIBLY M.D. 1791 A letter from Michael Sendivogius to Vincenzo II Gonzaga, duke of Mantua (1562-1612) The 16th Century Alchemist Who Discovered Oxygen TRANSMUTATION , an episode of the podcast Stories From The Eastern West all about Sendivogius and alchemy in the Middle Ages Works by Michael Sendivogius in digital library Polona v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Poland Vatican Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_Sendivogius&oldid=1296275823 " Categories : Clan of Ostoja 16th-century Polish nobility 1566 births 1636 deaths 16th-century alchemists 17th-century alchemists Jagiellonian University alumni People from Limanowa County Polish chemists 17th-century Polish philosophers 17th-century Polish male writers Polish alchemists Polish inventors 17th-century Polish nobility Scientists from the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Hidden categories: CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Polish-language text This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 00:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michael Sendivogius 26 languages Add topic

