Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geology 2 Flora and fauna Toggle Flora and fauna subsection 2.1 Forest fires and deforestation 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Dajti Mountain National Park 18 languages Azərbaycanca Basa Bali Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша മലയാളം Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Shqip Slovenščina Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°21′57″N 19°55′32″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.36583°N 19.92556°E ﻿ / 41.36583; 19.92556 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Dajti National Park ) National park and a tourist attraction in Albania Dajti Mountain National Park Parku Kombëtar Mali i Dajtit IUCN category II ( national park ) Official logo Location within Albania Show map of Albania Dajti Mountain National Park (Europe) Show map of Europe Location Tirana County Nearest city Tirana Coordinates 41°21′57″N 19°55′32″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.36583°N 19.92556°E ﻿ / 41.36583; 19.92556 Area 28,561.85 hectares (285.6185 km 2 ) Designated 21 June 2006 ( 2006-06-21 ) Governing body National Agency of Protected Areas Dajti Mountain National Park ( Albanian : Parku Kombëtar "Mali i Dajtit" ) is a national park established in 1966 in central Albania , spanning an area of 293.84 km 2 (113.45 sq mi) since 2006. The park is 40 km (25 mi) east of the Adriatic Sea and 26 km (16 mi) east of Tirana .

[ 1 ] The area is under shared jurisdiction between Albanian Agency of Protected Areas (AKZM) and Tirana Municipality Parks and Recreation Agency (APR). It is adjacent to Shtamë Pass Nature Park to the northwest, Kraste-Verjon Protected Landscape to the west, and Mali me Gropa-Bizë-Martanesh Protected Landscape to the east. The park is marked by an extremely fragmented, rugged topography which creates favourable conditions for a great diversity of ecosystems and biodiversity .

The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has listed the park as Category II. The park has been recognised as an Important Plant Area of international importance by Plantlife .

[ 2 ] In 2019, the new Dajti Mt National Park tourist information centre was opened, located near the TV and Radio towers along SH47 road in Fushe Dajt.

[ 3 ] The area is known for Dajti Ekspres [ 4 ] Cable Car and Adventure Park in addition to the area’s long standing traditional restaurants serving local dishes according to the slow food tradition.

Geology [ edit ] Dajti from the east Dajti massif , a mountain chain that rises to an elevation of 1,613 m (5,292 ft), comprises besides Dajti, Priska to the south, Tujani in the center and Brari to the north.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Climbers of the mountain can view down into the city of Tirana and over the mountains of the region. Due to the panoramic view, this place has been named as the Balcony of Tirana . One of Tirana 's main water sources, Lake Bovilla , is located to the northeast of Brar with steep cliffs and a canyon. On the other extremity of the park along Erzen River is found the prehistoric Pellumbas Cave located in the Skorana Gorge, which has been formed by the river. Another natural attraction is the Shëngjini Waterfalls located near Shëngjergj village.

Flora and fauna [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Dajti's varied geology and topography have resulted in a variety of flora and fauna . In addition to the forests and mountain landscapes with many wild flowers , numerous mammals are protected as well. The park is inhabited by wild boar , Eurasian wolf , red fox , European hare , brown bear , squirrel , and European wildcat . In the lower part of the mountains, the vegetation consists of scrubland and heath , myrtle and fragaria .

Oak dominates at around 600-1,000 m altitude interspersed with beech and maple forests and some conifers above 1,000 m altitude. The rocky top has little vegetation.

Forest fires and deforestation [ edit ] In the 2010s, deforestation has become a major problem on the mountain. In the summer of 2012 and spring 2019, [ 7 ] forest fires burned down 10 ha of forests at the Priska summit and partially Dajti in 2017, requiring authorities to extinguish it only with the help of helicopters.

[ 8 ] The damage was extensive at the summits and can be clearly seen from Tirana.

Bus line serving Dajti Mt Cable Car in Tirana Forest fires are happening more frequently every year, while those responsible are not being convicted.

See also [ edit ] Geography of Albania Protected areas of Albania Dajti Mountain References [ edit ] ^ "Dajti National Park A Recreational Area for Citizens of Tirana, Albania" (PDF) .

mmv.boku.ac.at . p. 432.

^ IUCN , World Wide Fund for Nature , Plantlife .

"Important Plant Areas of the south and east Mediterranean region" (PDF) .

portals.iucn.org . p. 75.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Inaugurohet qendra e re e vizitorëve në Parkun Kombëtar të Dajtit - ATSH -" . 25 March 2019. Archived from the original on 19 June 2020 . Retrieved 25 July 2020 .

^ "Dajti Ekspres Official Website" .

Dajti Ekspres . Retrieved 2021-07-28 .

^ "Dajti Mountain National Park" .

akzm.gov.al .

^ "Figure 1. Dajti National Park (Albania), the study area" .

researchgate.net .

^ "Zjarr në Malin e Dajtit, Goxhaj: Ndërhyrja e vështirë për shkak të terrenit (VIDEO) - Shqiptarja" .

^ "Zjarret në Dajt | Gazeta Shqip" .

Gazeta Shqip . Retrieved 2023-10-24 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dajti Mountain National Park .

National Agency of Protected Areas Official Site Dajti National Park on AKZM.net National Parks Portal v t e Protected areas of Albania Archaeological parks Amantia Antigonea Apollonia Byllis Lissus Oricum Phoenice Shkodër Biosphere reserves Ohrid-Prespa Bird areas Butrint Lagoon Drin Drin Gulf Karavasta Lagoon Narta Lagoon Ohrid Lake Patok Lagoon Prespa Lake Sazan Viluni Lagoon Vlorë Bay National parks Alps of Albania Butrint Dajti Divjakë-Karavasta Fir of Hotovë-Dangëll Karaburun-Sazan Llogara Lurë-Dejë Prespa Shebenik Tomorr Vjosë Nature reserves Blue Eye Bogovë Gashi Valley Karaburun Peninsula Korab-Koritnik Kunë-Vain-Talë-Patok-Fushëkuqe-Ishëm Mali me Gropa-Bizë-Martanesh Shkodër Lake Shtamë Pass Ulza Lake Protected landscapes Buna River-Velipojë Fir of Drenovë-Sinicë Guri i Nikës-Lenie-Valamarë Ramsar sites Buna Butrint Lagoon Shkodër Lake Small Prespa Lake Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dajti_Mountain_National_Park&oldid=1298756982 " Categories : IUCN Category II Dajti National Park National parks of Albania Protected areas established in 1966 Protected areas of Tirana County 1966 establishments in Albania Forests of Albania Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Albanian-language text Articles needing additional references from June 2019 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is defined as the pagename This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 13:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dajti Mountain National Park 18 languages Add topic

