Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Benefits 2 Drawbacks 3 Recycling timber 4 Examples 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Timber recycling 2 languages Македонски Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Recycling process This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Timber recycling" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Demolishers pulling timber from an old wool store in Sydney, which will later be re-used for timber flooring Timber recycling or wood recycling is the process of turning waste timber into usable products. Recycling timber is a practice that was popularized in the early 1990s as issues such as deforestation and climate change prompted both timber suppliers and consumers to turn to a more sustainable timber source. Recycling timber is the environmentally friendliest form of timber production and is very common in countries such as Australia and New Zealand where supplies of old wooden structures are plentiful.

[ citation needed ] Timber can be chipped down into wood chips which can be used to heat homes or generate electricity.

[ citation needed ] Benefits [ edit ] Example of recycled timber as a final product Recycling timber has become popular due to its image as an environmentally friendly product. Common belief among consumers is that by purchasing recycled wood, the demand for "green timber" will fall and ultimately benefit the environment. Greenpeace also view recycled timber as an environmentally friendly product, citing it as the most preferable timber source on their website. The arrival of recycled timber as a construction product has been important in both raising industry and consumer awareness towards deforestation and promoting timber mills to adopt more environmentally friendly practices.

[ citation needed ] Drawbacks [ edit ] Some hurdles facing the widespread adoption of recycled timber: sometimes the ends of wall studs need to be trimmed off to stop decay and cracking, thus resulting in a shorter piece of wood; this trimming may result in pieces of wood that do not meet building codes. Though the price may be less than for new wood, the process of selecting usable pieces of salvaged wood, pulling out nails, and refinishing for a new use can be laborious and time-consuming.  Demolition must happen in such a way as to preserve as much of the timber as possible in a building, which means more time spent dismantling a building rather than just tearing it down quickly. The trade in recycled timber is not well-established everywhere, so a reliable supply of usable wood may be hard to come by for builders. There may be a stigma associated with using "used" or "cheap" wood that is perceived to be of not as high quality as "new" wood. Not all pieces of wood in a dismantled building will fit in a new building, and it may be cheaper and easier, from a design and labor perspective, to simply get new wood (ex: wood from a 6-foot (1.8 m) deck being used in a 7-foot (2.1 m) deck). Of course, none of these issues are insurmountable, and they are issues of convenience and logistics rather than structural integrity, but many builders find it easier and less time-consuming to simply get new wood in standard uniform sizes.

Recycling timber [ edit ] Main article: Reclaimed lumber Recycled timber salvaged from a demolished building in Trat , Thailand , is applied to make a new roof.

Recycled timber most commonly comes from old buildings, bridges and wharfs, where it is carefully stripped out and put aside by demolishers. At the same time any usable dimension stone is set aside for reuse. The demolishers then sell the salvaged timber to merchants who then re-mill the timber by manually scanning it with a metal detector, which allows the timber to be de-nailed and sawn to size. Once re-milled the timber is commonly sold to consumers in the form of timber flooring, beams and decking.

Examples [ edit ] Use of recycling timber is not new. As early as 1948, the 100 metre tall tower of Golm transmitter near Potsdam, Germany was built from recycled timber. It stood for 31 years.
It was common to reuse wood of dismantled radio towers in the 1930s in Germany, e.g. the former tower of Koblenz radio transmitter was built of wood from a dismantled tower, which carried a T-antenna at Transmitter Muehlacker . The upper parts of the 157-metre-tall wood tower of Ismaning radio transmitter , which stood for 49 years, were built of wood from a smaller radio tower dismantled in 1934.

See also [ edit ] Denailer Dimension stone – stone recycling and reuse Green building and wood Lumber Nash Timbers Natural building Pallet crafts Recycling Sawmill References [ edit ] Falk, Robert H.

North American Wood Waste Forum: Summary of Group Feedback, February 2–3, 2012.

Madison, Wis.: U.S. Department of Agriculture , Forest Service , Forest Products Laboratory, 2012.

External links [ edit ] The Salvo Global Directory of specialist reclaimed timber dealers The Salvo Global Directory of 6,000 dealers in reclaimed building materials, including timber v t e Recycling Materials Aluminium Asphalt Concrete Copper Cotton Energy Glass Gypsum Paper Plastic Refrigerant Scrap Timber Cooking oil Water Products Appliances Automotive oil Batteries Bottles PET bottles Computers Drugs Fluorescent lamps Lumber Mobile phones Paint Ships Textiles Tires Vehicles Apparatus Bins Blue bags Blue boxes Codes Collection Materials recovery facility Waste sorting Countries Rate by country Australia Brazil Canada Ireland Israel Japan Malaysia Mongolia The Netherlands Switzerland Taiwan United Kingdom Northern Ireland United States Concepts Circular economy Dematerialization Downcycling Durable good Eco-industrial park Ecological design Extended producer responsibility Green economy Industrial ecology Industrial metabolism Interchangeable parts Land recycling Material flow analysis Precycling Product stewardship Recycling (ecological) Refill (campaign) Repairability Resource recovery Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Reuse of human excreta Repurposing Reuse Right to repair Symbol ( Green Dot ) Upcycling Urban lumberjacking Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste picking Wishcycling Zero waste See also Bottle cutting Cogeneration Composting Container-deposit legislation Dumpster diving Ethical consumerism Freeganism Pallet crafts Reverse vending machine Simple living Waste Waste-to-energy Waste collection Waste management law Waste management Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Environment portal Category by country by material by product organizations Index Commons v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Portal : Trees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timber_recycling&oldid=1302121044 " Categories : Energy conservation Recycled building materials Recycling by material Timber industry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from October 2015 Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2007 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 13:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Timber recycling 2 languages Add topic

