Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Summary 3 Reception 4 Editions 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Polymath 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2018 non-fiction book by Waqas Ahmed The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Polymath: Unlocking the Power of Human Versatility Author Waqas Ahmed Language English Subject Polymathy , Intellectual history , Education sciences , Personal development Publisher Wiley Publication date 2018 ISBN 978-1-119-50848-9 (1st edition, hardcover) OCLC 1117695960 Dewey Decimal 153.9 LC Class BF431 .A475 2019 Website www .davinci-network .com /the-book The Polymath: Unlocking the Power of Human Versatility is a non-fiction book by British author Waqas Ahmed, first published in 2018. It argues that specialisation in education and workplaces stifles human curiosity and human potential which naturally transcend subject areas. And that professional institutions have erected walls to keep outsiders out. Ahmed argues that a new approach — one which recognises and fosters versatility — is urgently needed in the modern world. He writes that this would help people both to lead more fulfilling lives and to develop solutions to complex, multi-dimensional problems. The book draws on historical, psychological, and neuroscientific research and profiles living and historical polymaths from many cultures.

Background [ edit ] The author Waqas Ahmed is an interdisciplinary scholar, artist, and curator. He is a visiting fellow at the Open University Business School [ 1 ] and a faculty member at the London Interdisciplinary School .

[ 2 ] He is also the former Artistic Director of the Khalili Collections and the current Executive Director of the Khalili Foundation .

[ 3 ] With degrees in Economics, International relations and Neuroscience , he has previously worked as a diplomatic journalist and editor (editing reports of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings ), investment analyst, and fitness trainer.

[ 4 ] His initial interest in polymathy was spurred by the way university and his early career pressured him to choose between his multiple interests. His diplomatic career and study of international relations involved a lot of travel, including to cultures in which specialisation was not treated as a default. This led to him studying Western culture's emphasis on specialisation and its polymathic alternatives.

[ 5 ] He noticed that there was no book-length treatment of the topic of polymathy in English.

[ 6 ] Ahmed spent five years writing the book, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] while doing postgraduate research in neuroscience .

[ 8 ] Summary [ edit ] Martin Kemp , author of the book's prologue The prologue is by the Oxford University professor Martin Kemp , author of many books on the Renaissance polymath Leonardo da Vinci . He has been cited as a leading expert on the topic.

[ 9 ] Ahmed takes as his definition of "polymath" those who have made significant contributions to at least three different fields.

[ 4 ] Rather than seeing polymaths as exceptionally gifted, he argues that every human being has the potential to become one: that people naturally have multiple interests and talents.

[ 9 ] He contrasts this polymathic nature against what he calls "the cult of specialisation", [ 10 ] claiming that education systems stifle this nature by forcing learners to specialise in narrow topics.

[ 9 ] The book argues that specialisation encouraged by the production lines of the Industrial Revolution is counter-productive both to the individual and wider society. It argues that the complex problems of the 21st century need the versatility, creativity, and broad perspectives characteristic of polymaths.

[ 9 ] Author Waqas Ahmed signing a copy of the book during its launch at the National Gallery For individuals, Ahmed says, specialisation is dehumanising and stifles their full range of expression whereas polymathy "is a powerful means to social and intellectual emancipation" which enables a more fulfilling life.

[ 11 ] In terms of social progress, he argues that answers to specific problems often come from combining knowledge and skills from multiple areas, and that many important problems are multi-dimensional in nature and cannot be fully understood through one specialism.

[ 11 ] Rather than interpreting polymathy as a mix of occupations or of intellectual interests, Ahmed challenges the dichotomies between "thinkers" and "doers" and between art and science. He argues that an orientation towards action and towards thinking support each other, and that human beings flourish by pursuing a diversity of experiences as well as a diversity of knowledge. He observes that successful people in many fields have cited hobbies and other "peripheral" activities as supplying skills or insights that helped them succeed.

[ 12 ] Ahmed examines evidence suggesting that the developing of multiple talents and perspectives is helpful for success in a highly specialised field. He cites a study of Nobel Prize–winning scientists which found them 25 times more likely to sing, dance, or act than average scientists.

[ 13 ] Another study found that children scored higher in IQ tests after having drum lessons, and he uses such research to argue that diversity of domains can enhance a person's general intelligence.

[ 14 ] Ahmed cites many historical claims for the advantages of polymathy. Some of these are about general intellectual abilities that polymaths apply across multiple domains. For example, Aristotle wrote that full understanding of a topic requires, in addition to subject knowledge, a general critical thinking ability that can assess how that knowledge was arrived at.

[ 15 ] Another claimed advantage of a polymathic mindset is in the application of multiple approaches to understanding a single issue. Ahmed cites the biologist E. O. Wilson 's view that reality is approached not by a single academic discipline but via a consilience between them.

[ 16 ] One argument for studying multiple approaches is that it would lead to open-mindedness . Within any one perspective, a question may seem to have a straightforward, settled answer. The argument presented is that someone aware of different, contrasting answers will be more open-minded and aware of the limitations of their own knowledge. The importance of recognising these limitations is a theme that Ahmed finds in many thinkers, including Confucius , ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib , and Nicolas of Cusa . He calls it "the essential mark of the polymath." [ 16 ] A further argument offered for multiple approaches is that a polymath does not see diverse approaches as diverse, because they see connections where other people see differences. For example, Leonardo da Vinci advanced multiple fields by applying mathematical principles to each.

[ 17 ] Throughout the book there are short profiles of historical and living polymaths from many cultures and historical periods, including Aristotle , Nasir al-Din al-Tusi , Ban Zhao , Suleiman the Magnificent , and Florence Nightingale . One chapter is based on interviews with living polymaths.

[ 18 ] Aristotle Ban Zhao Suleiman the Magnificent Nicholas of Cusa Alexander von Humboldt Florence Nightingale Muhammad Iqbal Some historical polymaths mentioned in the book Reception [ edit ] Andrew Hill, reviewing The Polymath in the Financial Times , agrees with the book's contentions that human beings are naturally polymathic and that it is harmful for society to discourage this. Like Ahmed, he decries specialisation for promoting "neglect of hobbies, withering of skills, stagnation of talent, and willful ignorance of wider opportunities." [ 13 ] In The Lancet , Andrew Robinson describes the book as "pioneering" for its focus on polymathy, in contrast to the many books that have been written on genius . He agrees with the author that "polymathic versatility has never been more needed, to deal with complex challenges such as climate change".

[ 9 ] The magazine Jocks & Nerds describes The Polymath as a "fascinating" book that "makes a compelling argument".

[ 5 ] In M3 India , the surgeon Kamal Mahawar endorses the case Ahmed makes for polymathy both as an approach to personal fulfilment and as a needed set of reforms to education and the workplace.

[ 19 ] The Globsyn Management Journal describes the book as "brilliant reading" that combines a narrative of polymaths in history with a vision of society's potential future evolution.

[ 20 ] BBC Worklife described the book as "one of the most detailed examinations of the subject.

[ 4 ] In response to interest in the book from cultural and educational institutions, Ahmed organised a Polymath Festival "designed to celebrate many-sided human potential and explore interdisciplinary solutions to complex world problems." [ 8 ] Editions [ edit ] Originally written in English and published by Wiley in print, ebook and audiobook formats, The Polymath has been translated into Korean .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Waqās Ahmed" .

Open University Business School . Retrieved 12 May 2022 .

^ "Waqās Ahmed" .

London Interdisciplinary School . Retrieved 12 May 2022 .

^ "About" .

Khalili Foundation . Retrieved 5 June 2023 .

^ a b c Robson, David (18 November 2019).

"Why some people are impossibly talented" .

BBC Worklife . Retrieved 1 October 2021 .

^ a b Ross, Marcus Agerman (October 2020). "Waqãs Ahmed".

Jocks & Nerds . Vol. 26. London: Tack Press. pp.

250– 251.

ISSN 2056-4872 .

^ a b Ahmed 2018 , p. xiv.

^ Goodwin, Georgina (31 March 2019).

Sunday Brunch / Weekend Read: Waqas Ahmed (podcast) . Monocle Radio.  Event occurs at 33:53.

^ a b Hamid, Sadek (19 March 2020).

"Waqas Ahmed: The Muslim renaissance man championing human versatility" .

The New Arab . Retrieved 1 October 2021 .

^ a b c d e Robinson, Andrew (11 May 2019).

"In pursuit of polymathy" .

The Lancet .

393 (10184): 1926.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30995-X .

S2CID 149445248 .

^ Ahmed 2018 , p. 85.

^ a b Ahmed 2018 , pp. 282–283.

^ Ahmed 2018 , pp. 160, 164, 176.

^ a b Hill, Andrew (11 February 2019).

"The hidden benefits of hiring Jacks and Jills of all trades" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 16 December 2021 .

^ Ahmed 2018 , p. 146.

^ Ahmed 2018 , p. 148.

^ a b Ahmed 2018 , pp. 134–136.

^ Ahmed 2018 , pp. 173–174.

^ Ahmed 2018 , p. 249.

^ Mahawar, Kamal (23 May 2019).

"The Polymath Will Survive: Book review by Dr. Kamal Mahawar" .

M3India . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ Chattopadhyay, Debaprasad (January–December 2019). "Book Review: The Polymath: Unlocking The Power of Human Versatility".

Globsyn Management Journal .

13 : 72– 73.

ISSN 0973-9181 .

^ "The Polymath : Unlocking the Power of Human Versatility | Formats and Editions" .

worldcat.org . Retrieved 20 March 2025 .

^ "The Polymath | Formats and Editions" .

worldcat.org . Retrieved 20 March 2025 .

Sources [ edit ] Ahmed, Waqas (2018).

The Polymath : unlocking the power of human versatility . Chichester, West Sussex, United Kingdom: Wiley.

ISBN 9781119508489 .

External links [ edit ] Official web site Is the era of "specialisation" over?

Lecture by Waqas Ahmed at Aarhus University, Denmark (YouTube) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Polymath&oldid=1291971024 " Categories : 2018 non-fiction books English non-fiction books Educational psychology books Intellectual history Books about human intelligence Books about creativity Wiley (publisher) books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from September 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Use dmy dates from June 2022 Use British English from July 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 13:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Polymath 1 language Add topic

