Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable alumni 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Bunker Hill Community College 4 languages 日本語 پنجابی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Community college in Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.

Bunker Hill Community College The main entrance to Bunker Hill Community College (The "B" building) Type Public community college Established 1973 ( 1973 ) Accreditation NECHE President Pam Eddinger Students 8,439 [ 1 ] (fall 2022) Location Boston , Massachusetts , United States 42°22′32″N 71°04′11″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.375566°N 71.069816°W ﻿ / 42.375566; -71.069816 Campus Urban Mascot Bulldog Website www .bhcc .edu [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Bunker Hill Community College ( BHCC ) is a public community college with multiple campuses in the Greater Boston area. Founded in 1973 in the Charlestown neighborhood of Boston , Massachusetts , United States, BHCC provides higher education and job training services at two campuses and three satellite locations.

BHCC is the state's largest community college, enrolling more than 13,000 students [ 5 ] in day, afternoon, evening, late-evening, weekend, and web-based distance-learning courses. It is also one of the state's most diverse institutions of higher education: 24% of the students are African-American, 24% are white or caucasian, and 24% Latino.

[ 5 ] More than half are women. Students' average age is 27.

[ 5 ] The college enrolls more than 800 international students who come from about 100 countries and speak more than 75 languages.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Community College station on the MBTA Orange Line. The station is named after and adjacent to BHCC.

Bunker Hill Community College's 42- acre (17 ha ; 0.066 sq mi ) main campus is in Boston's Charlestown neighborhood, on the site of the former Charlestown State Prison that closed in 1955.

[ 7 ] It is served by the MBTA Orange Line rapid transit station called Community College , and sits near the site of the 1775 Battle of Bunker Hill in the American Revolutionary War . Bunker Hill Community College is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education .

[ 8 ] Since 1987, a second campus has provided higher education and job training to residents of Chelsea , Revere , Everett , East Boston , Winthrop and other surrounding communities.

[ 9 ] This campus moved several times until settling in 1998 into a former post office in Bellingham Square . The two-story 1910 brick structure  had been vacant for a decade before being donated to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

[ 10 ] In Boston's South End , BHCC worked with Inquilinos Boricuas en Acción (IBA), a community-based organization, to establish the Pathway Technology Campus (PTC) in Villa Victoria, a predominantly-Latino affordable-housing community. PTC helps residents of the South End and Lower Roxbury earn a GED certificate, take adult education ( ESL , Basic English and Math) classes, and to enroll in community college-level classes.

[ 11 ] Since 2007, BHCC has operated an East Boston Satellite campus at the Education and Training Institute of the East Boston Neighborhood Health Center. It offers introductory and allied health courses in the evening during the fall, spring and summer terms.

[ 12 ] Established in fall 2009, the Malden Satellite is based at Malden High School in Malden, Massachusetts , and offers introductory and college-level courses in the evening during the fall and spring semesters.

[ 13 ] The college was featured in the 1997 movie Good Will Hunting , as the location where Sean Maguire ( Robin Williams ) teaches.

On July 1, 2013, Pam Y. Eddinger became BHCC's seventh president, replacing Mary L. Fifield, who retired after 16 years.

[ 14 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Dana Rosenblatt , boxer Stephen Stat Smith , state representative Tamerlan Tsarnaev , perpetrator of the Boston Marathon bombing - did not graduate [ 15 ] Betsy Warrior , feminist and author BB02 , Nigerian singer and record label boss Bobby Kelly , comedian Walter Varela , professional soccer player Christopher Worrell , politician References [ edit ] ^ "College Navigator - Bunker Hill Community College" .

National Center for Education Statistics . Retrieved July 21, 2024 .

^ Bunker Hill Community College Magazine , Summer 2013 ^ "Pam Y. Eddinger '82 named president of Bunker Hill Community College" , Barnard Alumnae , Barnard College, New York City ^ "Fast Facts - Fall 2016" . Bunker Hill Community College . Retrieved February 24, 2017 .

^ a b c Wickersham, Joan (February 24, 2017).

"Cooking up a better future" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved February 24, 2017 .

^ About Bunker Hill Community College - BHCC website ^ Barbo, Theresa Mitchell.

The Cape Cod Murder of 1899: Edwin Ray Snow's Punishment and Redemption .

The History Press , 2007.

ISBN 1-59629-227-X , 9781596292277. Cf.

Chapter 4, p.29 .

^ Massachusetts Institutions – NECHE , New England Commission of Higher Education , retrieved May 26, 2021 ^ "Chelsea Campus" .

bhcc.edu . Bunker Hill Community College . Retrieved December 13, 2013 .

^ "Rehabilitation of the Chelsea Post Office. 1997" .

preservationnation.org . National Trust for Historic Preservation. June 10, 1998 . Retrieved December 13, 2013 .

^ Desmarais, Nartin (October 25, 2013).

"IBA celebrates 45 years of building community" .

baystatebanner.com . Bay State Banner . Retrieved December 13, 2013 .

^ "East Boston Satellite" .

bhcc.edu . Bunker Hill Community College. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013 . Retrieved December 13, 2013 .

^ "Malden Satellite" .

bhcc.edu . Bunker Hill Community College. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013 . Retrieved December 13, 2013 .

^ Moore, Mary (April 30, 2013).

"Bunker Hill Community College names new president" .

bizjournals.com/boston . Boston Business Journal . Retrieved December 13, 2013 .

^ "Jahar's World" .

Rolling Stone . July 17, 2013 . Retrieved September 23, 2018 .

After graduating in 2006, [Tamerlan] enrolled at Bunker Hill Community College to study accounting, but attended for just three semesters before dropping out.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Public institutions of higher education in Massachusetts Massachusetts Department of Higher Education Two-year colleges Berkshire Community College Bristol Community College Bunker Hill Community College Cape Cod Community College Greenfield Community College Holyoke Community College Massachusetts Bay Community College Massasoit Community College Middlesex Community College Mount Wachusett Community College Northern Essex Community College North Shore Community College Quincy College Quinsigamond Community College Roxbury Community College Springfield Technical Community College State university system Bridgewater State University Fitchburg State University Framingham State University Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts Massachusetts Maritime Academy Salem State University Westfield State University Worcester State University University of Massachusetts University of Massachusetts Amherst University of Massachusetts Boston University of Massachusetts Dartmouth University of Massachusetts Lowell UMass Chan Medical School University of Massachusetts School of Law University of Massachusetts Global (private affiliate based outside the state) Merged Boston State College Bradford Durfee College of Technology Lowell State College Lowell Technological Institute New Bedford Institute of Technology Closed Hyannis State Teachers College Massachusetts State College–Fort Devens v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bunker_Hill_Community_College&oldid=1305509925 " Categories : Bunker Hill Community College Community colleges in Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1973 Universities and colleges in Boston 1973 establishments in Massachusetts Charlestown, Boston Education in Malden, Massachusetts Chelsea, Massachusetts East Boston Buildings and structures in Malden, Massachusetts NJCAA schools Two-year colleges in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 13:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bunker Hill Community College 4 languages Add topic

