Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Caritas : the altruistic love 2 As a theological virtue 3 See also 4 Sources 5 References Toggle the table of contents Charity (Christian virtue) 28 languages العربية Български བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Picard Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenščina Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt Batak Toba Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Charity (virtue) ) One of the seven theological virtues Part of a series on Love Red-outline heart icon Types of love Affection Bonding Broken heart Compassionate love Conjugal love Courtly love courtship troubadours Falling in love Friendship cross-sex romantic zone Infatuation Interpersonal relationship Intimacy Limerence Love addiction Love at first sight Love triangle Lovesickness Lovestruck Obsessive love Parental love Passion Passionate and companionate love Platonic love Puppy love Queerplatonic relationship Romance Self-love Amour de soi Unconditional love Unrequited love Social views Anarchist Free love Patriotism Chinese Ren Yuanfen French Amour-propre Greek words for love Agape Eros Ludus Mania Philautia Philia Pistis Pragma Storgḗ Xenia Indian Kama Bhakti Maitrī Islamic Ishq Jewish Chesed Latin Amor Caritas Portuguese Saudade Yaghan Mamihlapinatapai Concepts Color wheel theory of love Bhakti yoga Biology of romantic love Interpersonal attraction Love letter Love of Christ Love of God in Christianity Love magic Valentine's Day Philosophy Religious views love deities Sacred Heart Similarity Physical attractiveness Triangular theory of love v t e Allegorical personification of Charity as a mother with three infants by Anthony van Dyck , (ca. 1627-1628) In Christian theology , charity ( Latin : caritas ) is considered one of the seven virtues and was understood by Thomas Aquinas as "the friendship of man for God", which "unites us to God ". He holds it as "the most excellent of the virtues ".

[ 1 ] Aquinas further holds that "the habit of charity extends not only to the love of God, but also to the love of our neighbor".

[ 2 ] The Catechism of the Catholic Church defines "charity" as "the theological virtue by which we love God above all things for His own sake, and our neighbor as ourselves for the love of God".

[ 3 ] Louis Adolphe Salmon after Andrea del Sarto, Charity , 1863, etching and engraving Caritas : the altruistic love [ edit ] The phrase Deus caritas est from 1 John 4 :8 ( 1 John 4:8 )—or Θεὸς ἀγάπη ἐστίν ( Theos agapē estin ) in the original Greek [ 4 ] is translated in the King James Version as: "God is love", and in the Douay-Rheims bible as: "God is charity" ( 1 John 4:8 ). Thomas Aquinas does not simply equate charity with " love ", which he holds as a passion, not a virtue.

[ 5 ] The King James Version uses both the words charity and love to translate the idea of caritas / ἀγάπη ( agapē ): sometimes it uses one, then sometimes the other, for the same concept. Most other English translations, both before and since, do not; instead, throughout they use the same more direct English word love . Love can have other meanings in English, but as used in the New Testament it almost always refers to the virtue of caritas .

Many times when charity is mentioned in English-language bibles, it refers to "love of God", which is a spiritual love that is extended from God to man and then reflected by man, who is made in the image of God, back to God. God gives man the power to act as God acts (God is love), man then reflects God's power in his own human actions towards others. One example of this movement is "charity shall cover the multitude of sins" ( 1 Peter 4 :8, 1 Peter 4:8 ). "The practice of charity brings us to act toward ourselves and others out of love alone, precisely because each person has the dignity of a beloved child of God." [ 6 ] As a theological virtue [ edit ] Charity by William-Adolphe Bouguereau Charity is held to be the ultimate perfection of the human spirit because it both glorifies and reflects the nature of God. Confusion can arise from the multiple meanings of the English word "love". As with other theological virtues, charity is divinely infused into the soul; it resides in the will .

[ 7 ] According to Aquinas, charity is an absolute requirement for happiness, which he holds as man's last goal.

Charity has two parts: love of God and love of man, which includes both love of one's neighbor and one's self.

[ 7 ] In 1 Corinthians 13 , Paul places the greatest emphasis on charity (love). "So faith, hope, love remain, these three; but the greatest of these is love." He describes it this way: Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor , and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.
Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.... And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity.

The fruits of charity are joy, peace, and mercy.

[ 3 ] In December 2005, Pope Benedict XVI issued the encyclical Deus caritas est , in which he discussed "... the love which God lavishes upon us and which we in turn must share with others." [ 8 ] Charity ( c.

1920 ), oil painting by Antonio Salguero Salas. MuNa, Quito .

Based on the Matthew 25 's Parable of The Sheep and the Goats , the early Church saw the love of the poor ( periptochias ) as the crown jewel of the virtues. Cappadocian father St.

Gregory of Nazianzus wrote that It is not at all an easy task to discover the one virtue that surpasses all others and to give it the scepter and palm, just as it is not easy in a meadow fragrant with many blossoms to find the most
fragrant and beautiful.

After considering many of the Christian virtues, he concludes that following Paul and Christ himself, we must regard charity as the first and greatest of the commandments since it is the very sum of the Law and the Prophets, [and] its most vital part I find is the love of the poor...

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Charity by Jacques Blanchard , 1633 Altruism – Concern for the well-being of others Charity (practice) – Voluntary giving of help to those in need The other Capital Virtues – Seven virtues in Christian tradition Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Chastity – Ethic concept of temperance related to sexuality Diligence – Carefulness and persistent effort or work Humility – Quality of being humble Kindness – Behavior marked by generosity, consideration, assistance, or concern for others Patience – Ability to endure difficult circumstances Temperance – Cardinal virtue of control over excess Dāna – Concept of charity in Indian religions Great Commandment – First of two commandments cited by Jesus Love for enemies Loving-kindness and similar or related concepts: Agape – Greek word for love Chesed – Hebrew word referring to love or kindness Mettā – Buddhist term meaning "loving-kindness" Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Ren (Confucianism) – Confucian virtue Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Seven Deadly Sins – Set of vices in Christian theology Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Virtue – Positive trait or quality deemed to be morally good Zidqa – Alms in Mandaeism Sources [ edit ] Aquinas, Thomas (1917) [1485].

"Second Part of the Second Part" .

Summa Theologiae .

See Questions 23-46 Bossy, John (1985).

Christianity in the West 1400–1700 . Oxford. p. 168.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Deharbe, Joseph (1912).

"The Commandments in General and the Chief Commandment of Charity." .

A Complete Catechism of the Catholic Religion . Translated by Rev. John Fander. Schwartz, Kirwin & Fauss.

Slater S.J., Thomas (1925).

"Book V: Part III: On Charity" .

A manual of moral theology for English-speaking countries . Burns Oates & Washbourne Ltd.

Sollier, Joseph Francis (1910).

"Love (Theological Virtue)" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

References [ edit ] ^ Aquinas, Thomas (1920) [1485]. "Charity, considered in itself".

Summa Theologiae . Vol. Secunda, Secundae Partis. Q. 23 . Retrieved 2 April 2018 .

^ Aquinas, Thomas (1920) [1485]. "The object of charity".

Summa Theologiae . Vol. Secunda, Secundae Partis. Q. 25 . Retrieved 2 April 2018 .

^ a b "Catechism of the Catholic Church" .

usccb.org . Retrieved 15 July 2023 .

^ "1 John 4, Interlinear Bible" .

Bible Hub . Retrieved 2 April 2018 .

^ Aquinas, Thomas (1920) [1485]. "The passions of the soul in particular: and first, of love".

Summa Theologiae . Vol. Secunda, Secundae Partis. Q. 26 . Retrieved 2 April 2018 .

^ King, Will (November 29, 2012).

"What is Virtue?" .

Our Sunday Visitor . Archived from the original on May 4, 2018 . Retrieved May 3, 2018 .

^ a b Sollier, Joseph Francis (1910).

"Love (Theological Virtue)" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Benedict XVI (December 25, 2005).

Deus caritas est . Libreria Editrice Vaticana.

^ Vinson, Martha (2003).

Select Orations . The Fathers of the Church : A New Translation. Translated by Vinson, Martha. Catholic University of America Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt32b306 .

ISBN 978-0-8132-1207-4 .

JSTOR j.ctt32b306 .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Charity and Charities ".

v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic 2 Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐mdnpk
Cached time: 20250818102549
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.739 seconds
Real time usage: 0.952 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5434/1000000
Revision size: 10638/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 119483/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3953/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77113/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.508/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17580203/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  819.949      1 -total
 28.38%  232.718      1 Template:Love_sidebar
 28.15%  230.776      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 19.14%  156.916     34 Template:Lang
 18.45%  151.244     19 Template:Annotated_link
 15.40%  126.265      9 Template:Cite_book
  8.88%   72.778      1 Template:Reflist
  8.65%   70.920      1 Template:Short_description
  7.70%   63.122      3 Template:Navbox
  5.75%   47.180      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:245992:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818102549 and revision id 1290844489. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charity_(Christian_virtue)&oldid=1290844489 " Categories : Christian ethics Christian terminology Love and religion Virtue Seven virtues Fruit of the Holy Spirit Altruism First Epistle of John First Epistle of Peter Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Pages with numeric Bible version references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 17 May 2025, at 12:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charity (Christian virtue) 28 languages Add topic

