Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Visigothic art 2 Visigothic architecture 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 Notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Visigothic art and architecture 13 languages Aragonés Български Català Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Lietuvių Português Slovenčina Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art of the Visigoths This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Visigothic art and architecture" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) Church of San Juan Bautista in Baños de Cerrato , Spain Chapel of São Frutuoso in Braga , Portugal Visigoths remains in the Crypt of San Antolín of the cathedral of Palencia , Spain Ruins of Basilica of Santa María de Batres in Carranque , Spain The Visigoths entered Hispania (modern Spain and Portugal ) in 415 and became the dominant people there until the Umayyad conquest of Hispania of 711 brought their kingdom to an end.

This period in Iberian art is dominated by their style. Visigothic art is generally considered in the English -speaking world to be a strain of Migration art , while the Portuguese- and Spanish-speaking worlds generally classify it as Pre-Romanesque .

Branches of Visigothic art include architecture, crafts (especially jewellery), and the Visigothic script .

Visigothic art [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Early Visigothic art survives in functional items, especially those of personal adornment.

[ 1 ] The art of the Visigoths in Iberia featured vibrant colours, geometrical patterns and stylized figures.

[ 2 ] Visigothic architecture [ edit ] Visigothic architecture reflects the roots of late antiquity and early Christian architecture . The Visigoths gradually occupied Gaul and the Iberian Peninsula from the 5th to the 6th century. During the 6th century, they created a stable state entity, which reached its peak in the second half of the 7th century. The brief Byzantine occupation between 554 and 626 of the southeastern region (Provincia Spaniae ) of the Iberian Peninsula strengthened relations with the Byzantine Empire , the Mediterranean Sea , and North Africa .

[ 3 ] From the conversion of the Visigothic king Reccared I to the Orthodox (Catholic) faith in 589 until the Arab invasion in 711 , written and archaeological finds attest to the existence of up to 60 or more churches in the Iberian Peninsula. Visigothic churches were built of very finely worked stone. An example are the rural churches in the areas north of the Douro that have survived to the present day. Other important churches probably existed in large centres in the south of the peninsula, such as Seville or Toledo .

[ 4 ] Archaeological finds, especially of the basilica type, confirm their difference from rural architecture. The architecture of urban temples was more closely related to Merovingian or Byzantine architecture. Temples from different workshops differed in construction techniques and decoration. The sculptural decoration reflects an interest in complex ornamentation and plants, which must have reflected, to some extent, Visigothic traditions.

The Visigoths were gradually driven out of the southern regions of Gaul by the Frankish rulers. They held the capital Toulouse until 508 , when the Frankish king Ludwig I defeated them and pushed them back over the Pyrenees . Except for the region of Septimania, which remained part of the Visigothic Kingdom. Although almost nothing from the Visigothic period survives in Toulouse, a 1727 engraving shows the Church of Notre-Dame-de-la Daurade, probably built during the Visigothic period. It was demolished in 1761. It was an octagonal brick building with a vaulted cloister covered with mosaic decoration, which gave the church its name. The function of the church is unclear. It was probably a palatial chapel, as similar buildings were built at the Roman imperial courts. Regardless of its original function, type and decoration, the building can be dated to the end of the 5th century. The temple was very reminiscent of the San Vitale in Ravenna .

[ 5 ] Several other structures were modified or built in Aquitaine , such as the chapel of Saint-Christol of Nissan-lez-Enserune or the chapel of Notre-Dame-de-la-Miséricorde near Béziers .

[ 6 ] Horseshoe arch of the portal of the Church of San Juan de Baños, 661 , Venta de Baños, Spain In the Iberian Peninsula, the shops of the basilica type were built with a Greek cross plan, closed by barrel vaults in the trades . The space of the church was divided into a common area for the faithful with two opposite pastophoria and an apse separated by exceptions ( cancelli ) or walls.

[ 7 ] The architectural solution separates the laity from the sanctuary . It was also common to use slender and high arcades in the central nave and the horseshoe shape of the apses, some archivolts or vaults. A complete division can be seen in the small church of San Giao, near Nazareth, Portugal. There were narrow doors and openings in the wall that prevented lay people from seeing the ceremony in the apse. In the churches of San Peter de la Nave in Zamora, San Comba de Bande in Ourense, Santa Maria de Lara in Quintanilla de las Viñas, near Burgos, and San Frutuoso de Montélios in Portugal, the solution of a separate space prevails, in which the crossing is marked by a series of horseshoe-shaped arches. Although it is still not entirely clear whether this was an element of Hispano-Roman architecture or whether it arrived in the Iberian Peninsula with oriental influences, the horseshoe arch was probably adopted later by the Arabs from the Visigoths. To this day, many experts debate whether the horseshoe arch is an ancient element of local arts or a Visigothic innovation. This theory is contradicted by the fact that other Germanic peoples did not use it. The arch not only formed a decorative transition from the conventional semicircular arch, but also expanded the idea of a hierarchically separate space of the temple. The horseshoe arch was placed indoors, but also outdoors, such as the western portal and the arcade of San Juan de Baños. Its development occurred at a time when concerns about secrecy and division were expressed in the councils of the Hispano-Roman Church. The gradual separation of the temple space was probably an unconscious expression of the defensive posture of the Hispano-Roman Church against the oppression of the Arian Visigothic rulers. This system of dividing space also had the effect of improving the status of the clergy. The separation and covering of the sacramental parts increased the authority of the priest in his role as mediator between the laity and God.

[ 7 ] A number of 5th- and 6th-century churches, now mostly ruins or archaeological sites, were the source of Hispano-Visigothic architecture, such as the Basilica of Cabeza del Griego in Cuenca and the Basilica of Aljezares in Murcia. The first basilica is dated by the epitaph of bishops Hyginus and Sephronia to around 550. It was a three-naved basilica with a transept, side rooms (diaconium and prothesis) separated from the sanctuary, and a horseshoe-shaped apse, similar to North African basilicas. The Basilica of Aljezares in Murcia had a similar layout, except that the side nave was connected to an adjacent circular baptistery. Other churches are the Basilica of San Pedro de Alcántara in Murcia, the Basilica of Alcarecejos in Córdoba , the Basilica of Casa Herrera in Mérida , the Basilica of Villa Fortunatus in Fraga and the Basilica of Zorita de los Canes in Reccopolis.

[ 8 ] Worth mentioning is the small church of the monastery of Sant Cugat del Vallès in Barcelona, from the 6th century. It is a single-nave church with a semicircular apse on the inside and a rectangular apse on the outside. The plan of the church follows the early Christian typology and is later repeated in Mozarabic art and Mozarabic architecture. Most of the preserved Visigothic churches date from the second half of the 7th century. Visigothic architecture also received external influences. Variants of the Greek or Latin cross plan are used in the churches of San Pedro de La Nave near Zamora, San Comba de Bande in Ourense, San Fructuosus of Montélios in Braga, and San Pedro de La Mata in Toledo.

[ 7 ] Some buildings, such as the Santa Comba de Bande in Ourense, reflect formal similarities with late antique buildings in Ravenna .

[ 4 ] According to art historians, the popularity of the cruciform plan stems from an interest in Eastern Roman (Byzantine) architecture, such as the exterior of the chapel ( mausoleum ) of San Fructuosus of Montélios in Braga. The building reflects Eastern influence and similarities with the Mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna. The chapel is in the shape of a Greek cross and is built of finely worked stonework and geometrical patterns that may refer to the now extinct Visigothic buildings in Toledo. The architecture of many of the buildings shows the influence of Byzantine art in the Justinian and Heraclius periods. Due to the close contact and frequent wars between the Visigoths and the Byzantines, direct inspiration from Byzantium is reflected, as Isidore of Seville points out in his work De laude Hispaniae .

[ 7 ] The temple of San Juan de Baños, built by the Visigothic king Recceswinth in 661 , [ note. 1 ] is a three-nave basilica with a transept and a temple vestibule as wide as the main nave . According to archaeological research, the basilica originally had two side rooms ( diakonikon and prothesis ) with barrel vaults separate from the sanctuary, similar to early Christian temples. The rich sculptural decoration of the temple, portal, triumphal arch, cornice and barrel vault of the sanctuary recalls the decoration of Coptic and Syrian temples. The lintel of the portal leading to the temple refers to the Syrian cathedrals of Turmanin and Kalb Luz.

[ 9 ] The Church of San Pedrp de la Nave, built during the reign of King Égica , is a well-preserved example of a basilica-type church from the late 7th century near Zamora. The plan is in the form of a Greek cross inscribed in a rectangle formed by the adjacent rooms. The church is built of stone blocks, with bricks and quarry stones occasionally used for vaults and upper parts of the walls. The interior tends to be dark, with massive walls and vaulted surfaces that limit direct lighting to a minimum.

[ 4 ] The supporting system is formed by square pillars , to which, in special and significant places such as the crossing or the triumphal arch, columns are attached with rich relief decoration capitals . The decoration is illustrated mainly with scenes from the Old Testament .

[ 9 ] The decorative elements on the imposts are similar to those found on the external wall of the apse of the hermitage of Santa María de Lara in Quintanilla de las Viñas.

[ 5 ] Several churches in northern Spain dating from the 8th century can still be considered Visigothic. The most interesting is the hermitage of Santa María de Lara, near Burgos. Only the transept and the square sanctuary of the church have been preserved. The church is built of blue-grey stone blocks. The interior contains several reliefs representing Christ, the Virgin Mary, angels and the sun. The sculptural decoration of the church is illustrated mainly by early Christian motifs, such as the vine.

The last group consists of buildings in Catalonia. These include in particular the churches of Terrassa (St. Peter, which was only a chapel), St. Michael and St. Mary and the cathedral with the baptistery in Egara. The church of Virgin Mary was undoubtedly a three-nave basilica with a beamed ceiling. The church of St. Michael is a small building in the shape of a Greek cross inscribed in a quadrilateral with an apse to the east. The arms of the crossing are vaulted with a ribbed vault and, above the central part, there is a dome on horns . The chapels at the corners are vaulted with shells .

[ 10 ] In secular architecture, the Visigoths used existing Roman public buildings, which they extensively repaired or built new ones in imitation of the same style. King Leovigild famously built the fortified city of Recópole , north of Toledo , in 568 .

[ 6 ] The city's fortifications, palace, temple and residential area were built according to the Roman checkerboard plan.

[ 11 ] Later, in the 10th century , the city was abandoned. Archaeological excavations have revealed the foundations of a palace and an adjacent temple.

[ 6 ] The Visigothic kingdom was overthrown by the Arabs, who conquered the entire Iberian Peninsula soon after their invasion in 711. The Arab invasion did not completely destroy Visigothic architecture. The Christian (Mozarabic) population preserved the Visigothic legacy in Mozarabic architecture under Arab rule. In the northwest of the Iberian Peninsula, however, in the small Kingdom of Asturias , a local school was established under the rule of Pelagius .

[ 12 ] The legacy of Visigothic architecture continues in Asturian architecture , which continued to develop there between the 8th and 10th centuries.

[ 10 ] The only remaining examples of Visigothic architecture from the 6th century are the church of San Cugat del Vallés in Barcelona , the hermitage and church of Santa Maria de Lara in Burgos, Saint Frutuoso Chapel in Braga , the church of São Gião in Nazaré and the few remnants of the church at Cabeza de Griego in Cuenca . However, their style developed over the next centuries, though the prime remaining examples of it are mostly rural and often run-down. Some of the characteristics of their architecture are: Generally basilican in layout, sometimes a Greek cross plan or, more rarely, a combination of the two. The spaces are highly compartmentalised.

Horseshoe arches without keystones .

A rectangular, exterior apse .

Use of columns and pillars with Corinthian capitals of unique design.

Barrel vaults with cupolas at the crosses.

Frequent use of marble as material.

[ 13 ] Walls of ashlar blocks, occasionally alternating with Roman brickwork.

Decoration commonly of animal or plant motifs.

Examples include: Church of San Juan Bautista , province of Palencia , Spain.

[ 8 ] Crypt of San Antolín in the cathedral of Palencia , province of Palencia , Spain.

Church of Santa Comba in Bande , province of Ourense , Spain.

[ 14 ] Chapel of San Xes (or San Ginés) de Francelos in Ribadavia , province of Ourense , Spain.

Church of San Pedro de la Mata (in ruins) in Sonseca , province of Toledo , Spain.

Church of Santa María de Melque in San Martín de Montalbán , province of Toledo , Spain.

Suso monastery at San Millán de la Cogolla, La Rioja , Spain.

Basilica of Santa María de Batres in Carranque , province of Toledo , Spain.

Hermitage of Santa María in Quintanilla de las Viñas , province of Burgos , Spain.

[ 8 ] Church of Santa Lucía del Trampal near Alcuéscar province of Cáceres , Spain.

Crypt of the Monastery of San Salvador de Leyre , Navarre , Spain.

Church of San Miguel de los Fresnos (in ruins) in Fregenal de la Sierra , province of Badajoz , Spain.

Interior of church of San Pedro de la Nave, province of Zamora , Spain.

[ 8 ] Saint Frutuoso Chapel in Braga , Portugal .

Church of São Gião in Nazaré , Portugal .

Church of San Pedro de la Nave in San Pedro de la Nave-Almendra .

See also [ edit ] Treasure of Guarrazar Verona Orational Visigoths Goths References [ edit ] ^ Hourihane, Colum , ed. (2012). "Visigothic art".

The Grove Encyclopedia of Medieval Art and Architecture . Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. p. 316.

ISBN 9780195395365 . Retrieved 13 July 2025 .

[...] the art of the Visigoths had consisted mainly of elements of personal adornment: belt buckles, fibulae (dress pins), and horse trappings.

^ De Marco, Pasquale (2025). "The Iberian Crucible: The Visigothic Legacy".

The Iberian Chronicle . p. 9 . Retrieved 13 July 2025 .

Visigothic art is characterized by its use of geometric patterns, stylized figures, and vibrant colors.

^ Skubiszewski Piotr (1998). Livre de Poche (ed.).

L'art du Haut Moyen Âge: L'art européen du VIe au IXe siècle . Paris. p. 480.

ISBN 978-2-253-13056-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c Gerli E Michael; David Raizman (2003). Routledge Encyclopedias of the Middle Ages (ed.).

Routledge Revivals: Medieval Iberia . New York. p. 586—711: The Visigoths to the Muslim Invasion.

ISBN 978-0-203-95364-8 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Colum Hourihane (2012). Oxford University Press (ed.).

The Grove Encyclopedia of Medieval Art and Architecture . Vol. 6. Stave to Zyvele. Oxford. p. 316—318.

ISBN 978-0-19-539536-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c Blas Taracena (1947). "Ars Hispaniae: Historia Universal del Arte Hispanico". In Plus-Ultra (ed.).

Arte Romana, Arte Cristã Primitiva, Arte Visigótica, Arte Asturiana . Vol. 2. Madrid. pp.

225– 250.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c d Jerrilynn D. Dodds (1988). "VISIGOTHIC ART".

Dictionary of the Middle Ages . Vol. 12. New York: Sons of Charles Scribner. pp.

465– 467.

ISBN 9780684182780 .

^ a b c d González-García, Antonio César; Belmonte, Juan Antonio (2015-07-01).

"The Orientation of Pre-Romanesque Churches in the Iberian Peninsula" .

Nexus Network Journal .

17 (2): 353– 377.

doi : 10.1007/s00004-014-0231-7 .

ISSN 1522-4600 .

S2CID 253593505 .

^ a b PIJOAN, José. 175.

^ a b Dudák Vladislav; Pošva Rudolf; Neškudla Bořek. Baset (ed.).

Encyklopedie světové architektury od menhiru k dekonstruktivismu - VIZIGÓTSKA ARCHITEKTURA . 2000. pp. 981 e 982.

ISBN 80-86223-08-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Mezi křížem a půlměsícem: 430 e 907 , p. 13 e 14.

^ Pijoan, José (1978).

History of Art (World Art ed.). Prague: Odeon . p. 177.

^ Domingo Magaña, J. A. (2015).

"The use of marble in Hispanic Visigothic architectural decoration" .

The Use of Marble in Hispanic Visigothic Architectural Decoration : 527– 535.

^ Sánchez-Pardo, José C.; Blanco-Rotea, Rebeca; Sanjurjo-Sánchez, Jorge (August 2017).

"The church of Santa Comba de Bande and early medieval Iberian architecture: new chronological results" .

Antiquity .

91 (358): 1011– 1026.

doi : 10.15184/aqy.2017.83 .

ISSN 0003-598X .

S2CID 164322469 .

Bibliography [ edit ] "Visigothic art" . In Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

Diego Marin, La Civilizacion Espanola, pp. 34 –47, 1969, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.

Bradley Smith, Spain:  A History In Art, pp. 52–56, Doubleday & Company, Garden City, NY, no publication date given, about 1971.

Notes [ edit ] ^ The very name of the temple Baños suggests that there were Roman medicinal baths at this site. According to legend, the supposed woman was supposed to cure king Recceswinth with water from this site, who promised to build a temple dedicated to Saint John the Baptist on this site.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Visigothic art .

Age of spirituality : late antique and early Christian art, third to seventh century from The Metropolitan Museum of Art El portal del Arte Románico; Visigothic, Mozarabic and Romanesque art in Spain.

v t e Portuguese architecture Styles Romanesque Gothic Manueline Renaissance Plain Baroque Rococo Pombaline Neo-Manueline Neo-Mudéjar Summer architecture Soft Portuguese style Structures Airports Bridges Castles Cathedrals Football stadiums Hospitals Reservoirs and dams Tallest buildings and structures Elements Azulejo Gilding Lioz Pavement Colonial Portuguese Colonial architecture Sino-Portuguese architecture Sobrado Seven Wonders of Portuguese Origin in the World Others Architects Monuments Housing IGESPAR Seven Wonders of Portugal Category Portuguese Renaissance v t e Architecture of Spain Styles Megalithic Iberian Celtic Celtiberian Roman Visigothic Asturian Andalusi Mozarabic Repoblación Mudéjar First Romanesque Romanesque Gothic Catalan Gothic Isabelline Valencian Gothic Cisneros Plateresque Renaissance Purism Herrerian Baroque Churrigueresque Neoclassical Rococo Modernisme Valencian Art Nouveau Noucentisme Neo-Mudéjar Buildings and structures Roman sites Alcázars Alcazabas Cantabrian defensive towers Castles Castros Cathedrals Hórreos Lighthouses Llotjes Monasteries Royal sites Windmills Airports Indoor arenas Museums Stadiums Tallest buildings and structures Destroyed heritage Other Architects Andalusian patio Andalusian White Towns Aragonese Mudéjar Catalan vault Gaudí buildings Spanish Colonial architecture Alhóndiga Alqueria Artesonado Azulejo Baserri Cabaña pasiega Casa montañesa Casona montañesa Corral de comedias Cortijo Finca Estipite Hacienda Masia Mirador Palloza Pazo Real Spanish garden Yeseria Category v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐gr28x
Cached time: 20250812022331
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.539 seconds
Real time usage: 0.749 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1709/1000000
Revision size: 22494/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 170609/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 842/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78483/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.310/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6401733/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  550.855      1 -total
 35.16%  193.657      1 Template:Reflist
 27.36%  150.700      9 Template:Cite_book
 20.52%  113.040      2 Template:Ambox
 20.05%  110.452      6 Template:Navbox
 13.31%   73.320      1 Template:Architecture_of_Portugal
 12.25%   67.457      1 Template:Sectstub
 10.51%   57.874      1 Template:Short_description
 10.32%   56.848      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.97%   54.941      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3008683:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022331 and revision id 1302828097. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Visigothic_art_and_architecture&oldid=1302828097 " Categories : Visigothic art Architectural history Early Germanic architecture Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from July 2025 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 17:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Visigothic art and architecture 13 languages Add topic

