Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 The Supremacy Clause 3 Controversy to 1865 Toggle Controversy to 1865 subsection 3.1 Alien and Sedition Acts 3.2 Nullification Crisis of 1832 3.3 Civil War 3.3.1 Southern arguments 3.3.2 Northern arguments 3.3.3 Texas v. White 4 Since the Civil War Toggle Since the Civil War subsection 4.1 In case law 4.2 Later progressive era and World War II 4.3 Civil rights movement 5 Contemporary debates 6 10th Amendment 7 States' rights and the Rehnquist Court 8 States' rights as code word 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Citations 11.2 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents States' rights 12 languages Español فارسی Français Hausa עברית Latina 日本語 پښتو Română Русский Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political powers reserved for U.S. states For other uses, see States' rights (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "States' rights" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e In American political discourse , states' rights are political powers held for the state governments rather than the federal government according to the United States Constitution , reflecting especially the enumerated powers of Congress and the Tenth Amendment . The enumerated powers that are listed in the Constitution include exclusive federal powers , as well as concurrent powers that are shared with the states, and all of those powers are contrasted with the reserved powers —also called states' rights—that only the states possess.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Since the 1940s, the term "states' rights" has often been considered a loaded term or dog whistle because of its use in opposition to federally-mandated racial desegregation [ 3 ] and, more recently, same-sex marriage and reproductive rights .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Background [ edit ] The balance of federal powers and those powers held by the states as defined in the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution was first addressed in the case of McCulloch v. Maryland (1819). The Court's decision by Chief Justice John Marshall asserted that the laws adopted by the federal government, when exercising its constitutional powers, are generally paramount over any conflicting laws adopted by state governments. After McCulloch , the primary legal issues in this area concerned the scope of Congress' constitutional powers, and whether the states possess certain powers to the exclusion of the federal government, even if the Constitution does not explicitly limit them to the states.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Supremacy Clause [ edit ] The Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution states: This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof ; and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby, anything in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding. (Emphasis added.) In The Federalist Papers , ratification proponent Alexander Hamilton explained the limitations this clause placed on the proposed federal government, describing that acts of the federal government were binding on the states and the people therein only if the act was in pursuance of constitutionally granted powers, and juxtaposing acts which exceeded those bounds as "void and of no force": But it will not follow from this doctrine that acts of the large society which are not pursuant to its constitutional powers, but which are invasions of the residuary authorities of the smaller societies, will become the supreme law of the land. These will be merely acts of usurpation, and will deserve to be treated as such.

[ citation needed ] Controversy to 1865 [ edit ] In the period between the American Revolution and the ratification of the United States Constitution , the states had united under a much weaker federal government and a much stronger state and local government, pursuant to the Articles of Confederation . The Articles gave the central government very little, if any, authority to overrule individual state actions. The Constitution subsequently strengthened the central government, authorizing it to exercise powers deemed necessary to exercise its authority, with an ambiguous boundary between the two co-existing levels of government. In the event of any conflict between state and federal law, the Constitution resolved the conflict [ 6 ] via the Supremacy Clause of Article VI in favor of the federal government, which declares federal law the "supreme Law of the Land" and provides that "the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding." However, the Supremacy Clause only applies if the federal government is acting in pursuit of its constitutionally authorized powers, as noted by the phrase "in pursuance thereof" in the actual text of the Supremacy Clause itself (see above).

Alien and Sedition Acts [ edit ] When the Federalists passed the Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison secretly wrote the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions , which provide a classic statement in support of states' rights and called on state legislatures to nullify unconstitutional federal laws . (The other states, however, did not follow suit and several rejected the notion that states could nullify federal law.) According to this theory, the federal union is a voluntary association of states, and if the central government goes too far each state has the right to nullify that law. As Jefferson said in the Kentucky Resolutions: Resolved, that the several States composing the United States of America, are not united on the principle of unlimited submission to their general government; but that by compact under the style and title of a Constitution for the United States and of amendments thereto, they constituted a general government for special purposes, delegated to that government certain definite powers, reserving each State to itself, the residuary mass of right to their own self-government; and that whensoever the general government assumes undelegated powers, its acts are unauthoritative, void, and of no force: That to this compact each State acceded as a State, and is an integral party, its co-States forming, as to itself, the other party....each party has an equal right to judge for itself, as well of infractions as of the mode and measure of redress.

The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, which became part of the Principles of '98 , along with the supporting Report of 1800 by Madison, became final documents of Jefferson's Democratic-Republican Party .

[ 8 ] Gutzman argued that Governor Edmund Randolph designed the protest in the name of moderation.

[ 9 ] Gutzman argues that in 1798, Madison espoused states' rights to defeat national legislation that he maintained was a threat to republicanism. During 1831–33, the South Carolina Nullifiers quoted Madison in their defense of states' rights. But Madison feared that the growing support for this doctrine would undermine the union and argued that by ratifying the Constitution states had transferred their sovereignty to the federal government.

[ 10 ] The most vociferous supporters of states' rights, such as John Randolph of Roanoke , were called "Old Republicans" into the 1820s and 1830s.

[ 11 ] Tate (2011) undertook a literary criticism of a major book by John Taylor of Caroline , New Views of the Constitution of the United States.

Tate argues it is structured as a forensic historiography modeled on the techniques of 18th-century Whig lawyers. Taylor believed that evidence from American history gave proof of state sovereignty within the union, against the arguments of nationalists such as U.S. Chief Justice John Marshall.

[ 12 ] Another states' rights dispute occurred over the War of 1812 . At the Hartford Convention of 1814–15, New England Federalists voiced opposition to President Madison's war, and discussed secession from the Union. In the end they stopped short of calls for secession, but when their report appeared at the same time as news of the great American victory at the Battle of New Orleans , the Federalists were politically ruined.

[ 13 ] Nullification Crisis of 1832 [ edit ] One major and continuous strain on the union, from roughly 1820 through the Civil War, was the issue of trade and tariffs . Heavily dependent upon international trade, the almost entirely agricultural and export -oriented South imported most of its manufactured goods from Europe or obtained them from the North. The North, by contrast, had a growing domestic industrial economy that viewed foreign trade as competition. Trade barriers, especially protective tariffs, were viewed as harmful to the Southern economy, which depended on exports.

In 1828, Congress passed protective tariffs to benefit trade in the northern states, but that were detrimental to the South. Southerners vocally expressed their tariff opposition in documents such as the South Carolina Exposition and Protest in 1828, written in response to the " Tariff of Abominations ".

Exposition and Protest was the work of South Carolina senator and former vice president John C. Calhoun , formerly an advocate of protective tariffs and internal improvements at federal expense.

South Carolina 's Nullification Ordinance declared that both the tariff of 1828 and the tariff of 1832 were null and void within the state borders of South Carolina. This action initiated the Nullification Crisis . Passed by a state convention on November 24, 1832, it led, on December 10, to President Andrew Jackson 's proclamation against South Carolina, which sent a naval flotilla and a threat of sending federal troops to enforce the tariffs; Jackson authorized this under color of national authority, claiming in his 1832 Proclamation Regarding Nullification that "our social compact in express terms declares, that the laws of the United States, its Constitution, and treaties made under it, are the supreme law of the land" and for greater caution adds, "that the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding." Civil War [ edit ] Main articles: American Civil War and Origins of the American Civil War Over following decades, another central dispute over states' rights moved to the forefront. The issue of slavery polarized the union, with the Jeffersonian principles often being used by both sides—anti-slavery Northerners, and Southern slaveholders and secessionists—in debates that ultimately led to the American Civil War . Supporters of slavery often argued that one of the rights of the states was the protection of slave property wherever it went, a position endorsed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1857 Dred Scott decision . In contrast, opponents of slavery argued that the non-slave-states' rights were violated both by that decision and by the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850. While historians in the 21st century agree on the centrality of the conflict over slavery, [ 14 ] they disagree sharply on which aspects of this conflict (ideological, economic, political, or social) were most important.

[ 15 ] Southern arguments [ edit ] Southern states had a long tradition of using states' rights doctrine since the late eighteenth century to support slavery.

[ 16 ] A major Southern argument in the 1850s was that federal law to ban the expansion of slavery into the territories discriminated against states that allowed slavery, making them second-class states. In 1857 the Supreme Court sided with these states' rights supporters, declaring in Dred Scott v. Sandford that Congress had no authority to regulate slavery in the territories.

[ 17 ] Jefferson Davis used the following argument in favor of the equal rights of states: Resolved, That the union of these States rests on the equality of rights and privileges among its members, and that it is especially the duty of the Senate, which represents the States in their sovereign capacity, to resist all attempts to discriminate either in relation to person or property, so as, in the Territories—which are the common possession of the United States—to give advantages to the citizens of one State which are not equally secured to those of every other State.

[ 18 ] Southern states argued against "states' rights" when it benefited them in the context of fugitive slave laws . For example, Texas challenged some northern states having the right to protect fugitive slaves, with the argument that this would make the institution null once a particular slave had crossed into a free state . The question was pivotal in the case of Dred Scott v. Sandford .

[ 19 ] Northern arguments [ edit ] The historian James McPherson [ 20 ] [ a ] noted that Southerners were inconsistent on the states' rights issue, and that Northern states tried to protect the rights of their states against the South during the Gag Rule [ b ] and fugitive slave law controversies. Contemporany political thinkers like Karl Marx also noted this inconsistency regarding the Confederacy's actions during the war: The attempts of the Confederacy to annex Missouri and Kentucky , for example, against the will of these states, prove the hollowness of the pretext that it is fighting for the rights of the individual states against the encroachments of the Union. On the individual states that it considers to belong to the "South" it confers, to be sure, the right to secede from the Union, but by no means the right to remain in the Union.

[ 21 ] The historian William H. Freehling [ 22 ] noted that the South's argument for a state's right to secede was different from Thomas Jefferson's, in that Jefferson based such a right on the unalienable equal rights of man. The South's version of such a right was modified to be consistent with slavery, and with the South's blend of democracy and authoritarianism.

[ 22 ] Historian Henry Brooks Adams explains that the anti-slavery North took a consistent and principled stand on states' rights against federal encroachment throughout its history, while the Southern states, whenever they saw an opportunity to expand slavery and the reach of their political influence, termed Slave Power , often conveniently forgot the principle of states' rights—and fought in favor of federal centralization: Between the Slave Power and states' rights there was no necessary connection. The Slave Power, when in control, was a centralizing influence, and all the most considerable encroachments on states' rights were its acts. The acquisition and admission of Louisiana; the Embargo; the War of 1812 ; the annexation of Texas "by joint resolution" [rather than treaty]; the war with Mexico , declared by the mere announcement of President Polk ; the Fugitive Slave Law ; the Dred Scott decision —all triumphs of the Slave Power —did far more than either tariffs or internal improvements, which in their origin were also southern measures, to destroy the very memory of states' rights as they existed in 1789. Whenever a question arose of extending or protecting slavery, the slaveholders became friends of centralized power, and used that dangerous weapon with a kind of frenzy. Slavery in fact required centralization in order to maintain and protect itself, but it required to control the centralized machine; it needed despotic principles of government, but it needed them exclusively for its own use. Thus, in truth, states' rights were the protection of the free states, and as a matter of fact, during the domination of the Slave Power, Massachusetts appealed to this protecting principle as often and almost as loudly as South Carolina .

[ 23 ] Sinha [ 24 ] and Richards [ 25 ] both argue that the Southerners only advocated states' rights when they disagreed with a policy. Examples given are a states' right to engage in slavery or to suppress freedom of speech. They argue that it was instead the result of the increasing cognitive dissonance in the minds of Northerners and (some) Southern non-slaveowners between the ideals that the United States was founded upon and identified itself as standing for, as expressed in the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution of the United States, and the Bill of Rights, and the reality that the slave-power represented, as what they describe as an anti-democratic, counter-republican, oligarchic, despotic, authoritarian, if not totalitarian, movement for ownership of human beings as the personal chattels of the slaver. As this cognitive dissonance increased, the people of the Northern states, and the Northern states themselves, became increasingly inclined to resist the encroachments of the Slave Power upon their states' rights and encroachments of the Slave Power by and upon the federal government of the United States. The Slave Power, having failed to maintain its dominance of the federal government through democratic means, sought other means of maintaining its dominance of the federal government, by means of military aggression, by right of force and coercion, and thus, the Civil War occurred.

Texas v. White [ edit ] In Texas v. White , 74 U.S.

700 (1869) the Supreme Court ruled that Texas had remained a state ever since it first joined the Union, despite claims to have joined the Confederate States of America ; the court further held that the Constitution did not permit states to unilaterally secede from the United States, and that the ordinances of secession, and all the acts of the legislatures within seceding states intended to give effect to such ordinances, were "absolutely null " under the constitution.

[ 26 ] Since the Civil War [ edit ] A series of Supreme Court decisions developed the state action constraint on the Equal Protection Clause . The state action theory weakened the effect of the Equal Protection Clause against state governments, in that the clause was held not to apply to unequal protection of the laws caused in part by complete lack of state action in specific cases, even if state actions in other instances form an overall pattern of segregation and other discrimination. The separate but equal theory further weakened the effect of the Equal Protection Clause against state governments.

[ citation needed ] In case law [ edit ] With United States v. Cruikshank (1876), a case which arose out of the Colfax Massacre of Black residents contesting the results of a Reconstruction-era election, the Supreme Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment did not apply to the First Amendment or Second Amendment to state governments in respect to their own citizens, only to acts of the federal government. In McDonald v. City of Chicago (2010), the Supreme Court held that the Second Amendment right of an individual to "keep and bear arms" is incorporated by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, and therefore fully applicable to states and local governments.

[ citation needed ] Furthermore, United States v. Harris (1883) held that the Equal Protection Clause did not apply to an 1883 prison lynching on the basis that the Fourteenth Amendment applied only to state acts, not to individual criminal actions.

In the Civil Rights Cases (1883), the Supreme Court allowed segregation by striking down the Civil Rights Act of 1875 , a statute that prohibited racial discrimination in public accommodation. It again held that the Equal Protection Clause applied only to acts done by states, not to those done by private individuals, and as the Civil Rights Act of 1875 applied to private establishments, the Court said, it exceeded congressional enforcement power under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment .

Later progressive era and World War II [ edit ] By the beginning of the 20th century, greater cooperation began to develop between the state and federal governments and the federal government began to accumulate more power. Early in this period, a federal income tax was imposed, first during the Civil War as a war measure and then permanently with the Sixteenth Amendment in 1913. Before this, the states played a larger role in government.

States' rights were affected by the fundamental alteration of the federal government resulting from the Seventeenth Amendment , depriving state governments of an avenue of control over the federal government via the representation of each state's legislature in the U.S. Senate . This change has been described by legal critics as the loss of a check and balance on the federal government by the states.

[ 27 ] Following the Great Depression , the New Deal , and then World War II saw further growth in the authority and responsibilities of the federal government. The case of Wickard v. Filburn allowed the federal government to enforce the Agricultural Adjustment Act , providing subsidies to farmers for limiting their crop yields, arguing agriculture affected interstate commerce and came under the jurisdiction of the Commerce Clause even when a farmer grew his crops not to be sold, but for his own private use.

1948 electoral votes by state. The Dixiecrats carried Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and South Carolina, and received one additional electoral vote in Tennessee (colored in orange).

After World War II, President Harry Truman supported a civil rights bill and desegregated the military. The reaction was a split in the Democratic Party that led to the formation of the "States' Rights Democratic Party"—better known as the Dixiecrats —led by Strom Thurmond . Thurmond ran as the States' Rights candidate for president in the 1948 election , losing to Truman. The Dixiecrats carried Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and South Carolina.

Civil rights movement [ edit ] During the 1950s and 1960s, the civil rights movement was confronted by the proponents in the Southern states of racial segregation and Jim Crow laws who denounced federal interference in these state-level laws as an assault on states' rights.

Though Brown v. Board of Education (1954) overruled the Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) decision, the Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments were largely inactive in the South until the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ( 42 U.S.C.

§ 21 ) [ 28 ] and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . Several states passed Interposition Resolutions to declare that the Supreme Court's ruling in Brown usurped states' rights.

There was also opposition by states' rights advocates to voting rights at Edmund Pettus Bridge , which was part of the Selma to Montgomery marches , that resulted in the Voting Rights Act of 1965 .

Contemporary debates [ edit ] In 1964, the issue of fair housing in California involved the boundary between state laws and federalism.

California Proposition 14 overturned the Rumsford Fair Housing Act in California and allowed discrimination in any type of housing sale or rental.

[ 29 ] Martin Luther King Jr.

and others saw this as a backlash against civil rights, while actor and future (1967) governor of California Ronald Reagan gained popularity by supporting Proposition 14.

[ 30 ] The U.S. Supreme Court's Reitman v. Mulkey decision overturned Proposition 14 in 1967 in favor of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

Conservative historians Thomas E. Woods Jr. and Kevin R. C. Gutzman argue that when politicians come to power they exercise all the power they can get, in the process trampling states' rights.

[ 31 ] Gutzman argues that the Kentucky and Virginia resolutions of 1798 by Jefferson and Madison were not only responses to immediate threats but were legitimate responses based on the long-standing principles of states' rights and strict adherence to the Constitution.

[ 32 ] Another concern is the fact that on more than one occasion, the federal government has threatened to withhold highway funds from states which did not pass certain articles of legislation. Any state which lost highway funding for any extended period would face financial impoverishment, infrastructure collapse or both. Although the first such action (the enactment of a national speed limit) was directly related to highways and done in the face of a fuel shortage, most subsequent actions have had little or nothing to do with highways and have not been done in the face of any compelling national crisis. An example of this would be the federally mandated drinking age of 21, upheld in South Dakota v. Dole . Critics of such actions feel that the federal government is upsetting the traditional balance between itself and state governments.

More recently, the issue of states' rights has come to a head when the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) Commission recommended that Congress and the Department of Defense implement sweeping changes to the National Guard by consolidating some Guard installations and closing others. These recommendations in 2005 drew strong criticism from many states, and several states sued the federal government on the basis that Congress and the Pentagon would be violating states' rights should they force the realignment and closure of Guard bases without the prior approval of the governors from the affected states. After Pennsylvania won a federal lawsuit to block the deactivation of the 111th Fighter Wing of the Pennsylvania Air National Guard , defense and Congressional leaders chose to try to settle the remaining BRAC lawsuits out of court, reaching compromises with the plaintiff states.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Current states' rights issues include the death penalty , assisted suicide , same-sex marriage , gun control , and cannabis , the last of which is in direct violation of federal law. In Gonzales v. Raich , the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the federal government, permitting the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to arrest medical marijuana patients and caregivers. In Gonzales v. Oregon , the Supreme Court ruled the practice of physician-assisted suicide in Oregon is legal. In Obergefell v. Hodges , the Supreme Court ruled that states could not withhold recognition to same-sex marriages. In District of Columbia v. Heller (2008), the United States Supreme Court ruled that gun ownership is an individual right under the Second Amendment of the United States Constitution , and the District of Columbia could not completely ban gun ownership by law-abiding private citizens. Two years later, the court ruled that the Heller decision applied to states and territories via the Second and 14th Amendments in McDonald v. Chicago , stating that states, territories and political divisions thereof, could not impose total bans on gun ownership by law-abiding citizens.

These concerns have led to a movement sometimes called the State Sovereignty movement or "10th Amendment Sovereignty Movement".

[ 35 ] 10th Amendment [ edit ] The Tenth Amendment of the United States Constitution has been used as a prominent tool of invoking nullification, a common tactic of those that believe in the primacy of States' rights. The Tenth Amendment reads as follows: The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.

[ 36 ] Notably, the Tenth Amendment has been successfully utilized to nullify restrictive federal laws pertaining to gun rights , [ 37 ] immigration , [ 38 ] cannabis , [ 39 ] and more. Additionally, organizations such as the Tenth Amendment Center seek to utilize the Tenth Amendment to achieve, " Liberty through decentralization ".

[ 40 ] The Tenth Amendment center chiefly focuses on encouraging state representatives to submit bills that nullify federal laws by providing model legislation on their website that provides a rubric for state legislators to follow.

[ 41 ] In 2009–2010 thirty-eight states introduced resolutions to reaffirm the principles of sovereignty under the Constitution and the 10th Amendment; 14 states have passed the resolutions. These non-binding resolutions, often called " state sovereignty resolutions " do not carry the force of law. Instead, they are intended to be a statement to demand that the federal government halt its practices of assuming powers and imposing mandates upon the states for purposes not enumerated by the Constitution.

[ 7 ] States' rights and the Rehnquist Court [ edit ] The Supreme Court's University of Alabama v. Garrett (2001) [ 42 ] and Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents (2000) [ 43 ] decisions allowed states to use a rational basis review for discrimination against the aged and disabled, arguing that these types of discrimination were rationally related to a legitimate state interest, and that no "razorlike precision" was needed." The Supreme Court's United States v. Morrison (2000) [ 44 ] decision limited the ability of rape victims to sue their attackers in federal court. Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist explained that "States historically have been sovereign" in the area of law enforcement, which in the Court's opinion required narrow interpretations of the Commerce Clause and Fourteenth Amendment.

Kimel , Garrett and Morrison indicated that the Court's previous decisions in favor of enumerated powers and limits on Congressional power over the states, such as United States v. Lopez (1995), Seminole Tribe v. Florida (1996) and City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) were more than one time flukes. In the past, Congress relied on the Commerce Clause and the Equal Protection Clause for passing civil rights bills, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964 .

[ 28 ] Lopez limited the Commerce Clause to things that directly affect interstate commerce, which excludes issues like gun control laws, hate crimes, and other crimes that affect commerce but are not directly related to commerce.

Seminole reinforced the "sovereign immunity of states" doctrine, which makes it difficult to sue states for many things, especially civil rights violations. The Flores "congruence and proportionality" requirement prevents Congress from going too far in requiring states to comply with the Equal Protection Clause, which replaced the ratchet theory advanced in Katzenbach v. Morgan (1966). The ratchet theory held that Congress could ratchet up civil rights beyond what the Court had recognized, but that Congress could not ratchet down judicially recognized rights. An important precedent for Morrison was United States v. Harris (1883), which ruled that the Equal Protection Clause did not apply to a prison lynching because the state action doctrine applies Equal Protection only to state action, not private criminal acts. Since the ratchet principle was replaced with the "congruence and proportionality" principle by Flores , it was easier to revive older precedents for preventing Congress from going beyond what Court interpretations would allow. Critics such as Associate Justice John Paul Stevens accused the Court of judicial activism (i.e., interpreting law to reach a desired conclusion).

[ citation needed ] The tide against federal power in the Rehnquist court was stopped in the case of Gonzales v. Raich , 545 U.S. 1 (2005), in which the court upheld the federal power to prohibit medicinal use of cannabis even if states have permitted it. Rehnquist himself was a dissenter in the Raich case.

[ citation needed ] States' rights as code word [ edit ] Since the 1940s, the term "states' rights" has often been considered a loaded term or dog whistle because of its use in opposition to federally-mandated racial desegregation [ 45 ] and, more recently, same-sex marriage and reproductive rights .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] During the heyday of the civil rights movement , defenders of racial segregation [ 48 ] [ c ] used the term "states' rights" as a code word in what is now referred to as dog-whistle politics: political messaging that appears to mean one thing to the general population but has an additional, different, or more specific resonance for a targeted subgroup.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] In 1948 it was the official name of the " Dixiecrat " party led by white supremacist presidential candidate Strom Thurmond .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Democratic Governor George Wallace of Alabama , who famously declared in his inaugural address in 1963, " Segregation now! Segregation tomorrow! Segregation forever!

" later remarked that he should have said, "States' rights now! States' rights tomorrow! States' rights forever!" [ 54 ] Wallace, however, claimed that segregation was but one issue symbolic of a larger struggle for states' rights. In that view, which some historians dispute, his replacement of segregation with states' rights would be more of a clarification than a euphemism .

[ 54 ] In 2010, some claimed that Texas Governor Rick Perry 's use of the expression "states' rights" was "reminiscent of an earlier era when it was a rallying cry against civil rights." [ 55 ] During an interview with The Dallas Morning News , Perry made it clear that he supports the end of segregation, including passage of the Civil Rights Act . The Texas president of the NAACP , Gary Bledsoe, stated that he understood that Perry was not speaking of "states' rights" in a racial context, but others still claimed to feel offended by the term because of its past misuse.

[ 55 ] See also [ edit ] American Civil War portal Bibliography of the United States Constitution Balkanization – Fragmentation of multi-ethnic states Bibliography of the American Civil War Compact theory – United States foundational philosophy Federalism in the United States – Division of powers between national, state, tribal and local governments New Federalism – Transfer of certain powers from the United States federal government back to the states Anti-Federalism – 1780s political movement in the US Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Local government – Lowest in the administration pyramid Neo-feudalism – Theoretic rebirth of antique governance Origins of the American Civil War Rule according to higher law – Belief that universal principles of morality override unjust laws States' Rights Party (disambiguation) Subsidiarity – Principle of social organization Subsidiarity (European Union) – Principle of governance of the European Union (The rights and responsibilities of EU member states.) Notes [ edit ] ^ Speaking of alternative explanations for secession, McPherson writes (p.7), "While one or more of these interpretations remain popular among the Sons of Confederate Veterans and other Southern heritage groups, few professional historians now subscribe to them. Of all these interpretations, the state's-rights argument is perhaps the weakest. It fails to ask the question, state's rights for what purpose? State's rights, or sovereignty, was always more a means than an end, an instrument to achieve a certain goal more than a principle.

^ The pro-slavery forces controlling the House of Representatives passed the Pinckney Resolutions, authored and introduced by Henry L. Pinckney of South Carolina, on May 26, 1836. The first stated that Congress had no constitutional authority to interfere with slavery in the states, and the second that it "ought not" to interfere with slavery in the District of Columbia . The third  was known from the beginning as the "gag rule", and passed with a vote of 117 to 68. This gag rule was a series of rules that forbade the raising, consideration, or discussion of slavery in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1836 to 1844.

^ From Encyclopedia of Alabama - "After the Civil War and Reconstruction, Alabama, along with other southern states, used states' rights arguments to restore a system of white supremacy and racial segregation . ... The term still appears on occasion in political speech, in some cases as code language indicating support of discriminatory practices or outright racism ; as a result, its use is often met with skepticism or suspicion by the public at large." References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Gardbaum, Stephen. "Congress's Power to Pre-Empt the States", Pepperdine Law Review , Vol. 33, p. 39 (2005).

^ Bardes, Barbara et al.

American Government and Politics Today: The Essentials (Cengage Learning, 2008).

^ Herbert, Bob (October 6, 2005).

"Impossible, Ridiculous, Repugnant" .

The New York Times .

^ Craver, Jack (March 31, 2013).

"New GOP line on gay marriage: It's about states' rights" .

The Capital Times . Retrieved November 9, 2021 .

^ Abrams, Abigail (January 1, 2020).

"Here's How Conservatives Are Using Civil Rights Law to Restrict Abortion" .

Time . Retrieved November 9, 2021 .

^ a b "The United States Constitution - The U.S. Constitution Online - USConstitution.net" . April 23, 2024.

^ a b Orbach, Callahan & Lindemmen, "Arming States' Rights: Federalism, Private Lawmakers, and the Battering Ram Strategy", Arizona Law Review (2010) ^ Gutzman, Kevin R. C.

(2012).

James Madison and the Making of America . pp.

274– 76.

^ Gutzman, Kevin R. C.

(2004). "Edmund Randolph and Virginia Constitutionalism".

Review of Politics .

66 (3): 469– 97.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500038870 .

JSTOR 4149191 .

S2CID 145724474 .

^ Gutzman, Kevin R.

(1995). "A troublesome legacy: James Madison and "The principles of '98' ".

Journal of the Early Republic .

15 (4): 569– 89.

doi : 10.2307/3124014 .

JSTOR 3124014 .

^ Risjord, Norman K.

(1965).

The Old Republicans: Southern Conservatism in the Age of Jefferson .

^ Tate, Adam (2011). "A Historiography of States' Rights: John Taylor of Caroline's New Views of the Constitution".

Southern Studies .

18 (1): 10– 28.

^ James M Banner , To the Hartford Convention: the Federalists and the origins of party politics in Massachusetts, 1789–1815 (1970) ^ Mackowski, Chris (January 22, 2019), "Primary Sources: Slavery as the Cause of the Civil War" , Emerging Civil War , archived from the original on January 20, 2021 , retrieved September 15, 2021 ^ Aaron Sheehan-Dean, "A Book for Every Perspective: Current Civil War and Reconstruction Textbooks," Civil War History (2005) 51#3 pp. 317–24 ^ McDonald, Forrest (2000).

States' Rights and the Union . University Press of Kansas.

^ John Mack Faragher , Mari Jo Buhle , Daniel Czitrom Out of Many: A History of the American people (2005) p. 376 ^ Jefferson Davis' Resolutions on the Relations of States, Senate Chamber, U.S. Capitol, February 2, 1860, from The Papers of Jefferson Davis, Volume 6, pp. 273–76. Transcribed from the Congressional Globe, 36th Congress, 1st Session, pp. 658–59.

^ "Confederate States of America – A Declaration of the Causes which Impel the State of Texas to Secede from the Federal Union" . Yale Law School. March 1845 . Retrieved July 1, 2015 .

^ James McPherson , This Mighty Scourge , pp. 3–9.

^ K. Marx (1861) The Civil War in the United States . In MECW (ed.

Lawrence & Wishart , 2010) Volume 19, p. 48.

^ a b William H. Freehling, The Road to Disunion: Secessionists Triumphant, 1854–1861 ^ Adams, Henry (1882).

John Randolph (1st ed.).

Boston , MA , USA : Houghton Mifflin and Co. p.

270 .

OCLC 3942444 . Retrieved July 26, 2009 .

John Randolph.

^ Sinha, Manisha (2000).

The Counter-Revolution of Slavery: Politics and Ideology in Antebellum South Carolina .

Chapel Hill, North Carolina , USA : University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-8078-2571-6 .

OCLC 44075847 . Retrieved March 14, 2009 .

^ Richards, Leonard L. (2000).

The Slave Power: The Free North and Southern Domination .

Baton Rouge , Louisiana , USA : LSU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8071-2600-4 .

OCLC 43641070 .

^ Murray pp. 155–59.

^ Bybee, Jay S.

(1997). "Ulysses at the Mast: Democracy, Federalism, and the Sirens' Song of the Seventeenth Amendment".

Northwestern University Law Review .

91 . Chicago, IL: 505.

^ a b "Civil Rights Act of 1964 - CRA - Title VII - Equal Employment Opportunities - 42 US Code Chapter 21 - findUSlaw" .

finduslaw.com .

^ Skelton, George (May 7, 2014) "Thank you, Donald Sterling, for reminding us how far we've come" Los Angeles Times ^ Pillar of Fire , Taylor Branch, p. 242 ^ Thomas E. Woods, Jr. and Kevin R. C. Gutzman, Who Killed the Constitution?: The Federal Government Vs. American Liberty from World War I to Barack Obama (Random House Digital, 2009) p. 201 ^ K. R. Constantine Gutzman , "The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions Reconsidered: 'An Appeal to the Real Laws of Our Country'", Journal of Southern History (Aug 2000), Vol. 66 Issue 3, pp. 473–96 ^ Linder, Brad (August 24, 2005).

"Penn. Governor Fights Deactivation of Guard Units" .

NPR . Retrieved January 9, 2024 .

^ "Judge: Governor must OK Guard unit closure" (PDF) .

National Guard Association of the United States .

Associated Press . August 26, 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 18, 2011 . Retrieved January 9, 2024 .

^ Jhonston, Kirk (March 16, 2010).

"States' Rights Is Rallying Cry for Lawmakers" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 1, 2010.

^ "Tenth Amendment – Reserved Powers – Contents" (PDF) .

GPO.gov . United States Government Printing Office.

^ "State Legislators Want to Nullify Federal Gun Control" . Reason. July 2021.

^ "Are Sanctuary Cities the New Confederates?" . National Review. October 15, 2015.

^ "Can States or Citizens 'Nullify' Federal Cannabis Prohibition?" . Cannabis Now. June 20, 2018.

^ "About the Tenth Amendment" . Tenth Amendment Center . Retrieved February 11, 2022 .

^ "Model Legislation" . Tenth Amendment Center . Retrieved February 11, 2022 .

^ " Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama et al. v. Garrett et al.

, U.S. Supreme Court, decided February 21, 2001" .

^ " Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents , U.S. Supreme court, decided January 11, 2000" .

^ "United States v. Morrison" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

^ Herbert, Bob (October 6, 2005).

"Impossible, Ridiculous, Repugnant" .

The New York Times .

^ Craver, Jack (March 31, 2013).

"New GOP line on gay marriage: It's about states' rights" .

The Capital Times . Retrieved November 9, 2021 .

^ Abrams, Abigail (January 1, 2020).

"Here's How Conservatives Are Using Civil Rights Law to Restrict Abortion" .

Time . Retrieved November 9, 2021 .

^ White, D. Jonathan (2009).

"States' Rights" . Encyclopedia of Alabama . Retrieved September 9, 2010 .

^ Haney López, Ian (2014).

Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented Racism and Wrecked the Middle Class . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-19-996427-7 .

^ Full Show: Ian Haney López on the Dog Whistle Politics of Race, Part I .

Moyers & Company , February 28, 2014.

^ Yao, Kevin (November 9, 2015).

"A Coded Political Mantra" . Berkeley Political Review: UC Berkeley's Only Nonpartisan Political Magazine . Retrieved February 5, 2016 .

^ Lichtman, Allan J. (2008).

White Protestant Nation: The Rise of the American Conservative Movement . New York: Atlantic Monthly Press. p.

165 .

ISBN 978-0-87113-984-9 .

^ Bass, Jack; Thompson, Marilyn W.

(2006).

Strom: The Complicated Personal and Political Life of Strom Thurmond . New York: PublicAffairs. p. 102.

ISBN 1-58648-392-7 .

^ a b Carter, Dan T.

From George Wallace to Newt Gingrich: Race in the Conservative Counterrevolution, 1963–1994 . p. 1.

^ a b Slater, Wayne (November 19, 2010).

"Analysis: Perry's 'states' rights' battle cry evokes history that could damage his message" .

The Dallas Morning News . Retrieved November 21, 2010 .

Sources [ edit ] Althouse, Anne (October 2001).

"Why Talking About "States' Rights" Cannot Avoid the Need for Normative Federalism Analysis: A Response to Professors Baker and Young" .

Duke Law Journal .

51 (1): 363– 376.

doi : 10.2307/1373236 .

JSTOR 1373236 . Retrieved December 2, 2011 .

Baker, Lynn A.; Young, Ernest A. (October 2001).

"Federalism and the Double Standard of Judicial Review" .

Duke Law Journal .

51 (1): 75.

doi : 10.2307/1373231 .

JSTOR 1373231 . Retrieved December 2, 2011 .

, which argues at 143–49: "To many, [the notion of states' rights] stands for an anachronistic (and immoral) preference for the race-based denial of essential individual rights....".

Farber, Daniel A. (2001). "States' Rights and the Union: Imperium in Imperio, 1776–1876".

Constitutional Commentary .

18 .

Kirk, Russell K. (1951).

Randolph of Roanoke: A Study in Conservative Thought .

Gutzman, Kevin R. C.

(2012).

James Madison and the Making of America . New York: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 9780312625009 .

Gutzman, Kevin R. C.

(1995). "A troublesome legacy: James Madison and "The principles of '98' ".

Journal of the Early Republic .

15 (4 (Winter)): 569– 89.

doi : 10.2307/3124014 .

JSTOR 3124014 .

Gutzman, Kevin R. C.

(August 2000). "The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions Reconsidered: 'An Appeal to the Real Laws of Our Country' ".

Journal of Southern History .

66 (3): 473– 96.

doi : 10.2307/2587865 .

JSTOR 2587865 .

McDonald, Forrest (2001). "States' Rights and the Union: Imperium in Imperio, 1776–1876".

Constitutional Commentary .

18 .

Murray, Robert Bruce (2003).

Legal Cases of the Civil War . Stackpole Books.

ISBN 0-8117-0059-3 .

Risjord, Norman K.

(1965).

The Old Republicans: Southern Conservatism in the Age of Jefferson . New York: Columbia University Press.

Sinha, Manisha (2000). "Revolution or Counterrevolution?: The Political Ideology of Secession in Antebellum South Carolina".

Civil War History .

46 (3): 205– 226.

doi : 10.1353/cwh.2000.0072 .

(in JSTOR) Sinha, Manisha (2000).

The Counterrevolution of Slavery: Politics and Ideology in Antebellum South Carolina . University of North Carolina Press. p. 362.

ISBN 0-8078-2571-9 .

Orbach, Barak Y. (2010).

"Arming States' Rights: Federalism, Private Lawmakers, and the Battering Ram Strategy" .

Arizona Law Review .

52 . et al.

SSRN 1696012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sotirios A. Barber, The Fallacies of States' Rights.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013.

Jefferson Davis , " The Doctrine of State Rights " (1890).

The North American Review , Vol. 150, No. 399, pp. 205–219.

Frederick D. Drake, ed.

States' Rights and American Federalism: A Documentary History (1999) James J. Kilpatrick .

The Sovereign States: Notes of a Citizen of Virginia Chicago: Henry Regnery Company , 1957.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to States' rights .

Tenth Amendment Center Federalism and States Rights in the U.S.

States' Rights in Encyclopedia Virginia A copy of transcript of Florida's 1957 Interposition Resolution, made available for public use by the State Archives of Florida Missouri Sovereignty Project Archived 2019-08-12 at the Wayback Machine "Institutionalizing" the 10th Amendment into the populace and political fabrics of Missouri.

v t e American Civil War Origins Origins Timeline leading to the War Bleeding Kansas Border states Compromise of 1850 John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry Kansas-Nebraska Act Lincoln–Douglas debates Missouri Compromise Nullification crisis Panic of 1857 Popular sovereignty Secession South Carolina Declaration of Secession States' rights Proclamation 80 Slavery African Americans Cornerstone Speech Crittenden Compromise Dred Scott v. Sandford Emancipation Proclamation Fire-Eaters Fugitive slave laws Plantations in the American South Positive good Slave Power Treatment of slaves in the United States Uncle Tom's Cabin Abolitionism Abolitionism in the United States Susan B. Anthony James G. Birney John Brown Frederick Douglass William Lloyd Garrison Lane Debates on Slavery Elijah Parish Lovejoy J. Sella Martin Lysander Spooner George Luther Stearns Thaddeus Stevens Charles Sumner Caning Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Combatants Theaters Campaigns Battles States Combatants Union Army Navy Marine Corps Revenue Cutter Service Confederacy Army Navy Marine Corps Theaters Eastern Western Lower Seaboard Trans-Mississippi Pacific Coast Union naval blockade Major campaigns Anaconda Plan Blockade runners New Mexico Jackson's Valley Peninsula Northern Virginia Maryland Stones River Vicksburg Tullahoma Gettysburg Morgan's Raid Bristoe Knoxville Red River Overland Atlanta Valley 1864 Bermuda Hundred Richmond-Petersburg Franklin–Nashville Price's Missouri Expedition Sherman's March Carolinas Mobile Appomattox Major battles Fort Sumter 1st Bull Run Wilson's Creek Fort Donelson Pea Ridge Hampton Roads Shiloh New Orleans Corinth Seven Pines Seven Days 2nd Bull Run Antietam Perryville Fredericksburg Stones River Chancellorsville Gettysburg Vicksburg Chickamauga Chattanooga Wilderness Fort Pillow Spotsylvania Cold Harbor Atlanta Crater Mobile Bay Franklin Nashville Five Forks Involvement States and territories Alabama Arkansas Arizona California Colorado Connecticut Dakota Territory District of Columbia Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indian Territory Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina Ohio Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Cities Atlanta Charleston Chattanooga New Orleans Richmond Washington, D.C.

Winchester Leaders Confederate Military R. H. Anderson Beauregard Bragg Buchanan Cooper Early Ewell Forrest Gorgas Hill Hood Jackson A. S. Johnston J. E. Johnston Lee Longstreet Morgan Mosby Polk Price Semmes E. K. Smith Stuart Taylor Wheeler Civilian Benjamin Bocock Breckinridge Davis Hunter Mallory Memminger Seddon Stephens Union Military Anderson Buell Burnside Butler Du Pont Farragut Foote Frémont Grant Halleck Hooker Hunt McClellan McDowell Meade Meigs Ord Pope D. D. Porter Rosecrans Scott Sheridan Sherman Thomas Civilian Adams Chase Ericsson Hamlin Lincoln Pinkerton Seward Stanton Stevens Wade Welles Aftermath Constitution Reconstruction Amendments 13th Amendment 14th Amendment 15th Amendment Reconstruction Alabama Claims Brooks–Baxter War Carpetbaggers Colfax riot of 1873 Compromise of 1877 Confederate refugees Confederados Eufaula riot of 1874 Freedmen's Bureau Freedman's Savings Bank Homestead Acts Southern Homestead Act of 1866 Timber Culture Act of 1873 Impeachment of Andrew Johnson trial efforts timeline first inquiry second inquiry impeachment managers investigation Kirk–Holden war Knights of the White Camelia Ku Klux Klan Ethnic violence Memphis riots of 1866 Meridian riot of 1871 New Orleans riot of 1866 Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867 South Carolina riots of 1876 Reconstruction acts Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 Enforcement Act of 1870 Enforcement Act of February 1871 Enforcement Act of April 1871 Reconstruction era Reconstruction military districts Reconstruction Treaties Indian Council at Fort Smith Red Shirts Redeemers Scalawags South Carolina riots of 1876 Southern Claims Commission White League Post- Reconstruction Commemoration Centennial Civil War Discovery Trail Civil War Roundtables Civil War Trails Program Civil War Trust Confederate History Month Confederate Memorial Day Decoration Day Historical reenactment Robert E. Lee Day Confederate Memorial Hall Disenfranchisement Black Codes Jim Crow Historiographic issues Lost Cause mythology Modern display of the Confederate flag Red Shirts Sons of Confederate Veterans Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War Daughters of Union Veterans of the Civil War National Society Daughters of the Union 1861-1865 Southern Historical Society United Confederate Veterans United Daughters of the Confederacy Children of the Confederacy Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Monuments and memorials Union List Grand Army of the Republic memorials to Lincoln Confederate List artworks in Capitol memorials to Davis memorials to Lee Removal Cemeteries Ladies' Memorial Associations U.S. national cemeteries Veterans 1913 Gettysburg reunion 1938 Gettysburg reunion Confederate Memorial Hall Confederate Veteran Grand Army of the Republic Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.

Old soldiers' homes Southern Cross of Honor United Confederate Veterans Related topics Military Arms Armies Campaign Medal Cavalry Confederate Home Guard Confederate railroads Confederate revolving cannon Field artillery Infantry Medal of Honor recipients Medicine Naval battles Official Records Partisan rangers POW camps Rations Signal Corps Turning point Union corps badges U.S. Balloon Corps U.S. Home Guard U.S. Military Railroad Political Committee on the Conduct of the War Confederate States presidential election of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1862 Copperheads Diplomacy Emancipation Proclamation Habeas Corpus Act of 1863 Hampton Roads Conference National Union Party Politicians killed Radical Republicans Trent Affair Union Leagues U.S. Presidential Election of 1864 War Democrats Music Battle Hymn of the Republic Dixie John Brown's Body A Lincoln Portrait Marching Through Georgia Maryland, My Maryland Names from the War When Johnny Comes Marching Home Daar kom die Alibama By ethnicity African Americans German Americans Irish Americans Italian Americans Native Americans Catawba Cherokee Choctaw Seminole Other topics Baltimore riot of 1861 Battlefield preservation Bibliography Confederate war finance Confederate States dollar Espionage Confederate Secret Service Great Hanging at Gainesville Great Revival of 1863 Gender issues Juneteenth Naming the war New York City Gold Hoax of 1864 New York City riots of 1863 Photographers Richmond riots of 1863 Salt Supreme Court cases Tokens U.S. Sanitary Commission Women soldiers Related List of films and television shows about the American Civil War Category Portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐grj8p
Cached time: 20250817223632
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.261 seconds
Real time usage: 1.522 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8527/1000000
Revision size: 56833/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 362323/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13835/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 206516/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.752/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16014530/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1173.824      1 -total
 26.77%  314.237      2 Template:Reflist
 18.73%  219.817     14 Template:Annotated_link
 11.08%  130.083      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  8.90%  104.443      5 Template:Cite_news
  7.52%   88.282     12 Template:Cite_journal
  7.02%   82.445     17 Template:Cite_web
  6.78%   79.639     14 Template:Cite_book
  6.65%   78.021      1 Template:American_Civil_War
  6.44%   75.594      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:407755:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817223632 and revision id 1300612384. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=States%27_rights&oldid=1300612384 " Categories : States' rights Federalism in the United States Legal history of the United States Political history of the United States Conservatism in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from November 2023 Use American English from November 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 10:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents States' rights 12 languages Add topic

