Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Membership 2 Current constitution Toggle Current constitution subsection 2.1 External members 3 Meetings 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Council Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′19″N 0°7′1″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.20528°N 0.11694°E ﻿ / 52.20528; 0.11694 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Institution of the University of Cambridge The Council of the University of Cambridge is the principal executive and policy-making body, having responsibility for the administration of the university, for the planning of its work and for the management of its resources.

[ 1 ] Since the Regent House is the governing body of the university, the council must report and be accountable to the Regents through a variety of checks and balances. It has the right to report to the university and is obliged to advise the Regent House on matters of general concern to the university. It performs both functions by authorising notices to be published in the Cambridge University Reporter , its official journal.

Cambridge University is an exempt charity, under the Charities Act 2011 regulated by the Office for Students . Under charity law its trustees are members of the University Council.

[ 2 ] Membership [ edit ] Membership of the council consists of the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor of Cambridge University (the chancellor, primarily a ceremonial post, is appointed ad vitam , while the vice-chancellor is de facto the principal academic and administrative officer), nineteen elected members, and four appointed members, divided into classes as follows: [ 3 ] Four heads of colleges Four professors or readers Eight from the other members of the Regent House Three students: ex-officio the undergraduate and postgraduate presidents of the Cambridge Students' Union as well as an independently-elected current student Four external members Current constitution [ edit ] Position Name Term Ending Chancellor * Lord Sainsbury of Turville , K LIFE Vice-Chancellor Prof. Deborah Prentice 30 September 2024 Heads of Colleges President of Lucy Cavendish College Prof. Dame Madeleine Atkins , LC 31 December 2020 President of St John's Heather Hancock , JN 31 December 2024 Master of Fitzwilliam Baroness Morgan of Huyton , F 31 December 2022 Master of Clare Hall Prof. Alan Short , CLH 31 December 2022 Professors or Readers Professor of Cardiovascular Pharmacology Prof. Anthony Davenport, CTH 31 December 2024 Professor of Portuguese Literature and Culture Prof. Maria Manuel Lisboa, JN 31 December 2024 Professor of Photonics † Prof. Richard Penty, SID 31 December 2022 Professor in Modern Literature and Culture Prof. Jason Scott-Warren, CAI 31 December 2012 Other members of Regent House Dr Zoe Adams 31 December 2024 Dr Ruth Lisa Chadwick Charles, N 31 December 2022 Dr Nicholas Holmes, T 31 December 2022 Dr Ann Kaminski 31 December 2024 Dr Philip Knox 31 December 2022 Dr Andrew Sanchez 31 December 2022 Dr Mike Sewell, SEL 31 December 2024 Dr Pieter van Houten, CHU 31 December 2024 Three student members [ 3 ] CSU Undergraduate President Sarah Anderson, F 30 June 2025 CSU Postgraduate President Sumouli Bhattacharjee, F 30 June 2025 Student University Councilor Alex Myall, R 30 June 2025 Four external members Gaenor Bagley 31 December 2024 Sharon Flood 31 December 2022 Prof. Sir David Greenaway 31 December 2024 Mark Lewisohn ‡ , CHR 31 December 2022 * The Chancellor (currently Lord Sainsbury of Turville) is not expected to attend meetings † Professor Richard Penty currently serves as Master of Sidney Sussex College ‡ Mark Lewisohn also acts as Deputy Chairman of Council External members [ edit ] From January 2005, the membership of the council included two external members.

[ 4 ] The Regent House voted to increase the number of external members from two to four in March 2008, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] being approved by The Queen in July 2008.

[ 7 ] Meetings [ edit ] The council normally meets once per month, except August, in the Council Room at the Old Schools . However, the COVID-19 pandemic caused meetings to be held via Zoom .

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ Statute A, IV: Statutes and Ordinances of the University of Cambridge ^ "The University as a charity" .

University of Cambridge . 21 March 2013 . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ a b "Council membership" .

^ Reporter 15/12/04: Annual Report of the Council for 2003-04 ^ Grace 2 of 5 December 2008 ^ Acta in the Reporter , No 6107, publishing Results of Ballot ^ Reporter 23/07/08, Statutes approved: Notice ^ "Meeting dates of the Council and Business Committee" .

www.governance.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category 52°12′19″N 0°7′1″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.20528°N 0.11694°E ﻿ / 52.20528; 0.11694 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_University_Council&oldid=1294765979 " Category : Institutions of the University of Cambridge Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 17:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Council Add languages Add topic

