Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In Maslow's view 2 Metaneeds and metapathology 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Metamotivation 2 languages Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Psychology concept Metamotivation is a term coined by Abraham Maslow to describe the motivation of people who are self-actualized and striving beyond the scope of their basic needs to reach their full potential. Maslow suggested that people are initially motivated by a series of basic needs, [ 1 ] called the hierarchy of needs . Maslow states, "Self-actualizing people are gratified in all their basic needs (of belongingness, affection, respect, and self-esteem )".

[ 2 ] Once a person has successfully navigated the hierarchy of needs thus satisfying all their basic needs, Maslow proposed they then travel "a path called growth motivation".

[ 3 ] Maslow believed that a distinction must be made between the motives of those who operate at or below the level of self-actualization (ones still striving for their basic needs, or ones who have met their basic needs but still live without purpose), and those who are self-actualized who are also with significant purpose, as their motivations differ significantly.

[ 4 ] Deficiency needs ( drives or D-needs) motivate people to satisfy physiological needs such as hunger, sex, love, whereas being needs (B-needs [ 5 ] ) propel a person beyond self-actualization and drive them to fulfill their inherent ultimate potential.

[ 6 ] In Maslow's view [ edit ] Maslow had an optimistic and humanistic view of humanity.

[ 7 ] He regarded people's innate drive towards self-actualization beneficial to society as a whole.

[ 8 ] In Maslow's view, once people's basic needs were met, they were free to explore their abilities and strive to further develop those innate abilities.

[ 8 ] Driven by Metamotivation, people are more spontaneous, free to be themselves, and explore their ultimate potential to create a fulfilled life.

Not all people that satisfy their basic needs automatically become driven by B-needs. In his landmark book, Farther Reaches of Human Nature , [ 9 ] Maslow stated that people who are self-actualizing and driven by metamotivation "are dedicated people, devoted to some task 'outside themselves,' some vocation, or duty, or beloved job". Maslow goes on to say that such a calling could be construed as a destiny or fate and that such people are particularly talented in their field and could be called naturals.

[ 10 ] Metaneeds and metapathology [ edit ] Metamotivation is what motivates and impels an individual toward self-actualization and excellence.

[ 11 ] Metamotivation is distinct from motivation operating in the lower level needs, and it emerges after the lower needs are satisfied. These lower motivations, which Maslow calls "deficiency motivations" or D-Motivations, are described as the type of motivation that operates on the lower four levels of his hierarchy of needs . These deficiency motivations are drives that arise when a physiological or psychological deficit is perceived, leading toward actions to alleviate tension and restore equilibrium.

Maslow describes a metaneed as any need for knowledge, beauty, or creativity. Metaneeds are involved in self-actualization and constitute the highest level of needs, coming into play primarily after the lower level needs have been met.

[ 12 ] In Maslow's hierarchy, metaneeds are associated with impulses for self-actualization.

[ 13 ] Maslow's list of Metaneeds: Wholeness (unity) Perfection (balance and harmony) Completion (ending) Justice (fairness) Richness (complexity) Simplicity (essence) Liveliness (spontaneity) Beauty (rightness of form) Goodness (benevolence) Uniqueness (individuality) Playfulness (ease) Truth (reality) Autonomy (self-sufficiency) Meaningfulness (values) Metapathology is the thwarting of self-development related to failure to satisfy the metaneeds. Metapathology prevents self-actualizers from expressing, using and fulfilling their potential.

[ 14 ] Reasons people may not become self-actualized include: poor childhoods, lower economic conditions, inadequate education, anxieties and fears, and the Jonah complex .

See also [ edit ] Peak experiences Positive disintegration Self-actualization Self-esteem Law of the instrument Humanistic psychology Human Potential Movement Alfred Adler Carl Rogers Henry Murray Viktor Frankl References [ edit ] ^ Goble, F. The Third Force: The Psychology of Abraham Maslow. Richmond, Ca: Maurice Bassett Publishing, 1970. Pg. 62.

^ Maslow, A. Farther Reaches of Human Nature. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1971. Pg 299.

^ Rajamanickam, M. Contemporary Fields Of Psychology And Experiments. New Delhi, India: Ashok Kumar Mittal, 1999. Pg 142.

^ Maslow, A. Farther Reaches of Human Nature. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1971. Pg 300.

^ "To summarize, the major changes in the state of the problem of B-knowledge, or illumination-knowledge, are: (A) shifting it away from the question of the reality of angels, etc., i.e naturalizing the question; (B) affirming experientially valid knowledge, the intrinsic value of the enlarging of consciousness ... (C) realizing that the knowledge revealed was there all the time ... Finally (D) this kind of knowledge can be achieved in other ways, we need not rely solely on peak-experiences or peak-producing drugs for its attainment" Religions, Values, and Peak-Experiences Appendix D, p 80. A. H. Maslow. 1970 ISBN 014019487-8 ^ Engler, B. Personality Theories. 8th Edition. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 2009. Pg 351.

^ Schultz, D, and Schultz, S. Theories of Personality. 9th. New York, NY: Wadsworth, 2009. Pg. 214.

^ a b Zastrow, C, and Kirst-Ashman, K. Understanding Human Behavior and the Social Environment. 9th Edition. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole, 2010. Pg 448.

^ Full Text Lecture given at First Unitarian Church, Sept. 14 1967, Esalen Institute , Big Sur. Transcription with errors due to James Fadiman.

^ Maslow, A. Farther Reaches of Human Nature. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1971. Pg 301.

^ APA college dictionary of psychology. (2009) Washington, DC: America Psychological Association. Pg. 241.

^ APA college dictionary of psychology. (2009) Washington, DC: America Psychological Association. Pg. 24o2.

^ Coon, D. Introduction of Psychology. Wadsworth, 2004. Pg. 451.

^ Schultz, D, and Schultz, S. Theories of Personality, 9th. New York, NY; Wadsworth, 2009. Pg. 309.

Further reading [ edit ] Goble, F. The Third Force: The Psychology of Abraham Maslow. Richmond, Ca: Maurice Bassett Publishing, 1970 Maslow, A. Farther Reaches of Human Nature. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 1971.

Maslow, A. H. & Stephens, D. C. The Maslow Business Reader. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2000.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metamotivation&oldid=1273967064 " Categories : History of mental health Human Potential Movement Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 February 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metamotivation 2 languages Add topic

