Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Observation 2 History 3 Naked eye observations 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Phases of Venus 14 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Italiano Norsk bokmål Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Variations of lighting of the planet's surface The phases of Venus and evolution of its apparent diameter The phases of Venus are the variations of lighting seen on the planet's surface, similar to lunar phases . The first recorded observations of them are thought to have been telescopic observations by Galileo Galilei in 1610. Although the extreme crescent phase of Venus has since been observed with the naked eye , there are no indisputable historical pre-telescopic records of it being described or known.

[ 1 ] Observation [ edit ] The orbit of Venus is 224.7 Earth days (7.4 avg. Earth months [30.4 days]). The phases of Venus result from the planet's orbit around the Sun inside the Earth 's orbit giving the telescopic observer a sequence of progressive lighting similar in appearance to the Moon's phases . It presents a full image when it is on the opposite side of the Sun. It is a gibbous phase when it approaches or leaves the opposite side of the Sun. It shows a quarter phase when it is at its maximum elongation from the Sun. Venus presents a thin crescent in telescopic views as it comes around to the near side between the Earth and the Sun and presents its new phase when it is between the Earth and the Sun. Since the planet has an atmosphere it can be seen at new in a telescope by the halo of light refracted around the planet. The full cycle from new to full to new again takes 584 days (the time it takes Venus to overtake the Earth in its orbit). Venus (like the Moon) has 4 primary phases of 146 days each.

The planet also changes in apparent size from 9.9 arc seconds at full ( superior conjunction ) up to a maximum of 68 arc seconds at new ( inferior conjunction ).

[ 1 ] Venus reaches its greatest magnitude of about −4.5 when it is an intermediate crescent shape at the point in its orbit, when it is 68 million km away from the Earth, at which point the illuminated part of its disk reaches its greatest angular area as seen from the Earth (a combination of its closeness and the fact that it is 28% illuminated).

[ 2 ] Contrary to other planets its apparent magnitude around inferior conjunction does not decrease consistently but rather spikes before dimming further. This is caused by sulfuric acid droplets in Venus' atmosphere reflecting more light at a certain angle and thus phase, an effect similar to a glory on Earth.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] In 1610 Galileo Galilei observed with his telescope that Venus showed phases, despite remaining near the Sun in Earth's sky (first image). This proved that it orbits the Sun and not Earth , as predicted by Copernicus 's heliocentric model , and disproved Ptolemy's geocentric model (second image).

The first observations of the full planetary phases of Venus were by Galileo at the end of 1610 (though not published until 1613 in the Letters on Sunspots ). Using a telescope , Galileo was able to observe Venus going through a full set of phases, something prohibited by the Ptolemaic system that assumed Venus to be a perfect celestial body.  In the Ptolemaic system,  the Sun and Venus circle the earth, with Venus orbiting around a point on the Earth-Sun axis, so that Venus is never on the far side of the sun. One could never expect an alignment Sun-Earth-Venus  or Venus-Sun-Earth to occur, so that a full Venus could never be observed.  Galileo's observations of the phases of Venus [ 4 ] essentially ruled out the Ptolemaic system, and was compatible only with the Copernican system and the Tychonic system and other models such as the Capellan and Riccioli 's extended Capellan model.

There is some controversy about Galileo's claim to first observing the phases of Venus: In December of 1610, Galileo received a letter from fellow scientist Benedetto Castelli , asking if the phases of Venus were observable through Galileo's new telescope.

[ 5 ] Days later, Galileo wrote in a letter to Johannes Kepler saying that he had observed Venus going through phases, but took complete credit for himself. It is unclear, lacking copies of any earlier correspondence, whether Castelli was telling Galileo of it for the first time, or responding to Galileo having previously informed him of it.

[ 6 ] Curiously, Galileo's letter to Kepler was encrypted so that Kepler could not scoop Galileo before he had made more exhaustive observations: Galileo took a sentence stating that Venus went through phases: Cynthiae figuras aemulatur mater amorum (The mother of love imitates the shape of Cynthia) And scrambled the letters into a strange anagram: Haec immatura a me iam frustra leguntur o.y.

(These are now too young to be read by me) Cynthia was a popular epithet for the Moon, the mother of love of course being Venus. He sent the anagram to Kepler, then a few months later sent the decoded version. This way he had proof of having made the observation, without Kepler being able to publish it earlier.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] This technique of hiding encoded announcements in letters was not uncommon at the time.

Naked eye observations [ edit ] The extreme crescent phase of Venus  can be seen without a telescope by those with exceptionally acute eyesight, at the limit of human perception. The angular resolution of the naked eye is about 1 minute of arc (60 seconds). The apparent disk of Venus' extreme crescent measures between 60.2 and 66 seconds of arc , [ 8 ] depending on the distance from Earth.

Mesopotamian priest-astronomers described Ishtar (Venus) in cuneiform text as having horns which has been interpreted as indicating observation of a crescent. However, other Mesopotamian deities were depicted with horns, so the phrase could have been simply a symbol of divinity.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Solar System portal Aspects of Venus Ashen light Transit of Venus Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Goines, David Lance (October 18, 1995).

"Inferential Evidence for the Pre-Telescopic Sighting of the Crescent Venus" . Retrieved 2010-08-11 .

^ "NIGHT SKY~PHASES OF VENUS" .

www.souledout.org . Retrieved 2022-02-16 .

^ "How Bright Are the Planets?" .

Sky & Telescope . 2020-05-26 . Retrieved 2022-10-27 .

^ Galileo's observations of the phases of Venus (slide 4) ^ Phases of Venus ^ a b "The Phases of Venus and Heliocentricity: A Rough Guide" .

The Renaissance Mathematicus . 2014-06-09 . Retrieved 2022-02-16 .

^ Galileo Galilei's Anagram ^ Williams, David R. (April 15, 2005).

"Venus Fact Sheet" .

NASA . Retrieved 2007-10-12 .

References [ edit ] Campbell, William Wallace (1916).

"Is the Crescent Form of Venus Visible to the Naked Eye?" .

Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific .

28 (162): 85– 86.

Bibcode : 1916PASP...28...85C .

doi : 10.1086/122498 .

Reinhardt, Carl (1929). "Notes and Queries: Phase of Venus seen with the Naked Eye".

Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada .

23 : 48– 49.

Bibcode : 1929JRASC..23...48C .

Goines, David Lance (1992). "Observer's Notebook: Naked Eye Crescent of Venus".

Sky & Telescope .

83 .

External links [ edit ] Observations and Theories of Planetary Motion The crescent Venus seen with the naked eye Owen Gingerich - Empirical proof and/or persuasion — lecture on Galileo's observation of the phases of Venus from a renowned historian of science YouTube animation of the phases of Venus predicted by the pure geocentric Ptolemaic model [1] YouTube animation of the phases of Venus predicted by the heliocentric model (and implicitly also by the geo-heliocentric models such as the Tychonic) [2] v t e Venus Outline of Venus Geography General Arachnoid Atmosphere Dune fields Features Mapping of Venus Regions Regio Alpha Regio Asteria Regio Beta Regio Ovda Regio Terrae Aphrodite Terra Ishtar Terra Lada Terra Mountains and volcanoes Abeona Mons Akna Montes Anala Mons Artemis Corona Baʽhet Corona Boala Corona Ciuacoatl Mons Fand Mons Fotla Corona Gula Mons Heng-o Corona Iaso Tholus Idunn Mons Irnini Mons Jaszai Patera Maat Mons Maxwell Montes Nightingale Corona Onatah Corona Ozza Mons Pavlova Corona Quetzalpetlatl Corona Pancake dome Renpet Mons Sacajawea Patera Sachs Patera Sapas Mons Scalloped margin dome Siddons Patera Sif Mons Skadi Mons Theia Mons Ushas Mons Zisa Corona List of coronae on Venus Plains and plateaus Guinevere Planitia Lakshmi Planum Sedna Planitia Canyons and valleys Aikhylu Chasma Artemis Chasma Baltis Vallis Dali and Diana Chasma system Devana Chasma Ganis Chasma Craters Addams Adivar Agnesi Alcott Ariadne Aurelia Balch Barton Buck Cleopatra Cunitz Danilova De Lalande Dickinson Goeppert-Mayer Golubkina Grimke Gregory Guilbert Isabella Jeanne Maria Celeste Mariko Mead Meitner Merit Ptah Mona Lisa Nanichi Riley Ruth Stefania Wanda Wheatley Yablochkina Other Geodynamics Geology Surface features Venus snow Venusquake Astronomy General Aspects Orbit Phases Transits 1639 1761 1769 1874 1882 2004 2012 Asteroids Venus-crosser asteroids Venus trojans Zoozve Exploration Past Sputnik programme Sputnik 7 Venera program Venera 1 Sputnik 19 Sputnik 20 Sputnik 21 Kosmos 21 Venera 1964A Kosmos 27 Venera 2 Venera 3 Kosmos 96 Venera 4 Kosmos 167 Venera 5 Venera 6 Venera 7 Venera 8 Kosmos 482 Venera 9 Venera 10 Venera 11 Venera 12 Venera 13 Venera 14 Venera 15 Venera 16 Mariner program Mariner 1 Mariner 2 Mariner 5 Mariner 10 Zond program Zond 1 Pioneer Venus Pioneer Venus Orbiter /  Pioneer 12 Pioneer Venus Multiprobe /  Pioneer 13 Vega program Vega 1 Vega 2 Magellan IKAROS Shin'en Venus Express Akatsuki Gravity Assists Galileo Cassini–Huygens MESSENGER BepiColombo Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer (planned) MBR Explorer (planned) Planned DAVINCI EnVision VERITAS Venus Orbiter Mission Venus Life Finder Proposed European Venus Explorer Venera-D VAMP VISE VISAGE VICI VOX Proposed (crewed) Colonization Inspiration Mars (flyby) Terraforming Other Geological mapping of Venus Artificial objects on Venus Related Cytherean In culture In fiction Hesperus Life Mythology Neith (hypothetical moon) Phosphorus Category Portal v t e Galileo Galilei Scientific career Observational astronomy Galileo affair Galileo's escapement Galilean invariance Galilean moons Galilean transformation Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment Phases of Venus Celatone Thermoscope Works De motu antiquiora (1589–1592) Sidereus Nuncius (1610) Letters on Sunspots (1613) Letter to Benedetto Castelli (1613) " Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina " (1615) " Discourse on the Tides " (1616) Discourse on Comets (1619) The Assayer (1623) Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632) Two New Sciences (1638) Family Vincenzo Galilei (father) Michelagnolo Galilei (brother) Vincenzo Gamba (son) Maria Celeste (daughter) Marina Gamba (mistress) Related " And yet it moves " Villa Il Gioiello Galileo's paradox Galileo's ship Sector Museo Galileo Galileo's telescopes Galileo's objective lens Tribune of Galileo Galileo thermometer Galileo project spacecraft Galileo Galilei Airport Galileo National Telescope Astronomers Monument In popular culture Life of Galileo (1943 play) Lamp At Midnight (1947 play) Galileo (1968 film) Galileo (1975 film) Starry Messenger (1996 book) Galileo's Daughter: A Historical Memoir of Science, Faith, and Love (1999 book) Galileo Galilei (2002 opera) Galileo's Dream (2009 novel) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phases_of_Venus&oldid=1255205866 " Categories : Observational astronomy Venus Discoveries by Galileo Galilei Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 November 2024, at 18:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phases of Venus 14 languages Add topic

