Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dirawong and the Rainbow Serpent 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Dirawong 2 languages Македонски Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dirawong" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Creature of Australian Aboriginal mythology Snake Island in the middle of the river, on the right is Pelican Island and in the background is Goanna Headland.

In Australian Aboriginal mythology (specifically Bundjalung , from the northern New South Wales coast and South-East Queensland ) Dirawong is a goanna Ancestral Being who taught humans how to live on the land, as well as important ceremonies and rituals. Dirawong is known as a benevolent protector of its people from the Rainbow Serpent . Dirawong's gender is ambiguous.

Dirawong and the Rainbow Serpent together created parts of the Richmond River , Goanna Headland , Snake Island , and Pelican Island . In Aboriginal mythology, a deposit of red ochre on top of Goanna Headland is believed to have originated from the wound where the Rainbow Serpent bit Dirawong during the Dreaming .

Dirawong is also believed to have been transformed into, and still resides within, the Goanna Headland.

Dirawong is associated with rain, and there is a rain cave on Goanna Headland where the elders of the Bundjalung people went in the past to organise ceremonies for rain. Dirawong is also associated with birds and snakes.

Dirawong and the Rainbow Serpent [ edit ] Bundjalung oral literature tells of a fight between Dirawong and the Rainbow Serpent, which created the Bungawalbin River , the Evans River , Pelican Island, Snake Island, other islands in the Evans River, and also an island at an unknown location in the Pacific Ocean .

In the Bundjalung story, a weeum ("cleverman", "man of high degree of initiation" or "man with great powers") named Nyimbunji from the area known as Bungawalbin calls on Dirawong to help protect a yabbra (bird) from the Rainbow Serpent.

Dirawong chases the Rainbow Serpent from inland eastward towards the coast, forming parts of the Richmond River as they go. At Maniworkan (or the town of Woodburn, New South Wales ) they leave the Richmond River and kept on going east. Halfway down the Evans River , Dirawong catches the Rainbow Serpent. The Rainbow Serpent turns around and bites Dirawong on the head. Dirawong then withdraws from the battle in order to eat some herbs to recover from the snakebite. A deposit of red ochre at Goanna Headland is said to originate from the wound where the Rainbow Serpent bit Dirawong.

Meanwhile, Rainbow Serpent reaches Evans Head. Dirawong is nowhere to be seen, so Rainbow Serpent decides to go back west. He then goes into the Evans River and coils himself around, creating Snake Island. As he turns, his body makes a larger island in the river, now known as Pelican Island .

When Rainbow Serpent spots Dirawong heading towards him, he quickly turns, and this time keeps going until he reaches Burraga (the Tasman Sea ), Here he transforms himself into an island so Dirawong cannot recognise him.

When Dirawong reaches the coast at Evans Head, he lies down down next to the coast, facing the Burraga, waiting for Rainbow Serpent to come back.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] List of Australian Aboriginal mythological figures Dirawong Reserve References [ edit ] ^ The Rainbow Snake & the Dreamtime v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7b7cddf567‐z7djr
Cached time: 20250812093818
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.180 seconds
Real time usage: 0.241 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 634/1000000
Revision size: 3886/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 43643/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1047/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 11332/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.103/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2737720/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  183.505      1 -total
 36.39%   66.775      1 Template:Indigenous_Australians
 36.13%   66.292      2 Template:Navbox
 31.93%   58.586      1 Template:Citations_needed
 25.26%   46.355      1 Template:Ambox
 18.62%   34.171      1 Template:Short_description
  9.31%   17.079      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.54%   11.997      4 Template:Main_other
  5.71%   10.487      1 Template:SDcat
  5.14%    9.430      1 Template:Find_sources_mainspace Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3854823:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812093818 and revision id 1223489974. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dirawong&oldid=1223489974 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal legendary creatures Creator deities Legendary reptiles Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references Use Australian English from August 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from August 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 May 2024, at 13:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dirawong 2 languages Add topic

