Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Vertical draft 15 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français עברית Lombard Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Updraft ) Small-scale current of rising air Warm, moist updraft from a thunderstorm associated with a southward-moving frontal boundary - taken from Texarkana, Texas , looking north In meteorology , an updraft (British English: up-draught ) is a small-scale current of rising air, often within a cloud.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] Vertical drafts, known as updrafts or downdrafts, are localized regions of warm or cool air that move vertically. A mass of warm air will typically be less dense than the surrounding region, and so will rise until it reaches air that is either warmer or less dense than itself. The converse will occur for a mass of cool air, and is known as subsidence . This movement of large volumes of air, especially when regions of hot, wet air rise, can create large clouds , and is the central source of thunderstorms . Drafts can also be caused by low or high pressure regions. A low pressure region will attract air from the surrounding area, which will move towards the center and then rise, creating an updraft. A high pressure region will attract air from the surrounding area, which will move towards the center and sink, spawning a downdraft .

Updrafts and downdrafts, along with wind shear in general, are a major contributor to airplane crashes during takeoff and landing in a thunderstorm. Extreme cases, known as downbursts and microbursts, can be deadly and difficult to predict or observe. The crash of Delta Air Lines Flight 191 on its final approach before landing at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport in 1985 was presumably caused by a microburst, and prompted the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to research and deploy new storm detection radar stations at some of the major airports, notably those in the South, Midwest, and Northeast United States where wind shear affects air safety .  Downbursts can cause extensive localized damage, similar to that caused by tornadoes . Downburst damage can be differentiated from that of a tornado because the resulting destruction is circular and radiates away from the center. Tornado damage radiates inward, towards the center of the damage.

The term "downdraft" can also refer to a type of backdraft which occurs through chimneys which have fireplaces on the lowermost levels (such as basements) of multi-level buildings. It involves cold air coming down the chimney due to low air pressure, and makes it hard to light fires, and can push soot and carbon monoxide into domiciles.

See also [ edit ] Terminal Doppler Weather Radar , a 5 cm Doppler weather radar design to detect wind shear near major airports in the U.S. ( FAA ) and abroad NEXRAD , a 10 cm radar in the U.S. that detects wind shear, but to a specific extent. ( NOAA 's National Weather Service ) Low level windshear alert system Atmospheric thermodynamics Lee waves New Zealand National Airways Corporation Flight 441 — airplane crash linked to severe downdraft Rear flank downdraft and forward flank downdraft Thermal References [ edit ] ^ Park, Chris (2007).

A Dictionary of Environment and Conservation (1 ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198609957.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780198609957 . Retrieved 14 August 2014 .

External links [ edit ] National Science Digital Library - Downdraft the Microburst Windshear v t e Natural disasters – list by death toll Geological Mass wasting Landslide Avalanche Mudflow Debris flow Earthquake ( List ) Seismic hazard Seismic risk Soil liquefaction Volcano eruption Pyroclastic flow Lahar Volcanic ash Natural erosion Sinkhole Hydrological Flood ( List ) Coastal flood Flash flood Storm surge Other Tsunami Megatsunami Limnic eruption Meteorological Temperature Blizzard Cold wave Ice storm Heat wave Drought Megadrought Cyclonic storms Bomb cyclone Thunderstorm ( Hail ) Tornado ( Tornado outbreak ) Tropical cyclone Other Derecho Wildfire Firestorm ARkStorm Astronomical Potentially hazardous object Impact event Meteor shower Geomagnetic storm Solar flare Supernova Hypernova Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vertical_draft&oldid=1242689769 " Categories : Aviation meteorology Gliding meteorology Severe weather and convection Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 August 2024, at 05:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vertical draft 15 languages Add topic

