Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Title 3 Content Toggle Content subsection 3.1 First edition (1625) 3.2 1678 edition 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Musaeum Hermeticum 5 languages Deutsch Español Italiano Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Compendium of alchemical texts (1678) Title page of a 1678 edition at the Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library Frontispiece of the Musaeum Hermeticum Musaeum Hermeticum (" Hermetic library") is a compendium of alchemical texts first published in German , in Frankfurt , 1625 by Lucas Jennis .

[ 1 ] Additional material was added for the 1678 Latin edition, which in turn was reprinted in 1749.

Purpose [ edit ] Its purpose was apparently to supply in a compact form a representative collection of relatively brief and less ancient alchemical writings; it could be regarded as a supplement to those large storehouses of Hermetic learning such as the Theatrum Chemicum , or Jean-Jacques Manget 's Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa . It seemed to represent a distinctive school in Alchemy, less committed to the past and less obscure than the works of older and more traditional alchemical masters.

[ 2 ] Title [ edit ] The full Latin title is: " Musæum Hermeticum, omnes sopho-spagyricæ artis discipulos fidelissime erudiens, quo pacto summa illa veraque Medicina, qua res omne, qualemcumque defectum patientes, instaurari possunt (quæ alias Benedictus Lapis Sapientum appellatur) inveniri ac haberi queat inveniri ac haberi queat. Continens tractatus chymicos novem præatantissimos, quorum nomina et seriem versa pagella indicabit. In gratiam filiorum doctrinæ, quibus Germanicum Idioma ignotum, in Latinum conversum ac juris publici factum .
Jennis" Content [ edit ] First edition (1625) [ edit ] The first edition contained: The Remonstrances of Nature ascribed to Jean de Meung The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Subtle Allegory ( Michael Maier ) Three Treatise of Philalethes The Book of Alze Open Entrance to the Closed Palace - Philalethes A Tract of Great Price The Only True Way The Testament of Cremer The Glory of the World The Waterstone of the Wise The Golden Tract concerning the Philosopher's Stone The illustrated book contains 445 + 35 pages.

"Spirit and Soul are acting as child and guide" from the Musaeum Hermeticum , 1678 Edition, Science History Institute 1678 edition [ edit ] The 1678 edition is 863 pages long, and includes: [ 3 ] Aureus tractatus de philosophorum lapide Aureum seculum redivivum Hydrolithus sophicus Aquarium sapientum Demonstratio naturae, quam errantibus chymicis facit Via veritatis unicae Elegans, perutile et praestans opusculum, viam veritatis aperiens Gloria mundi, aliâs, paradysi tabula Vera priscae scientiae descriptio De lapide philosophico tractatus eximius Lambsprinck nobilis germani philosophi antiqui libellus De lapide philosophico De lapide philosophico Tripus Aureus Tres tractatus chymici selectissimi Basilii Valentini, benedictini ordinis monachi, Germani, practica una cum 12. clavibus et appendice Practica cum duodecim clavibus et appendice, de magno lapide antiquorum sapientum Testamentum cremeri, abbatis westmonasteriensis, angli, ordinis benedictine Novum lumen chemicum, e naturae fonte et manuali experientia depromptum Introitus apertus, ad occlusum regis palatium Subtilis allegoria super secreta chymiae perspicuae utilitatis et iucundae meditationis Philalethae tractatus tres Metallorum metamorphosis Brevis manuductio ad rubinum coelestum Fons chymicae veritatis Vitulus aureus References [ edit ] ^ See German Wikipedia, Lucas Jennis ^ Arthur Edward Waite (1893).

"Preface - THE GOLDEN TRACT concerning the Stone of the Philosophers, by an Anonymous German Adept" .

The Hermetic Museum . Vol. 1. p. 5–50.

^ "Othmer Library Catalog Entry" .

Science History Institute .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Musaeum Hermeticum .

Musaeum hermeticum etc.

(1625 German edition)l Musaeum hermeticum etc.

(1678 Latin edition) Musaeum hermeticum etc.

(1678 Latin edition) Musaeum Hermeticum etc.

(English translation at "The Alchemy Website") The Hermetic Museum , restored and enlarged (English A. E. Waite edition, 1898) The Hermetic Museum , restored and enlarged Vol I (of II) (A scanned UMI copy of volume one from the Cecil H. Green Library at Stanford, published in 1893 introduction written by A.E. Waite, the translator of the original texts is anonymous) v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Musaeum_Hermeticum&oldid=1215047174 " Categories : 1625 books Emblem books Hermetica Alchemical documents Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 March 2024, at 20:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Musaeum Hermeticum 5 languages Add topic

