Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sciences Toggle Sciences subsection 1.1 Astronomy 1.2 Chemistry 1.3 Earth sciences 1.4 Psychology 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Logic 2.2 Metaphysics 2.3 Philosophy of science 3 Sections of the text 4 In English Translation 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents The Book of Healing 17 languages العربية বাংলা Català Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Bahasa Melayu Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific and philosophical encyclopedia by Avicenna "al-Shifa" redirects here. For other uses, see al-Shifa (disambiguation) .

The Book of Healing Author Ibn Sina Original title كتاب الشفاء Language Arabic Genre Natural Philosophy Published 1027 (Arabic) Part of a series on Avicenna (Ibn Sīnā) Works The Book of Healing The Canon of Medicine Al-Nijat Thoughts Avicennism On God's existence Floating man Al-Ghazali's criticism of Avicennian philosophy Pupils Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Bahmanyar Ibn Abi Sadiq Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Monuments Avicenna Mausoleum Avicenna (crater) Bu-Ali Sina University Avicenne Hospital The Physician The Physician (2013 film) Avicenna Cultural and Scientific Foundation Scholars Pavilion v t e The Book of Healing ( Arabic : کتاب الشفاء , romanized : Kitāb al-Shifāʾ ; Latin : Sufficientia ; also known as The Cure or Assepha ) is a scientific and philosophical encyclopedia written by Abu Ali ibn Sīna (also known as Avicenna). He most likely began to compose the book in 1014, completed it around 1020, [ 1 ] and published it in 1027.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This work is Ibn Sina's major work on science and philosophy , and is intended to "cure" or "heal" ignorance of the soul. Thus, despite its title, it is not concerned with medicine, in contrast to Avicenna's earlier The Canon of Medicine (5 vols.) which is, in fact, medical.

The book is divided into four parts: logic , natural sciences , mathematics (a quadrivium of arithmetic, geometry , astronomy ), and metaphysics .

[ 3 ] It was influenced by ancient Greek philosophers such as Aristotle ; Hellenistic thinkers such as Ptolemy ; and earlier Persian / Muslim scientists and philosophers, such as Al-Kindi (Alkindus), Al-Farabi (Alfarabi), and Al-Bīrūnī .

Sciences [ edit ] Astronomy [ edit ] In astronomy , the book proposes the theory that Venus is closer to Earth than the Sun .

Chemistry [ edit ] Ibn Sina's theory on the formation of metals combined the alchemical sulfur-mercury theory of metals (although he was a critic of alchemy ) with the mineralogical theories of Aristotle and Theophrastus . He created a synthesis of ideas concerning the nature of the mineral and metallic states.

[ 4 ] Earth sciences [ edit ] Toulmin and Goodfield (1965), commented on Avicenna's contribution to geology : [ 5 ] Around A.D. 1000, Avicenna was already suggesting a hypothesis about the origin of mountain ranges, which in the Christian world, would still have been considered quite radical eight hundred years later Paleontology Ibn Sina also contributed to paleontology with his explanation of how the stoniness of fossils was caused.

Aristotle previously explained it in terms of vaporous exhalations, which Ibn Sina modified into the theory of petrifying fluids ( succus lapidificatus ), which was elaborated on by Albertus Magnus in the 13th century and accepted in some form by most naturalists by the 16th century.

[ 6 ] Ibn Sina made the following observation on the theories held at the time on fossils and the petrifaction of plants and animals: "If what is said concerning the petrifaction of animals and plants is true, the cause of this (phenomenon) is a powerful mineralizing and petrifying virtue which arises in certain stony spots, or emanates suddenly from the earth during earthquake and subsidences, and petrifies whatever comes into contact with it. As a matter of fact, the petrifaction of the bodies of plants and animals is not more extraordinary than the transformation of waters." Psychology [ edit ] See also: Avicennism and The Canon of Medicine In The Book of Healing , Avicenna discusses the mind , its existence , the mind–body relationship, sensation , perception , etc. He writes that at the most common level, the influence of the mind on the body can be seen in voluntary movements, in that the body obeys whenever the mind wishes to move the body. He further writes that the second level of influence of the mind on the body is from emotions and the will . As an example, he states that if a plank of wood is placed as a bridge over a chasm , a person could hardly creep over it without falling if that person only pictures themself in a possible fall so vividly that the "natural power of limbs accord with it." He also writes that strong negative emotions can have a negative effect on the vegetative functions of an individual and may even lead to death in some cases. He also discusses hypnosis ( al Wahm al-Amil ), stating that one could create conditions in another person so that they accepts the reality of hypnosis. Avicenna was also the first to divide human perception into the five external senses (the classical senses of hearing , sight , smell , taste and touch known since ancient history ) and the five internal senses which he discovered himself: [ 7 ] : 366 sensus communis ('common sense'), which integrates sense data into percepts ; the imaginative faculty, which conserves the perceptual images; imagination , which acts upon these images by combining and separating them, serving as the seat of the practical intellect ; wahm ( instinct ), which perceives qualities (such as good and bad, love and hate, etc.) and forms the basis of a person's character whether or not influenced by reason ; and ma'ni ( intentions ), which conserve all these notions in memory .

Avicenna also gives psychological explanations for certain somatic illnesses , always linking the physical and psychological illnesses together. He describes melancholia (i.e.

depression ) as a type of mood disorder in which the person may become suspicious and develop certain types of phobias . He states that anger heralds the transition of melancholia to mania , and explains that humidity inside the head can contribute to mood disorders. He recognizes that this occurs when the amount of breath changes: happiness increases the breath, which leads to increased moisture inside the brain , but if this moisture goes beyond its limits, the brain would lose control over its rationality and lead to mental disorders . He also writes about symptoms and treatments for nightmare , epilepsy , and weak memory .

[ 7 ] : 366 Avicenna often used psychological methods to treat his patients.

[ 7 ] : 366 One such example is when a Persian prince had melancholia, suffering from the delusion that he was a cow . He would moo and cry out, "Kill me so that a good stew may be made of my flesh," and would never eat anything. Avicenna was persuaded to take the case. Avicenna sent a message to the patient, asking him to be happy as the butcher was coming to slaughter him, and the sick man rejoiced. When Avicenna approached the prince with a knife in his hand, he asked "where is the cow so I may kill it." The patient then mooed like a cow to indicate where he was. The patient was laid on the ground for slaughter. When Avicenna approached the patient, pretending to be ready to slaughter him, he said, "the cow is too lean and not ready to be killed. He must be fed properly and I will kill it when it becomes healthy and fat." The patient was then offered food which he ate eagerly, and gradually "gained strength, got rid of his delusion, and was completely cured." [ 7 ] : 376 Philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Avicennism In the medieval Islamic world , due to Avicenna's successful reconciliation of Aristotelianism and Neoplatonism along with Kalam , Avicennism eventually became the leading school of early Islamic philosophy by the 12th century, with Avicenna becoming a central authority on philosophy.

[ 8 ] Avicennism was also influential in medieval Europe , particular his doctrines on the nature of the soul and his existence - essence distinction, along with the debates and censure that they raised in scholastic Europe . This was particularly the case in Paris , where Avicennism was later proscribed in 1210. Nevertheless, his Muslim psychology and theory of knowledge influenced William of Auvergne and Albertus Magnus , while his metaphysics influenced the thought of Thomas Aquinas .

[ 9 ] Logic [ edit ] Avicenna discussed the topic of logic in Islamic philosophy extensively in his works, and developed his own system of logic known as "Avicennian logic" as an alternative to Aristotelian logic . By the 12th century, Avicennian logic had replaced Aristotelian logic as the dominant system of logic in the Islamic world.

[ 10 ] After the Latin translations of the 12th century , his writings on logic were also an important influence on Western medieval writers such as Albertus Magnus .

[ 11 ] He wrote on the hypothetical syllogism [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and on the propositional calculus , which were both part of the Stoic logical tradition.

[ 12 ] He developed an original theory of “ temporally modalized ” syllogistic [ 13 ] and made use of inductive logic , such as the methods of agreement, difference and concomitant variation which are critical to the scientific method .

[ 2 ] Metaphysics [ edit ] Early Islamic metaphysics , imbued as it is with Islamic theology , distinguishes more clearly than Aristotelianism the difference between essence and existence .

[ citation needed ] Whereas existence is the domain of the contingent and the accidental, essence endures within a being beyond the accidental. The philosophy of Ibn Sīnā, particularly that part relating to metaphysics , owes much to al-Farabi . The search for a truly definitive Islamic philosophy can be seen in what is left to us of his work.

Following al-Farabi's lead, Avicenna initiated a full-fledged inquiry into the question of being , in which he distinguished between essence ( mahiat ) and existence ( wujud ). He argued that the fact of existence can not be inferred from or accounted for by the essence of existing things and that form and matter by themselves cannot interact and originate the movement of the universe or the progressive actualization of existing things. Existence must, therefore, be due to an agent-cause that necessitates, imparts, gives, or adds existence to an essence. To do so, the cause must be an existing thing and coexist with its effect.

[ 14 ] Avicenna's proof for the existence of God was the first ontological argument , which he proposes in the "Metaphysics" section of The Book of Healing .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] This was the first attempt at using the method of a priori proof , which utilizes intuition and reason alone. Avicenna's proof of God's existence is unique in that it can be classified as both a cosmological argument and an ontological argument. "It is ontological insofar as ‘necessary existence’ in intellect is the first basis for arguing for a Necessary Existent". The proof is also "cosmological insofar as most of it is taken up with arguing that contingent existents cannot stand alone and must end up in a Necessary Existent." [ 17 ] Philosophy of science [ edit ] Further information: Avicennism and The Canon of Medicine In the "Al-Burhan" ('On Demonstration') section of the book, Avicenna discusses the philosophy of science and describes an early scientific method of inquiry . He discusses Aristotle 's Posterior Analytics and significantly diverges from it on several points. Avicenna explains the issue of a proper methodology for scientific inquiry and the question of "How does one acquire the first principles of a science?" He asks how a scientist would arrive at "the initial axioms or hypotheses of a deductive science without inferring them from some more basic premises?" He explains that the ideal situation is when one grasps that a "relation holds between the terms, which would allow for absolute, universal certainty." Avicenna then adds two further methods for arriving at the first principles : the ancient Aristotelian method of induction ( istiqra ), and the method of examination and experimentation ( tajriba ). Avicenna criticizes Aristotelian induction, arguing that "it does not lead to the absolute, universal, and certain premises that it purports to provide." In its place, he develops a "method of experimentation as a means for scientific inquiry." [ 18 ] Sections of the text [ edit ] Critical editions of the Arabic text have been published in Cairo , 1952–83, originally under the supervision of Ibrahim Madkour; some of these editions are given below.

[ 1 ] Al-Mantiq ( Logic ) , Part 1, al-Ahwani, Cairo: al-Matba’ah al-Amiriyah, 1952. (Volume I, Part 1 of al-Shifa’.) Al-‘Ibarah ( Interpretation ), edited by M. El-Khodeiri. Cairo: Dar al-Katib al-Arabi, 1970. (Volume 1, Part 3 of al-Shifa’.) Al-Qiyas ( Syllogism ), edited by S. Zayed and I. Madkour, Cairo: Organisme General des Imprimeries Gouvernementales, 1964. (Volume I, Part 4 of al-Shifa’.) Shehaby, N., trans. 1973.

The Propositional Logic of Ibn Sina , Dordrecht: Reidel.

Al-Burhan ( Demonstration ), edited by A. E. Affifi. Cairo: Organisme General des Imprimeries Gouvernementales, 1956. (Volume I, Part 5 of al-Shifa’.) Al-Jadal ( Dialectic ), edited by A.F. Al-Ehwany. Cairo: Organisme General des Imprimeries Gouvernementales, 1965. (Volume I, Part 6 of al-Shifa’.) Al-Khatabah ( Rhetoric ), edited by S. Salim, Cairo: Imprimerie Nationale, 1954. (Volume I, Part 8 of al-Shifa’.) Al-Ilahiyat ( Theology ) , edited by M.Y. Moussa, S. Dunya and S. Zayed, Cairo: Organisme General des Imprimeries Gouvernementales, 1960; R. M. Savory and D. A. Agius, ed. and trans. 1984. ‘Ibn Sina on Primary Concepts in the Metaphysics of al-Shifa’, in Logos Islamikos , Toronto, Ont.: Pontifical Institute for Mediaeval Studies; Anawati, G. C., trans. 1978, 1985. "La metaphysique du Shifa’ [The Metaphysics of al-Shifa’]," ( Etudes Musulmanes 21 and 27). Paris: Vrin. (Vol. I, Books 1-5; Vol. II. Books 6-10.) Marmura, Michael E. 2005.

The Metaphysics of the Healing . A parallel English-Arabic text, with introduction and annotation by M. E. Marmura. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press .

Al-Nafs ( The Soul ) , edited by G. C. Anawati and S. Zayed. Cairo: Organisme General des Imprimeries Gouvernementales, 1975; Rahman, F., ed. 1959.

Avicenna's De Anima, Being the Psychological Part of Kitab al-Shifa’ , London: Oxford University Press, 1959. (Volume 1, part 6 of al-Shifa’.) In English Translation [ edit ] BYU's Islamic Translation Series includes two parts of The Healing .

Avicenna (2005).

The Metaphysics of The Healing . Translated by Marmura, Michael E. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University.

Avicenna (2010).

The Physics of The Healing: A Parallel English-Arabic Text in Two Volumes . Translated by McGinnis, Jon. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University.

See also [ edit ] Avicenna The Canon of Medicine Islamic Golden Age Early Islamic philosophy Islamic science Medical literature References [ edit ] ^ a b "Ibn Sina Abu 'Ali Al-Husayn" . Muslimphilosophy.com . Retrieved 2014-08-05 .

^ a b c Goodman, Lenn Evan. 2003.

Islamic Humanism .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-513580-6 . p. 155.

^ a b c Goodman, Lenn Evan. 1992.

Avicenna .

Routledge .

ISBN 0-415-01929-X . p. 31.

^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr (December 2003), "The achievements of IBN SINA in the field of science and his contributions to its philosophy", Islam & Science , 1 ^ Toulmin, Stephen . and June Goodfield . 1965.

The Ancestry of Science: The Discovery of Time . Chicago: University of Chicago Press . p. 64.

( cf.

The Contribution of Ibn Sina to the development of Earth sciences Archived 2010-03-14 at the Wayback Machine .) ^ Rudwick, M. J. S. (1985), The Meaning of Fossils: Episodes in the History of Palaeontology , University of Chicago Press , p. 24, ISBN 0-226-73103-0 ^ a b c d Haque, Amber. 2004. "Psychology from Islamic Perspective: Contributions of Early Muslim Scholars and Challenges to Contemporary Muslim Psychologists." Journal of Religion & Health 43(4):357–77.

^ Fancy, Nahyan A. G.  2006. " Pulmonary Transit and Bodily Resurrection: The Interaction of Medicine, Philosophy and Religion in the Works of Ibn al-Nafīs (d. 1288) Archived 2015-04-04 at the Wayback Machine " ( doctoral dissertation ).

University of Notre Dame . pp. 80-81.

^ "The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Avicenna/Ibn Sina (CA. 980-1037)" . Iep.utm.edu. 2013-08-02 . Retrieved 2014-08-05 .

^ I. M. Bochenski (1961), "On the history of the history of logic", A history of formal logic , p. 4-10. Translated by I. Thomas, Notre Dame, Indiana University Press . ( cf.

Ancient Islamic (Arabic and Persian) Logic and Ontology ) ^ Richard F. Washell (1973), "Logic, Language, and Albert the Great", Journal of the History of Ideas 34 (3), pp. 445–450 [445].

^ Goodman, Lenn Evan (1992); Avicenna , p. 188, Routledge , ISBN 0-415-01929-X .

^ " History of logic: Arabic logic ." Archived 2007-10-12 at the Wayback Machine Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ "Islam" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . 2007 . Retrieved November 27, 2007 .

^ Steve A. Johnson (1984), "Ibn Sina's Fourth Ontological Argument for God's Existence", The Muslim World 74 (3-4), 161–171.

^ Morewedge, P. (1970), "Ibn Sina (Avicenna) and Malcolm and the Ontological Argument", Monist , 54 (2): 234– 49, doi : 10.5840/monist197054212 ^ Mayer, Toby. 2001. "Ibn Sina's 'Burhan Al-Siddiqin'." Journal of Islamic Studies 12(1):18–39.

Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies .

doi : 10.1093/jis/12.1.18 .

^ McGinnis, Jon (July 2003), "Scientific Methodologies in Medieval Islam" , Journal of the History of Philosophy , 41 (3): 307– 327, doi : 10.1353/hph.2003.0033 , S2CID 30864273 v t e Avicenna Works The Canon of Medicine The Book of Healing Al-isharat wa al-tanbihat Alai Encyclopedia Book of science Al-Nijat Five Treatises On the Science of the Pulse The Book of the Mi'raj Category Commons v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy External links [ edit ] Ibn Sina (Avicenna) — Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Avicenna on the subject and the object of metaphysics with a list of English translations of his philosophical works (AR) Kitab al-Shifa fi [kidha] tariff huquq al-Mustafa (in Arabic) – via archive.org .

Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Israel Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐p7fnm
Cached time: 20250814215420
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.634 seconds
Real time usage: 0.816 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4009/1000000
Revision size: 21911/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 188898/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4045/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 99655/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.374/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26476608/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  651.733      1 -total
 23.53%  153.349      1 Template:Infobox_book
 21.36%  139.216      1 Template:Infobox
 14.97%   97.540      1 Template:Lang
 13.31%   86.716      3 Template:Cite_book
 11.73%   76.456      1 Template:Reflist
 11.12%   72.466      1 Template:Avicenna_sidebar
 10.88%   70.884      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.89%   57.949      1 Template:Short_description
  8.60%   56.035      8 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:145227:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215420 and revision id 1285806763. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Book_of_Healing&oldid=1285806763 " Categories : Works by Avicenna Medical works of the medieval Islamic world 11th-century Arabic-language books Iranian books Iranian literature 1020s books Psychology in the medieval Islamic world Islamic philosophical texts Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Books with missing cover Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 22:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Book of Healing 17 languages Add topic

