Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Young scholar 2 Early work Toggle Early work subsection 2.1 Publication of the Critique of Pure Reason 3 Later work 4 Death and burial 5 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 5.1 Kant's critical project 5.2 Doctrine of transcendental idealism 5.2.1 Interpretive disagreements 5.3 Kant's theory of judgment 5.3.1 Transcendental deduction of the categories of the understanding 5.3.2 Principles of pure understanding 5.4 Critique of metaphysics 5.4.1 On the concepts of pure reason 5.4.2 Dialectical inferences of pure reason 5.5 Moral thought 5.5.1 Idea of freedom 5.5.2 Categorical imperative 5.5.3 "The Doctrine of Virtue" 5.6 Political philosophy 5.7 Religious writings 5.8 Aesthetics 5.9 Anthropology 5.9.1 Views on race 6 Influence and legacy Toggle Influence and legacy subsection 6.1 Historical influence 6.2 Influence on modern thinkers 7 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 7.1 List of major works 7.2 Collected works in German 8 Notes 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Works cited 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Immanuel Kant 177 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Multilingual Wikisource Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher (1724–1804) "Kant" redirects here. For other uses, see Kant (disambiguation) .

Immanuel Kant Portrait of Kant, 1768 Born Emanuel Kant ( 1724-04-22 ) 22 April 1724 Königsberg , Prussia Died 12 February 1804 (1804-02-12) (aged 79) Königsberg, Prussia Education Education University of Königsberg ( BA ; MA , 1755; PhD , 1755; PhD, 1770) Theses New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition (September 1755) On the Form and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible Worlds (August 1770) Academic advisors Martin Knutzen , Johann Gottfried Teske (M.A. advisor) Philosophical work Era Age of Enlightenment Region Western philosophy School Enlightenment philosophy Kantianism Other schools Classical liberalism Empirical realism German idealism Liberal naturalism Transcendental idealism Institutions University of Königsberg Notable students Jakob Sigismund Beck , Johann Gottfried Herder , Karl Leonhard Reinhold (epistolary correspondent) Main interests Aesthetics , epistemology , ethics , metaphysics , systematic philosophy Notable ideas Aesthetic – teleological judgments Analytic–synthetic distinction Categorical and hypothetical imperative Categories Critical philosophy Copernican revolution in philosophy Disinterested delight Empirical realism Kant's antinomies Kantian ethics Kingdom of Ends Nebular hypothesis Transcendental schema Theoretical vs.

practical philosophy Transcendental idealism Transcendental subject Understanding–reason distinction Signature Part of a series on Immanuel Kant Major works Critique of Pure Reason Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics " Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals Critique of Practical Reason Critique of Judgment Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Perpetual Peace The Metaphysics of Morals " On a Supposed Right to Tell Lies from Benevolent Motives " Opus Postumum Kantianism • Kantian ethics Transcendental idealism Critical philosophy Sapere aude Thing-in-itself Schema A priori and a posteriori Analytic–synthetic distinction Noumenon Category Categorical imperative Hypothetical imperative " Kingdom of Ends " Political philosophy Teleology People J. G. Fichte G. W. F. Hegel David Hume F. H. Jacobi Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Related topics German idealism Neo-Kantianism Category • Philosophy portal Immanuel Kant [ a ] (born Emanuel Kant ; 22 April 1724 – 12 February 1804) was a German philosopher and one of the central thinkers of the Enlightenment . Born in Königsberg , Kant's comprehensive and systematic works in epistemology , metaphysics , ethics , and aesthetics have made him one of the most influential and highly discussed figures in modern Western philosophy .

In his doctrine of transcendental idealism , Kant argued that space and time are mere "forms of intuition" that structure all experience and that the objects of experience are mere "appearances". The nature of things as they are in themselves is unknowable to us. Nonetheless, in an attempt to counter the philosophical doctrine of skepticism , he wrote the Critique of Pure Reason (1781/1787), his best-known work. Kant drew a parallel to the Copernican Revolution in his proposal to think of the objects of experience as conforming to people's spatial and temporal forms of intuition and the categories of their understanding so that they have a priori cognition of those objects.

Kant believed that reason is the source of morality and that aesthetics arises from a faculty of disinterested judgment. Kant's religious views were deeply connected to his moral theory. Their exact nature remains in dispute. He hoped that perpetual peace could be secured through an international federation of republican states and international cooperation . His cosmopolitan reputation is called into question by his promulgation of scientific racism for much of his career, although he altered his views on the subject in the last decade of his life.

Early life [ edit ] Immanuel Kant was born on 22 April 1724 into a Prussian German family of Lutheran faith in Königsberg in East Prussia . His mother, Anna Regina Reuter, was born in Königsberg to a father from Nuremberg .

[ 7 ] Her surname is sometimes erroneously given as Porter. Kant's father, Johann Georg Kant, was a German harness-maker from Memel , [ 8 ] at the time Prussia's most northeastern city (now Klaipėda , Lithuania). It is possible that the Kants got their name from the village of Kantvainiai (German: Kantwaggen – today part of Priekulė ) and were of Kursenieki origin.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Kant was baptized as Emanuel and later changed the spelling of his name to Immanuel after learning Hebrew .

[ 8 ] He was the fourth of nine children (six of whom reached adulthood).

[ 11 ] The Kant household stressed the pietist values of religious devotion, humility, and a literal interpretation of the Bible .

[ 12 ] Immanuel Kant's early education was strict, punitive, and highly disciplinary, with an emphasis on Latin and religious instruction rather than mathematics and science.

[ 13 ] In his later years, Kant lived a strictly ordered life. It was said that neighbors would set their clocks by his daily walks. Kant considered marriage two times, first a widow and then a Westphalian girl, but both times waited too long.

[ 14 ] Though he never married, he seems to have had a rewarding social life; he was a popular teacher as well as a modestly successful author, even before starting on his major philosophical works.

[ 15 ] Young scholar [ edit ] Kant showed a great aptitude for study at an early age. He first attended the Collegium Fridericianum , from which he graduated at the end of the summer of 1740. In 1740, aged 16, he enrolled at the University of Königsberg , where he would later remain for the rest of his professional life.

[ 16 ] He studied the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz and Christian Wolff under Martin Knutzen (Associate Professor of Logic and Metaphysics from 1734 until he died in 1751), a rationalist who was also familiar with developments in British philosophy and science and introduced Kant to the new mathematical physics of Isaac Newton . Knutzen dissuaded Kant from the theory of pre-established harmony , which he regarded as "the pillow for the lazy mind".

[ 17 ] He also dissuaded Kant from idealism , the idea that reality is purely mental, which most philosophers in the 18th century regarded negatively. The theory of transcendental idealism that Kant later included in the Critique of Pure Reason was developed partially in opposition to traditional idealism. Kant had contacts with students, colleagues, friends and diners who frequented the local Masonic lodge .

[ 18 ] His father's stroke and subsequent death in 1746 interrupted his studies. Kant left Königsberg shortly after August 1748; [ 19 ] he would return there in August 1754.

[ 20 ] He became a private tutor in the towns surrounding Königsberg, but continued his scholarly research. In 1749, he published his first philosophical work, Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces (written in 1745–1747).

[ 21 ] Early work [ edit ] Kant is best known for his work in the philosophy of ethics and metaphysics, but he made significant contributions to other disciplines. In 1754, while contemplating on a prize question by the Berlin Academy about the problem of Earth's rotation, he argued that the Moon's gravity would slow down Earth's spin and he also put forth the argument that gravity would eventually cause the Moon's tidal locking to coincide with the Earth's rotation.

[ b ] [ 23 ] The next year, he expanded this reasoning to the formation and evolution of the Solar System in his Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens .

[ 23 ] In 1755, Kant received a license to lecture in the University of Königsberg and began lecturing on a variety of topics including mathematics, physics, logic, and metaphysics. In his 1756 essay on the theory of winds, Kant laid out an original insight into the Coriolis force .

[ citation needed ] In 1756, Kant also published three papers on the 1755 Lisbon earthquake .

[ 24 ] Kant's theory, which involved shifts in huge caverns filled with hot gases, though inaccurate, was one of the first systematic attempts to explain earthquakes in natural rather than supernatural terms. In 1757, Kant began lecturing on geography, making him one of the first lecturers to explicitly teach geography as its own subject.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Geography was one of Kant's most popular lecturing topics and, in 1802, a compilation by Friedrich Theodor Rink of Kant's lecturing notes, Physical Geography , was released. After Kant became a professor in 1770, he expanded the topics of his lectures to include lectures on natural law , ethics, and anthropology , along with other topics.

[ 25 ] Kant's house in Königsberg in an 1842 painting In the Universal Natural History , Kant laid out the nebular hypothesis , in which he deduced that the Solar System had formed from a large cloud of gas, a nebula . Kant also correctly deduced that the Milky Way was a large disk of stars , which he theorized formed from a much larger spinning gas cloud. He further suggested that other distant "nebulae" might be other galaxies. These postulations opened new horizons for astronomy, for the first time extending it beyond the solar system to galactic and intergalactic realms.

[ 27 ] From then on, Kant turned increasingly to philosophical issues, although he continued to write on the sciences throughout his life. In the early 1760s, he produced a series of important works in philosophy.

The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures , a work in logic, was published in 1762. Two more works appeared the following year: Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy and The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God . By 1764, Kant had become a notable popular author, and wrote Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime ; he was second to Moses Mendelssohn in a Berlin Academy prize competition with his Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (often referred to as "The Prize Essay"). In 1766 Kant wrote a critical piece on Emanuel Swedenborg 's Dreams of a Spirit-Seer .

In 1770, Kant was appointed Full Professor of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of Königsberg. In defense of this appointment, Kant wrote his inaugural dissertation On the Form and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible World .

[ c ] This work saw the emergence of several central themes of his mature work, including the distinction between the faculties of intellectual thought and sensible receptivity. To miss this distinction would mean to commit the error of subreption , and, as he says in the last chapter of the dissertation, only in avoiding this error does metaphysics flourish.

While it is true that Kant wrote his greatest works relatively late in life, there is a tendency to underestimate the value of his earlier works. Recent Kant scholarship has devoted more attention to these "pre-critical" writings and has recognized a degree of continuity with his mature work.

[ 28 ] Publication of the Critique of Pure Reason [ edit ] Main article: Critique of Pure Reason The philosopher David Hume by Allan Ramsay At age 46, Kant was an established scholar and an increasingly influential philosopher, and much was expected of him. In correspondence with his ex-student and friend Markus Herz , Kant admitted that, in the inaugural dissertation, he had failed to account for the relation between our sensible and intellectual faculties.

[ 29 ] He needed to explain how we combine what is known as sensory knowledge with the other type of knowledge—that is, reasoned knowledge—these two being related but having very different processes. Kant also credited David Hume with awakening him from a " dogmatic slumber " in which he had unquestioningly accepted the tenets of both religion and natural philosophy .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Hume, in his 1739 Treatise on Human Nature , had argued that people know the mind only through a subjective, essentially illusory series of perceptions. Ideas such as causality , morality , and objects are not evident in experience, so their reality may be questioned. Kant felt that reason could remove this skepticism, and he set himself to solving these problems. Although fond of company and conversation with others, Kant isolated himself, and resisted friends' attempts to bring him out of his isolation.

[ d ] When Kant emerged from his silence in 1781, the result was the Critique of Pure Reason , printed by Johann Friedrich Hartknoch . Kant countered Hume's empiricism by claiming that some knowledge exists inherently in the mind, independent of experience.

[ 30 ] He drew a parallel to the Copernican revolution in his proposal that worldly objects can be intuited a priori , and that intuition is consequently distinct from objective reality . Perhaps the most direct contested matter was Hume's argument against any necessary connection between causal events, which Hume characterized as the "cement of the universe". In the Critique of Pure Reason , Kant argues for what he takes to be the a priori justification of such necessary connection.

[ 33 ] Portrait of Kant by Johann Christoph Frisch , after Johann Gottlieb Becker, c.

1770 Although now recognized as one of the greatest works in the history of philosophy, the Critique disappointed Kant's readers upon its initial publication.

[ 34 ] The book was long, over 800 pages in the original German edition, and written in a convoluted style. Kant was quite upset with its reception.

[ 35 ] His former student Johann Gottfried Herder criticized it for placing reason as an entity worthy of criticism by itself instead of considering the process of reasoning within the context of language and one's entire personality.

[ 36 ] Similarly to Christian Garve and Johann Georg Heinrich Feder , he rejected Kant's position that space and time possess a form that can be analyzed. Garve and Feder also faulted the Critique for not explaining differences in perception of sensations.

[ 37 ] Its density made it, as Herder said in a letter to Johann Georg Hamann , a "tough nut to crack", obscured by "all this heavy gossamer".

[ 38 ] Its reception stood in stark contrast to the praise Kant had received for earlier works, such as his Prize Essay and shorter works that preceded the first Critique . Recognizing the need to clarify the original treatise, Kant wrote the Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics in 1783 as a summary of its main views. Shortly thereafter, Kant's friend Johann Friedrich Schultz (1739–1805), a professor of mathematics, published Explanations of Professor Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (Königsberg, 1784), which was a brief but very accurate commentary on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason .

[ 39 ] Kant's reputation gradually rose through the latter portion of the 1780s, sparked by a series of important works: the 1784 essay, " Answer to the Question: What is Enlightenment?

"; 1785's Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (his first work on moral philosophy); and Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science from 1786. Kant's fame ultimately arrived from an unexpected source. In 1786, Karl Leonhard Reinhold published a series of public letters on Kantian philosophy. In these letters, Reinhold framed Kant's philosophy as a response to the central intellectual controversy of the era: the pantheism controversy .

Friedrich Jacobi had accused the recently deceased Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (a distinguished dramatist and philosophical essayist) of Spinozism . Such a charge, tantamount to an accusation of atheism, was vigorously denied by Lessing's friend Moses Mendelssohn , leading to a bitter public dispute among partisans. The controversy gradually escalated into a debate about the values of the Enlightenment and the value of reason. Reinhold maintained in his letters that Kant's Critique of Pure Reason could settle this dispute by defending the authority and bounds of reason. Reinhold's letters were widely read and made Kant the most famous philosopher of his era.

[ 40 ] Later work [ edit ] Kant published a second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason in 1787, heavily revising the first parts of the book. Most of his subsequent work focused on other areas of philosophy. He continued to develop his moral philosophy, notably in 1788's Critique of Practical Reason (known as the second Critique ), and 1797's Metaphysics of Morals . The 1790 Critique of the Power of Judgment (the third Critique ) applied the Kantian system to aesthetics and teleology . In 1792, Kant's attempt to publish the Second of the four Pieces of Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason , [ 41 ] in the journal Berlinische Monatsschrift , met with opposition from the King 's censorship commission, which had been established that same year in the context of the French Revolution . Kant then arranged to have all four pieces published as a book, routing it through the philosophy department at the University of Jena to avoid the need for theological censorship. This insubordination earned him a now-famous reprimand from the King. When he nevertheless published a second edition in 1794, the censor was so irate that he arranged for a royal order that required Kant never to publish or even speak publicly about religion. Kant then published his response to the King's reprimand and explained himself in the preface of The Conflict of the Faculties (1798).

Kant with friends, including Christian Jakob Kraus , Johann Georg Hamann , Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel , and Karl Gottfried Hagen He also wrote a number of semi-popular essays on history, religion, politics, and other topics. These works were well received by Kant's contemporaries and confirmed his preeminent status in eighteenth-century philosophy. There were several journals devoted solely to defending and criticizing Kantian philosophy. Despite his success, philosophical trends were moving in another direction. Many of Kant's most important disciples and followers (including Karl Leonhard Reinhold , Jakob Sigismund Beck , and Johann Gottlieb Fichte ) transformed the Kantian position. The progressive stages of revision of Kant's teachings marked the emergence of German idealism . In what was one of his final acts expounding a stance on philosophical questions, Kant opposed these developments and publicly denounced Fichte in an open letter in 1799.

[ 42 ] In 1800, a student of Kant named Gottlob Benjamin Jäsche (1762–1842) published a manual of logic for teachers called Logik , which he had prepared at Kant's request. Jäsche prepared the Logik using a copy of a textbook in logic by Georg Friedrich Meier entitled Excerpt from the Doctrine of Reason , in which Kant had written copious notes and annotations. The Logik has been considered of fundamental importance to Kant's philosophy, and the understanding of it. The great 19th-century logician Charles Sanders Peirce remarked, in an incomplete review of Thomas Kingsmill Abbott 's English translation of the introduction to Logik , that "Kant's whole philosophy turns upon his logic." [ 43 ] Also, Robert S. Hartman and Wolfgang Schwarz wrote in the translators' introduction to their English translation of the Logik , "Its importance lies not only in its significance for the Critique of Pure Reason , the second part of which is a restatement of fundamental tenets of the Logic , but in its position within the whole of Kant's work." [ 44 ] Death and burial [ edit ] Kant's health, long poor, worsened. He died at Königsberg on 12 February 1804, uttering Es ist gut ("It is good") before his death.

[ 45 ] His unfinished final work was published as Opus Postumum . Kant always cut a curious figure in his lifetime for his modest, rigorously scheduled habits, which have been referred to as clocklike.

Heinrich Heine observed the magnitude of "his destructive, world-crushing thoughts" and considered him a sort of philosophical "executioner", comparing him to Maximilien Robespierre with the observation that both men "represented in the highest the type of provincial bourgeois. Nature had destined them to weigh coffee and sugar, but Fate determined that they should weigh other things and placed on the scales of the one a king, on the scales of the other a god." [ 46 ] When his body was transferred to a new burial spot, his skull was measured during the exhumation and found to be larger than the average German male's with a "high and broad" forehead.

[ 47 ] His forehead has been an object of interest ever since it became well known through his portraits: "In Döbler's portrait and in Kiefer's faithful if expressionistic reproduction of it—as well as in many of the other late eighteenth- and early-nineteenth-century portraits of Kant—the forehead is remarkably large and decidedly retreating." [ 48 ] Kant's tomb in Kaliningrad , Russia Kant's mausoleum adjoins the northeast corner of Königsberg Cathedral in Kaliningrad , Russia. The mausoleum was constructed by the architect Friedrich Lahrs and was finished in 1924, in time for the bicentenary of Kant's birth. Originally, Kant was buried inside the cathedral, but in 1880 his remains were moved to a neo-Gothic chapel adjoining the northeast corner of the cathedral. Over the years, the chapel became dilapidated and was demolished to make way for the mausoleum, which was built on the same location. The tomb and its mausoleum are among the few artifacts of German times preserved by the Soviets after they captured the city.

[ 49 ] Into the 21st century, many newlyweds bring flowers to the mausoleum. Artifacts previously owned by Kant, known as Kantiana , were included in the Königsberg City Museum ; however, the museum was destroyed during World War II . A replica of the statue of Kant that in German times stood in front of the main University of Königsberg building was donated by a German entity in the early 1990s and placed in the same grounds. After the expulsion of Königsberg's German population at the end of World War II, the University of Königsberg where Kant taught was replaced by the Russian-language Kaliningrad State University, which appropriated the campus and surviving buildings. In 2005, the university was renamed Immanuel Kant State University of Russia.

[ 50 ] The name change, which was considered a politically-charged issue due to the residents having mixed feelings about its German past, [ 51 ] was announced at a ceremony attended by Russian president Vladimir Putin and German chancellor Gerhard Schröder , [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] and the university formed a Kant Society, dedicated to the study of Kantianism . In 2010, the university was again renamed to Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University .

[ 55 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Kantianism Bust of Kant by Emanuel Bardou , 1798 Like many of his contemporaries, Kant was greatly impressed with the scientific advances made by Sir Isaac Newton and others. This new evidence of the power of human reason called into question for many the traditional authority of politics and religion. In particular, the modern mechanistic view of the world called into question the very possibility of morality; for, if there is no agency, there cannot be any responsibility.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] The aim of Kant's critical project is to secure human autonomy, the basis of religion and morality, from this threat of mechanism—and to do so in a way that preserves the advances of modern science.

[ 58 ] In the Critique of Pure Reason , Kant summarizes his philosophical concerns in the following three questions: What can I know?

What should I do?

What may I hope?

[ 59 ] The Critique of Pure Reason focuses upon the first question and opens a conceptual space for an answer to the second question. It argues that even though we cannot strictly know that we are free, we can—and for practical purposes, must— think of ourselves as free. In Kant's own words, "I had to deny knowledge in order to make room for faith." [ 60 ] Our rational faith in morality is further developed in the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals and the Critique of Practical Reason .

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] The Critique of the Power of Judgment argues we may rationally hope for the harmonious unity of the theoretical and practical domains treated in the first two Critiques on the basis, not only of its conceptual possibility, but also on the basis of our affective experience of natural beauty and, more generally, the organization of the natural world.

[ 63 ] In Religion within the Bounds of Mere Reason , Kant endeavors to complete his answer to this third question.

[ 64 ] These works all place the active, rational human subject at the center of the cognitive and moral worlds. In brief, Kant argues that the mind itself necessarily makes a constitutive contribution to knowledge , that this contribution is transcendental rather than psychological, and that to act autonomously is to act according to rational moral principles.

[ 65 ] Kant's critical project [ edit ] See also: Critique of Pure Reason Kant by Carle Vernet Kant's 1781 (revised 1787) Critique of Pure Reason has often been cited as the most significant volume of metaphysics and epistemology in modern philosophy.

[ 66 ] In the first Critique , and later on in other works as well, Kant frames the "general" and "real problem of pure reason" in terms of the following question: "How are synthetic judgments a priori possible?" [ 67 ] [ 68 ] To understand this claim, it is necessary to define some terms. First, Kant makes a distinction between two sources of knowledge: Cognitions a priori : "cognition independent of all experience and even of all the impressions of the senses".

Cognitions a posteriori : cognitions that have their sources in experience—that is, which are empirical.

[ 69 ] Second, he makes a distinction in terms of the form of knowledge: Analytic judgements: judgements in which the predicate concept is contained in the subject concept; e.g., "All bachelors are unmarried", or "All bodies take up space". These can also be called "judgments of clarification".

Synthetic judgements: judgements in which the predicate concept is not contained in the subject concept; e.g., "All bachelors are alone", "All swans are white", or "All bodies have weight". These can also be called "judgments of amplification".

[ 70 ] An analytic judgement is true by nature of strictly conceptual relations. All analytic judgements are a priori since basing an analytic judgement on experience would be absurd.

[ 71 ] By contrast, a synthetic judgement is one the content of which includes something new in the sense that it is includes something not already contained in the subject concept. The truth or falsehood of a synthetic statement depends upon something more than what is contained in its concepts. The most obvious form of synthetic judgement is a simple empirical observation.

[ 72 ] Philosophers such as David Hume believed that these were the only possible kinds of human reason and investigation, which Hume called "relations of ideas" and "matters of fact".

[ 73 ] Establishing the synthetic a priori as a third mode of knowledge would allow Kant to push back against Hume's skepticism about such matters as causation and metaphysical knowledge more generally. This is because, unlike a posteriori cognition, a priori cognition has "true or strict ... universality" and includes a claim of "necessity".

[ 74 ] [ 72 ] Kant himself regards it as uncontroversial that we do have synthetic a priori knowledge—especially in mathematics. That 7 + 5 = 12, he claims, is a result not contained in the concepts of seven, five, and the addition operation.

[ 75 ] Yet, although he considers the possibility of such knowledge to be obvious, Kant nevertheless assumes the burden of providing a philosophical proof that we have a priori knowledge in mathematics, the natural sciences, and metaphysics. It is the twofold aim of the Critique both to prove and to explain the possibility of this knowledge.

[ 76 ] Kant says "There are two stems of human cognition, which may perhaps arise from a common but to us unknown root, namely sensibility and understanding, through the first of which objects are given to us, but through the second of which they are thought ." [ 77 ] Kant's term for the object of sensibility is intuition, and his term for the object of the understanding is concept. In general terms, the former is a non-discursive representation of a particular object, and the latter is a discursive (or mediate) representation of a general type of object.

[ 78 ] The conditions of possible experience require both intuitions and concepts, that is, the affection of the receptive sensibility and the actively synthesizing power of the understanding.

[ 79 ] [ e ] Thus the statement: "Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions without concepts are blind." [ 81 ] Kant's basic strategy in the first half of his book will be to argue that some intuitions and concepts are pure—that is, are contributed entirely by the mind, independent of anything empirical. Knowledge generated on this basis, under certain conditions, can be synthetic a priori . This insight is known as Kant's "Copernican revolution", because, just as Copernicus advanced astronomy by way of a radical shift in perspective, so Kant here claims do the same for metaphysics.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] The second half of the Critique is the explicitly critical part. In this "transcendental dialectic", Kant argues that many of the claims of traditional rationalist metaphysics violate the criteria he claims to establish in the first, "constructive" part of his book.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] As Kant observes, however, "human reason, without being moved by the mere vanity of knowing it all, inexorably pushes on, driven by its own need to such questions that cannot be answered by any experiential use of reason".

[ 86 ] It is the project of "the critique of pure reason" to establish the limits as to just how far reason may legitimately so proceed.

[ 87 ] Doctrine of transcendental idealism [ edit ] See also: Transcendental idealism The section of the Critique entitled "The transcendental aesthetic" introduces Kant's famous metaphysics of transcendental idealism . Something is "transcendental" if it is a necessary condition for the possibility of experience, and "idealism" denotes some form of mind-dependence that must be further specified. The correct interpretation of Kant's own specification remains controversial.

[ 88 ] The metaphysical thesis then states that human beings only experience and know phenomenal appearances, not independent things-in-themselves, because space and time are nothing but the subjective forms of intuition that we ourselves contribute to experience.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Nevertheless, although Kant says that space and time are "transcendentally ideal"—the pure forms of human sensibility, rather than part of nature or reality as it exists in-itself—he also claims that they are "empirically real", by which he means "that 'everything that can come before us externally as an object' is in both space and time, and that our internal intuitions of ourselves are in time".

[ 91 ] [ 89 ] However  Kant's doctrine is interpreted, he wished to distinguish his position from the subjective idealism of George Berkeley .

[ 92 ] Paul Guyer , although critical of many of Kant's arguments in this section, writes of the "Transcendental Aesthetic" that it "not only lays the first stone in Kant's constructive theory of knowledge; it also lays the foundation for both his critique and his reconstruction of traditional metaphysics. It argues that all genuine knowledge requires a sensory component, and thus that metaphysical claims that transcend the possibility of sensory confirmation can never amount to knowledge." [ 93 ] Interpretive disagreements [ edit ] One interpretation, known as the "two-world" interpretation, regards Kant's position as a statement of epistemological limitation, meaning that we are not able to transcend the bounds of our own mind, and therefore cannot access the " thing-in-itself ". On this particular view, the thing-in-itself is not numerically identical to the phenomenal empirical object.

[ 94 ] Kant also spoke, however, of the thing-in-itself or transcendent object as a product of the (human) understanding as it attempts to conceive of objects in abstraction from the conditions of sensibility. Following this line of thought, a different interpretation argues that the thing-in-itself does not represent a separate ontological domain but simply a way of considering objects by means of the understanding alone; this is known as the "two-aspect" view.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] On this alternative view, the same objects to which we attribute empirical properties like color, size, and shape are also, when considered as they are in themselves, the things-in-themselves, otherwise inaccessible to human knowledge.

[ 97 ] Kant's theory of judgment [ edit ] See also: Category (Kant) Kant statue in the School of Philosophy and Human Sciences (FAFICH) in the Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte , Brazil Following the "Transcendental Analytic" is the "Transcendental Logic". Whereas the former was concerned with the contributions of the sensibility, the latter is concerned, first, with the contributions of the understanding ("Transcendental Analytic") and, second, with the faculty of reason as the source of both metaphysical errors and genuine regulatory principles ("Transcendental Dialectic"). The "Transcendental Analytic" is further divided into two sections. The first, "Analytic of Concepts", is concerned with establishing the universality and necessity of the pure concepts of the understanding (i.e., the categories). This section contains Kant's famous "transcendental deduction". The second, "Analytic of Principles", is concerned with the application of those pure concepts in empirical judgments. This second section is longer than the first and is further divided into many sub-sections.

[ 98 ] Transcendental deduction of the categories of the understanding [ edit ] The "Analytic of Concepts" argues for the universal and necessary validity of the pure concepts of the understanding, or the categories, for instance, the concepts of substance and causation. These twelve basic categories define what it is to be a thing in general —that is, they articulate the necessary conditions according to which something is a possible object of experience. These, in conjunction with the a priori forms of intuition, are the basis of all synthetic a priori cognition. According to Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood , "Kant's idea is that just as there are certain essential features of all judgments, so there must be certain corresponding ways in which we form the concepts of objects so that judgments may be about objects." [ 99 ] Kant provides two central lines of argumentation in support of his claims about the categories. The first, known as the "metaphysical deduction", proceeds analytically from a table of the Aristotelian logical functions of judgment. As Kant was aware, this assumes precisely what the skeptic rejects, namely, the existence of synthetic a priori cognition. For this reason, Kant also supplies a synthetic argument that does not depend upon the assumption in dispute.

[ 100 ] This argument, provided under the heading "Transcendental Deduction of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding", is widely considered to be both the most important and the most difficult of Kant's arguments in the Critique . Kant himself said that it is the one that cost him the most labor.

[ 101 ] Frustrated by its confused reception in the first edition of his book, he rewrote it entirely for the second edition.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] The "Transcendental Deduction" gives Kant's argument that these pure concepts apply universally and necessarily to the objects that are given in experience. According to Guyer and Wood, "He centers his argument on the premise that our experience can be ascribed to a single identical subject, via what he calls the 'transcendental unity of apperception,' only if the elements of experience given in intuition are synthetically combined so as to present us with objects that are thought through the categories." [ 104 ] Kant's principle of apperception is that "The I think must be able to accompany all my representations; for otherwise something would be represented in me that could not be thought at all, which is as much as to say that the representation would either be impossible or else at least would be nothing for me." [ 105 ] The necessary possibility of the self-ascription of the representations of self-consciousness, identical to itself through time, is an a priori conceptual truth that cannot be based on experience.

[ 106 ] This is only a bare sketch of one of the arguments that Kant presents.

Principles of pure understanding [ edit ] Kant's deduction of the categories in the "Analytic of Concepts", if successful, demonstrates its claims about the categories only in an abstract way. The task of the "Analytic of Principles" is to show both that they must universally apply to objects given in actual experience (i.e., manifolds of intuition) and how it is they do so.

[ 107 ] In the first book of this section on the " schematism ", Kant connects each of the purely logical categories of the understanding to the temporality of intuition to show that, although non-empirical, they do have purchase upon the objects of experience. The second book continues this line of argument in four chapters, each associated with one of the category groupings. In some cases, it adds a connection to the spatial dimension of intuition to the categories it analyzes.

[ 108 ] The fourth chapter of this section, "The Analogies of Experience", marks a shift from "mathematical" to "dynamical" principles, that is, to those that deal with relations among objects. Some commentators consider this the most significant section of the Critique .

[ 109 ] The analogies are three in number: Principle of persistence of substance : Kant is here concerned with the general conditions of determining time-relations among the objects of experience. He argues that the unity of time implies that "all change must consist in the alteration of states in an underlying substance, whose existence and quantity must be unchangeable or conserved." [ 110 ] Principle of temporal succession according to the law of causality : Here Kant argues that "we can make determinate judgments about the objective succession of events, as contrasted to merely subjective successions of representations, only if every objective alteration follows a necessary rule of succession, or a causal law." This is Kant's most direct rejoinder to Hume's skepticism about causality .

[ 111 ] Principle of simultaneity according to the law of reciprocity or community : The final analogy argues that "determinate judgments that objects (or states of substance) in different regions of space exists simultaneously are possible only if such objects stand in mutual causal relation of community or reciprocal interaction." This is Kant's rejoinder to Leibniz 's thesis in the Monadology .

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] The fourth section of this chapter, which is not an analogy, deals with the empirical use of the modal categories. That was the end of the chapter in the A edition of the Critique . The B edition includes one more short section, "The Refutation of Idealism". In this section, by analysis of the concept of self-consciousness, Kant argues that his transcendental idealism is a "critical" or "formal" idealism that does not deny the existence of reality apart from our subjective representations.

[ 114 ] The final chapter of "The Analytic of Principles" distinguishes phenomena , of which we can have genuine knowledge, from noumena , a term which refers to objects of pure thought that we cannot know, but to which we may still refer "in a negative sense".

[ 115 ] An Appendix to the section further develops Kant's criticism of Leibnizian-Wolffian rationalism by arguing that its "dogmatic" metaphysics confuses the "mere features of concepts through which we think things ... [with] features of the objects themselves". Against this, Kant reasserts his own insistence upon the necessity of a sensible component in all genuine knowledge.

[ 116 ] Critique of metaphysics [ edit ] The second of the two Divisions of "The Transcendental Logic", "The Transcendental Dialectic", contains the "negative" portion of Kant's Critique , which builds upon the "positive" arguments of the preceding "Transcendental Analytic" to expose the limits of metaphysical speculation. In particular, it is concerned to demonstrate as spurious the efforts of reason to arrive at knowledge independent of sensibility. This endeavor, Kant argues, is doomed to failure, which he claims to demonstrate by showing that reason, unbounded by sense, is always capable of generating opposing or otherwise incompatible conclusions. Like "the light dove, in free flight cutting through the air, the resistance of which it feels", reason "could get the idea that it could do even better in airless space".

[ 117 ] Against this, Kant claims that, absent epistemic friction, there can be no knowledge. Nevertheless, Kant's critique is not entirely destructive. He presents the speculative excesses of traditional metaphysics as inherent in our very capacity of reason. Moreover, he argues that its products are not without some (carefully qualified) regulative value.

[ 118 ] On the concepts of pure reason [ edit ] Kant calls the basic concepts of metaphysics "ideas". They are different from the concepts of understanding in that they are not limited by the critical stricture limiting knowledge to the conditions of possible experience and its objects. "Transcendental illusion" is Kant's term for the tendency of reason to produce such ideas.

[ 119 ] Although reason has a "logical use" of simply drawing inferences from principles, in "The Transcendental Dialectic", Kant is concerned with its purportedly "real use" to arrive at conclusions by way of unchecked regressive syllogistic ratiocination.

[ 120 ] The three categories of relation , pursued without regard to the limits of possible experience, yield the three central ideas of traditional metaphysics: The soul : the concept of substance as the ultimate subject; The world in its entirety : the concept of causation as a completed series; and God : the concept of community as the common ground of all possibilities.

[ 120 ] Although Kant denies that these ideas can be objects of genuine cognition, he argues that they are the result of reason's inherent drive to unify cognition into a systematic whole.

[ 119 ] Leibnizian-Wolffian metaphysics was divided into four parts: ontology, psychology, cosmology, and theology. Kant replaces the first with the positive results of the first part of the Critique . He proposes to replace the following three with his later doctrines of anthropology, the metaphysical foundations of natural science, and the critical postulation of human freedom and morality.

[ 121 ] Dialectical inferences of pure reason [ edit ] In the second of the two Books of "The Transcendental Dialectic", Kant undertakes to demonstrate the contradictory nature of unbounded reason. He does this by developing contradictions in each of the three metaphysical disciplines that he contends are in fact pseudosciences. This section of the Critique is long and Kant's arguments are extremely detailed. In this context, it not possible to do much more than enumerate the topics of discussion. The first chapter addresses what Kant terms the paralogisms —i.e., false inferences—that pure reason makes in the metaphysical discipline of rational psychology. He argues that one cannot take the mere thought of "I" in the proposition "I think" as the proper cognition of "I" as an object. In this way, he claims to debunk various metaphysical theses about the substantiality, unity, and self-identity of the soul.

[ 122 ] The second chapter, which is the longest, takes up the topic Kant calls the antinomies of pure reason —that is, the contradictions of reason with itself—in the metaphysical discipline of rational cosmology. Originally, Kant had thought that all transcendental illusion could be analyzed in antinomic terms .

[ 123 ] He presents four cases in which he claims reason is able to prove opposing theses with equal plausibility: That "reason seems to be able to prove that the universe is both finite and infinite in space and time"; that "reason seems to be able to prove that matter both is and is not infinitely divisible into ever smaller parts"; that "reason seems to be able to prove that free will cannot be a causally efficacious part of the world (because all of nature is deterministic) and yet that it must be such a cause"; and, that "reason seems to be able to prove that there is and there is not a necessary being (which some would identify with God)".

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Kant further argues in each case that his doctrine of transcendental idealism is able to resolve the antinomy.

[ 124 ] The third chapter examines fallacious arguments about God in rational theology under the heading of the "Ideal of Pure Reason". (Whereas an idea is a pure concept generated by reason, an ideal is the concept of an idea as an individual thing .

[ 126 ] ) Here Kant addresses and claims to refute three traditional arguments for the existence of God: the ontological argument , the cosmological argument , and the physio-theological argument (i.e., the argument from design).

[ 127 ] The results of the transcendental dialectic so far appear to be entirely negative. In an Appendix to this section, Kant rejects such a conclusion. The ideas of pure reason, he argues, have an important regulatory function in directing and organizing our theoretical and practical inquiry. Kant's later works elaborate upon this function at length and in detail.

[ 128 ] Moral thought [ edit ] Main article: Kantian ethics Kant developed his ethics, or moral philosophy, in three works: Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785), Critique of Practical Reason (1788), and Metaphysics of Morals (1797).
With regard to morality , Kant argued that the source of the good lies not in anything outside the human subject, either in nature or given by God , but rather is only the good will itself. A good will is one that acts from duty in accordance with the universal moral law that the autonomous human being freely gives itself. This law obliges one to treat humanity—understood as rational agency, and represented through oneself as well as others—as an end in itself rather than (merely) as means to other ends the individual might hold. Kant is known for his theory that all moral obligation is grounded in what he calls the " categorical imperative ", which is derived from the concept of duty . He argues that the moral law is a principle of reason itself, not based on contingent facts about the world, such as what would make us happy; to act on the moral law has no other motive than "worthiness to be happy".

[ 129 ] Idea of freedom [ edit ] In the Critique of Pure Reason , Kant distinguishes between the transcendental idea of freedom, which as a psychological concept is "mainly empirical" and refers to "whether a faculty of beginning a series of successive things or states from itself is to be assumed", [ 130 ] and the practical concept of freedom as the independence of our will from the "coercion" or "necessitation through sensuous impulses". Kant finds it a source of difficulty that the practical idea of freedom is founded on the transcendental idea of freedom, [ 131 ] but for the sake of practical interests uses the practical meaning, taking "no account of ... its transcendental meaning", which he feels was properly "disposed of" in the Third Antinomy, and as an element in the question of the freedom of the will is for philosophy "a real stumbling block" that has embarrassed speculative reason.

[ 130 ] Kant calls practical "everything that is possible through freedom"; he calls the pure practical laws that are never given through sensuous conditions, but are held analogously with the universal law of causality, moral laws. Reason can give us only the "pragmatic laws of free action through the senses", but pure practical laws given by reason a priori dictate "what is to be done".

[ 130 ] [ 132 ] Kant's categories of freedom function primarily as conditions for the possibility for actions (i) to be free, (ii) to be understood as free, and (iii) to be morally evaluated. For Kant, although actions as theoretical objects are constituted by means of the theoretical categories, actions as practical objects (objects of practical use of reason, and which can be good or bad) are constituted by means of the categories of freedom. Only in this way can actions, as phenomena, be a consequence of freedom, and be understood and evaluated as such.

[ 133 ] Categorical imperative [ edit ] Kant makes a distinction between categorical and hypothetical imperatives . A hypothetical imperative is one that must be obeyed to satisfy contingent desires. A categorical imperative binds rational agents regardless of their desires: for example, all rational agents have a duty to respect other rational agents as individual ends in themselves, regardless of circumstances, even though it is sometimes in one's selfish interest to not do so. These imperatives are morally binding because of the categorical form of their maxims, rather than contingent facts about an agent.

[ 134 ] Unlike hypothetical imperatives, which bind us insofar as we are part of a group or society which we owe duties to, we cannot opt out of the categorical imperative, because we cannot opt out of being rational agents. We owe a duty to rationality by virtue of being rational agents; therefore, rational moral principles apply to all rational agents at all times.

[ 135 ] Stated in other terms, with all forms of instrumental rationality excluded from morality, "the moral law itself, Kant holds, can only be the form of lawfulness itself, because nothing else is left once all content has been rejected".

[ 136 ] Kant provides three formulations for the categorical imperative. He claims that these are necessarily equivalent, as all being expressions of the pure universality of the moral law as such; [ 137 ] many scholars are not convinced.

[ 138 ] The formulas are as follows: Formula of Universal Law : "Act only in accordance with that maxim through which you at the same time can will that it become a universal law"; [ 139 ] alternatively, Formula of the Law of Nature : "So act, as if the maxim of your action were to become through your will a universal law of nature." [ 139 ] Formula of Humanity as End in Itself : "So act that you use humanity, as much in your own person as in the person of every other, always at the same time as an end and never merely as a means".

[ 140 ] Formula of Autonomy : "the idea of the will of every rational being as a will giving universal law", [ 141 ] or "Not to choose otherwise than so that the maxims of one's choice are at the same time comprehended with it in the same volition as universal law"; [ 142 ] alternatively, Formula of the Realm of Ends : "Act in accordance with maxims of a universally legislative member for a merely possible realm of ends." [ 143 ] [ 144 ] Kant defines maxim as a "subjective principle of volition", which is distinguished from an "objective principle or 'practical law.

' " While "the latter is valid for every rational being and is a 'principle according to which they ought to act[,]' a maxim 'contains the practical rule which reason determines in accordance with the conditions of the subject (often their ignorance or inclinations) and is thus the principle according to which the subject does act.

' " [ 145 ] Maxims fail to qualify as practical laws if they produce a contradiction in conception or a contradiction in the will when universalized. A contradiction in conception happens when, if a maxim were to be universalized, it ceases to make sense, because the "maxim would necessarily destroy itself as soon as it was made a universal law".

[ 146 ] For example, if the maxim 'It is permissible to break promises' was universalized, no one would trust any promises made, so the idea of a promise would become meaningless; the maxim would be self-contradictory because, when it is universalized, promises cease to be meaningful. The maxim is not moral because it is logically impossible to universalize—that is, we could not conceive of a world where this maxim was universalized.

[ 147 ] A maxim can also be immoral if it creates a contradiction in the will when universalized. This does not mean a logical contradiction, but that universalizing the maxim leads to a state of affairs that no rational being would desire.

"The Doctrine of Virtue" [ edit ] As Kant explains in the 1785 Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals and as its title directly indicates, that text is "nothing more than the search for and establishment of the supreme principle of morality ".

[ 148 ] His promised Metaphysics of Morals was much delayed and did not appear until its two parts, "The Doctrine of Right" and "The Doctrine of Virtue", were published separately in 1797 and 1798.

[ 149 ] The first deals with political philosophy, the second with ethics. "The Doctrine of Virtue" provides "a very different account of ordinary moral reasoning" than the one suggested by the Groundwork .

[ 150 ] It is concerned with duties of virtue or "ends that are at the same time duties".

[ 151 ] It is here, in the domain of ethics, that the greatest innovation by The Metaphysics of Morals is to be found. According to Kant's account, "ordinary moral reasoning is fundamentally teleological—it is reasoning about what ends we are constrained by morality to pursue, and the priorities among these ends we are required to observe".

[ 152 ] There are two sorts of ends that it is our duty to have: our own perfection and the happiness of others ( MS 6:385). "Perfection" includes both our natural perfection (the development of our talents, skills, and capacities of understanding) and moral perfection (our virtuous disposition) ( MS 6:387). A person's "happiness" is the greatest rational whole of the ends the person set for the sake of her own satisfaction ( MS 6:387–388).

[ 153 ] Kant's elaboration of this teleological doctrine offers up a moral theory very different from the one typically attributed to him on the basis of his foundational works alone.

Political philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant This article is part of a series on Liberalism in Germany Ideologies Christian democracy Classical Economic Green National Neo Ordo Radical Social Principles Civil and political rights Due process Equality before the law Freedom economic press religion speech Liberal democracy Popular sovereignty Rule of law Social justice History Hambach Festival March Revolution November Revolution Old Liberals Weimar Constitution Resistance to Nazism Peaceful Revolution People Barth Bennigsen Brentano Dahrendorf Dehler Flach Genscher Gerlach Harnack Heuss Humboldt Kant Koch Külz Lambsdorff Lasker Lindner Maier Mommsen Naumann Preuß Rathenau Richter Röpke Scheel Schlözer Stresemann Unruh Weber Westerwelle Parties Active Free Democratic Party (FDP) Liberal Democrats (LD) Party of Humanists (PdH) South Schleswig Voters' Association (SSW) Volt Deutschland Defunct Democratic Union (DV) Free-minded People's Party (FVP) Free-minded Union (FVG) Free People's Party (FVP) German Democratic Party (DDP) German Free-minded Party (DFP) German People's Party (DtVP) German People's Party (DVP) German Progress Party (DFP) German State Party (DStP) Imperial Liberal Party Liberal Union National Liberal Party (NLP) National-Social Association (NSV) Old Liberals Progressive People's Party (FVP) Organizations Active Friedrich Naumann Foundation German Taxpayers Federation Defunct Berliner Mittwochsgesellschaft Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold Young German Order Media Berliner Tageblatt Cicero Focus Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Frankfurter Zeitung Der Freitag Handelsblatt Der Spiegel Stern Süddeutsche Zeitung Der Tagesspiegel Vossische Zeitung Wirtschaftswoche Die Zeit Related topics Anti-clericalism Grundgesetz wehrhafte Demokratie Politics of Germany Conservatism Max Weber and German politics Wandel durch Handel Liberalism portal Germany portal v t e Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e In Towards Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Project , Kant listed several conditions that he thought necessary for ending wars and creating a lasting peace. They included a world of constitutional republics.

[ 154 ] His classical republican theory was extended in the Doctrine of Right , the first part of the Metaphysics of Morals (1797).

[ 155 ] Kant believed that universal history leads to the ultimate world of republican states at peace, but his theory was not pragmatic. The process was described in Perpetual Peace as natural rather than rational: What affords this guarantee (surety) is nothing less than the great artist nature ( natura daedala rerum ) from whose mechanical course purposiveness shines forth visibly, letting concord arise by means of the discord between human beings even against their will; and for this reason nature, regarded as necessitation by a cause the laws of whose operation are unknown to us, is called fate , but if we consider its purposiveness in the course of the world as the profound wisdom of a higher cause directed to the objective final end of the human race and predetermining this course of the world, it is called providence .

[ 156 ] Kant's political thought can be summarized as republican government and international organization: "In more characteristically Kantian terms, it is doctrine of the state based upon the law ( Rechtsstaat ) and of eternal peace. Indeed, in each of these formulations, both terms express the same idea: that of legal constitution or of 'peace through law.

' " [ 157 ] "Kant's political philosophy, being essentially a legal doctrine, rejects by definition the opposition between moral education and the play of passions as alternate foundations for social life. The state is defined as the union of men under law. The state rightly so called is constituted by laws which are necessary a priori because they flow from the very concept of law. A regime can be judged by no other criteria nor be assigned any other functions, than those proper to the lawful order as such." [ 158 ] Kant opposed "democracy", which at his time meant direct democracy , believing that majority rule posed a threat to individual liberty. He stated that " democracy in the strict sense of the word is necessarily a despotism because it establishes an executive power in which all decide for and, if need be, against one (who thus does not agree), so that all, who are nevertheless not all, decide; and this is a contradiction of the general will with itself and with freedom." [ 159 ] As with most writers at the time, Kant distinguished three forms of government—namely, democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy—with mixed government as the most ideal form of it.

[ 160 ] He believed in republican ideals and forms of governance, and rule of law brought on by them.

[ 161 ] Although Kant published this as a "popular piece", Mary J. Gregor points out that two years later, in The Metaphysics of Morals , Kant claims to demonstrate systematically that "establishing universal and lasting peace constitutes not merely a part of the doctrine of right, but rather the entire final end of the doctrine of right within the limits of mere reason".

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] The Doctrine of Right , published in 1797, contains Kant's most mature and systematic contribution to political philosophy. It addresses duties according to law, which are "concerned only with protecting the external freedom of individuals" and indifferent to incentives. Although there is a moral duty "to limit ourselves to actions that are right, that duty is not part of [right] itself".

[ 150 ] Its basic political idea is that "each person's entitlement to be his or her own master is only consistent with the entitlements of others if public legal institutions are in place".

[ 164 ] He formulates the universal principle of right as: Any action is right if it can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law, or if on its maxim the freedom of choice of each can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law. ( MS 6:230).

[ 150 ] Religious writings [ edit ] Main article: Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Starting in the 20th century, commentators tended to see Kant as having a strained relationship with religion, although in the nineteenth century this had not been the prevalent view.

Karl Leonhard Reinhold , whose letters helped make Kant famous, wrote: "I believe that I may infer without reservation that the interest of religion, and of Christianity in particular, accords completely with the result of the Critique of Reason." [ 165 ] According to Johann Friedrich Schultz , who wrote one of the first commentaries on Kant: "And does not this system itself cohere most splendidly with the Christian religion? Do not the divinity and beneficence of the latter become all the more evident?" [ 166 ] The reason for these views was Kant's moral theology and the widespread belief that his philosophy was the great antithesis to Spinozism , which was widely seen as a form of sophisticated pantheism or even atheism. As Kant's philosophy disregarded the possibility of arguing for God through pure reason alone, for the same reasons it also disregarded the possibility of arguing against God through pure reason alone.

Kant directs his strongest criticisms of the organization and practices of religious organizations at those that encourage what he sees as a religion of counterfeit service to God.

[ 167 ] Among the major targets of his criticism are external ritual, superstition, and a hierarchical church order. He sees these as efforts to make oneself pleasing to God in ways other than conscientious adherence to the principle of moral rightness in choosing and acting upon one's maxims. Kant's criticisms on these matters, along with his rejection of certain theoretical proofs for the existence of God that were grounded in pure reason (particularly the ontological argument ) and his philosophical commentary on some Christian doctrines, have resulted in interpretations that see Kant as hostile to religion in general and to Christianity in particular.

[ 168 ] Other interpreters, nevertheless, consider that Kant was trying to mark off defensible from indefensible Christian belief.

[ 169 ] Regarding Kant's conception of religion, some critics have argued that he was sympathetic to deism.

[ 170 ] Other critics have argued that Kant's moral conception moves from deism to theism (as moral theism), for example Allen W. Wood, [ 171 ] as well as Merold Westphal .

[ 172 ] As for Kant's book Religion within the Bounds of Mere Reason , it was emphasized that Kant reduced religiosity to rationality, religion to morality, and Christianity to ethics; [ 173 ] however, many interpreters, including Wood, [ 174 ] alongside Lawrence Pasternack, [ 175 ] now agree with Stephen Palmquist 's claim that a better way of reading Kant's Religion is to see him as raising morality to the status of religion.

[ 176 ] Aesthetics [ edit ] See also: Kant's teleology Engraving of Kant by Friedrich Rosmäsler, 1822, from a painting by Todd Schorr Kant discusses the subjective nature of aesthetic qualities and experiences in Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (1764). Kant's contribution to aesthetic theory is developed in the Critique of the Power of Judgment (1790), where he investigates the possibility and logical status of "judgments of taste". In the "Critique of Aesthetic Judgment", the first major division of the Critique of the Power of Judgment , Kant used the term "aesthetic" in a manner that resembles its modern sense.

[ 177 ] In the Critique of Pure Reason , to note essential differences between judgments of taste, moral judgments, and scientific judgments, Kant abandoned the term "aesthetic" as "designating the critique of taste", noting that judgments of taste could never be "directed" by "laws a priori ".

[ 178 ] After Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten , who wrote Aesthetica (1750–58), [ f ] Kant was one of the first philosophers to develop and integrate aesthetic theory into a unified and comprehensive philosophical system, utilizing ideas that played an integral role throughout his philosophy.

[ 179 ] In the chapter "Analytic of the Beautiful" in the Critique of the Power of Judgment , Kant states that beauty is not a property of an artwork or natural phenomenon, but is instead consciousness of the pleasure that attends the 'free play' of the imagination and the understanding. Even though it appears that we are using reason to decide what is beautiful, the judgment is not a cognitive judgment, [ g ] "and is consequently not logical, but aesthetical".

[ 180 ] A pure judgement of taste is subjective since it refers to the emotional response of the subject and is based upon nothing but esteem for an object itself: it is a disinterested pleasure, and we feel that pure judgements of taste (i.e., judgements of beauty), lay claim to universal validity.

[ 181 ] This universal validity is not derived from a determinate concept of beauty but from common sense .

[ 182 ] Kant also believed that a judgment of taste shares characteristics with a moral judgment: both are disinterested, and we hold them to be universal.

[ 183 ] In the chapter "Analytic of the Sublime," Kant identifies the sublime as an aesthetic quality that, like beauty, is subjective, but unlike beauty, it refers to an indeterminate relationship between the faculties of the imagination and reason. It also shares the character of moral judgments in its engagement with reason.

[ 184 ] The feeling of the sublime, divided into two distinct modes (the mathematical and the dynamical sublime), [ 185 ] describes two subjective moments that concern the relationship of the faculty of the imagination to reason. Some commentators argue that Kant's critical philosophy contains a third kind of the sublime, the moral sublime, which is the aesthetic response to the moral law or a representation, and a development of the "noble" sublime in Kant's theory of 1764.

[ 186 ] The mathematical sublime results from the failure of the imagination to comprehend natural objects that appear boundless and formless, or appear "absolutely great".

[ 187 ] This imaginative failure is then recuperated through the pleasure taken in reason's assertion of the concept of infinity. In this move the faculty of reason proves itself superior to our fallible sensible self.

[ 188 ] In the dynamical sublime, there is the sense of annihilation of the sensible self as the imagination tries to comprehend a vast might. This power of nature threatens us but through the resistance of reason to such sensible annihilation, the subject feels a pleasure and a sense of the human moral vocation. This appreciation of moral feeling through exposure to the sublime helps to develop moral character. Kant developed a theory of humor , [ 189 ] which has been interpreted as an "incongruity" theory. He illustrated his theory of humor by telling three narrative jokes in the Critique of Judgment . He thought that the physiological impact of humor is akin to that of music.

[ 190 ] Kant developed a distinction between an object of art as a material value subject to the conventions of society and the transcendental condition of the judgment of taste as a "refined" value in his Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Aim (1784). In the Fourth and Fifth Theses of that work he identified all art as the "fruits of unsociableness" due to men's "antagonism in society" [ 191 ] and, in the Seventh Thesis, asserted that while such material property is indicative of a civilized state, only the ideal of morality and the universalization of refined value through the improvement of the mind "belongs to culture".

[ 192 ] Anthropology [ edit ] Kant lectured on anthropology , the study of human nature, for twenty-three years.

[ 193 ] His Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View was published in 1798. Transcripts of Kant's lectures on anthropology were published for the first time in 1997 in German.

[ 194 ] Kant was among the first people of his time to introduce anthropology as an intellectual area of study, long before the field gained popularity, and his texts are considered to have advanced the field. His point of view was to influence the works of later philosophers such as Martin Heidegger and Paul Ricœur .

[ 195 ] Kant was the first to suggest using a dimensionality approach to human diversity. He analyzed the nature of the Hippocrates - Galen four temperaments and plotted in two dimensions "what belongs to a human being's faculty of desire":
"his natural aptitude or natural predisposition" and "his temperament or sensibility".

[ 196 ] Cholerics were described as emotional and energetic, phlegmatics as balanced and weak, sanguines as balanced and energetic, and melancholics as emotional and weak. These two dimensions reappeared in all subsequent models of temperament and personality traits. Kant viewed anthropology in two broad categories: (1) the physiological approach, which he referred to as "what nature makes of the human being"; and (2) the pragmatic approach, which explores the things that a human "can and should make of himself".

[ 197 ] Views on race [ edit ] Kant's theory of race and his prejudicial beliefs are among the most contentious areas of recent Kant scholarship.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] While few, if any, dispute the overt racism and chauvinism present in his work, a more contested question is the degree to which it degrades or invalidates his other contributions. His most severe critics assert that Kant intentionally manipulated science to support chattel slavery and discrimination.

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] [ 198 ] Others acknowledge that he lived in an era of immature science, with many erroneous beliefs, some racist, all appearing decades before evolution, molecular genetics, and other sciences that today are taken for granted.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 203 ] [ 204 ] Kant was one of the most notable Enlightenment thinkers to defend racism . The philosopher Charles W. Mills is unequivocal: "Kant is also seen as one of the central figures in the birth of modern 'scientific' racism. Whereas other contributors to early racial thought like Carolus Linnaeus and Johann Friedrich Blumenbach had offered only 'empirical' (scare-quotes necessary!) observation, Kant produced a full-blown theory of race." [ 205 ] Using the four temperaments of ancient Greece, Kant proposed a hierarchy of racial categories including white Europeans, black Africans, and red Native Americans.

[ 206 ] Although he was a proponent of scientific racism for much of his career, Kant's views on race changed significantly in the last decade of his life, and he ultimately rejected racial hierarchies and European colonialism in Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1795).

[ 200 ] [ 207 ] [ 206 ] [ h ] Kant was an opponent of miscegenation , believing that whites would be "degraded" and that "fusing of races" is undesirable, for "not every race adopts the morals and customs of the Europeans". He states that "instead of assimilation, which was intended by the melting together of the various races, nature has here made a law of just the opposite".

[ 210 ] Kant was also an anti-Semite, believing that Jews were incapable of transcending material forces, which a moral order required. In this way, Jews are presented as the opposite of autonomous, rational Christians, and therefore incapable of being incorporated into an ethical Christian society. In his "Anthropology", Kant called the Jews "a nation of cheaters" and portrayed them as "a group that has followed not the path of transcendental freedom but that of enslavement to the material world".

[ 211 ] Mills wrote that Kant has been "sanitized for public consumption", his racist works conveniently ignored.

[ 212 ] Robert Bernasconi stated that Kant "supplied the first scientific definition of race".

Emmanuel Chukwudi Eze is credited with bringing Kant's contributions to racism to light in the 1990s among Western philosophers, who he believed often glossed over this part of his life and works.

[ 213 ] Pauline Kleingeld argues that, while Kant "did defend a racial hierarchy until at least the end of the 1780s", his views on race changed significantly in works published in the last decade of his life. In particular, she argues that Kant rejected past views related to racial hierarchies and the diminished rights or moral status of non-whites in Perpetual Peace (1795). This work also saw him providing extended arguments against European colonialism , which he claimed was morally unjust and incompatible with the equal rights held by indigenous populations. Kleingeld argues that this shift in Kant's views later in life has often been forgotten or ignored in the literature on Kant's racist anthropology, and that the shift suggests a belated recognition of the fact that racial hierarchy was incompatible with a universalized moral framework.

[ 200 ] While Kant's racist rhetoric is indicative of the state of scholarship and science during the 18th century, German philosopher Daniel-Pascal Zorn explains the risk of taking period quotations out of context. Many of Kant's most outrageous quotations are from a series of articles from 1777–1788, a public exchange among Kant, Herder, the natural scientist Georg Forster , and other scholars prominent in that period.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] [ 216 ] Kant asserts that all races of humankind are of the same species, challenging the position of Forster and others that the races were distinct species. While his commentary is clearly biased at times, certain extreme statements were patterned specifically to paraphrase or counter Forster and other authors.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] By considering the full arc of Kant's scholarship, Zorn notes the progression in both his philosophical and his anthropological works, "with which he argues, against the zeitgeist , for the unity of humanity".

[ 199 ] Influence and legacy [ edit ] Poster celebrating the 300 years of the University of Königsberg , 1844. Among others, Kant and Johann Friedrich Herbart are honored.

Kant's influence on Western thought has been profound.

[ i ] Although the basic tenets of Kant's transcendental idealism (i.e., that space and time are a priori forms of human perception rather than real properties and the claim that formal logic and transcendental logic coincide) have been claimed to be falsified by modern science and logic, [ 217 ] [ 218 ] [ 219 ] and no longer set the intellectual agenda of contemporary philosophers, Kant is credited with having innovated the way philosophical inquiry has been carried on at least up to the early nineteenth century. This shift consisted of several closely related innovations that, although highly contentious in themselves, have become important in subsequent philosophy and in the social sciences broadly construed: The human subject seen as the center of inquiry into human knowledge, such that it is impossible to philosophize about things as they exist independently of human perception or of how they are "for us"; [ 220 ] the notion that is possible to discover and systematically explore the inherent limits of the human ability to know entirely a priori ; the notion of the "categorical imperative", an assertion that people are naturally endowed with the ability and obligation toward right reason and acting. Perhaps his most famous quote is drawn from the Critique of Practical Reason : "Two things fill my mind with ever new and increasing admiration and reverence ... : the starry heavens above me and the moral law within me "; [ 221 ] the concept of "conditions of possibility", as in his notion of "the conditions of possible experience"; that is, that things, knowledge, and forms of consciousness rest on prior conditions that make them possible, so that, to understand or to know them, several conditions must be understood: the claim that objective experience is actively constituted or constructed by the functioning of the human mind; the concept of moral autonomy as central to humanity; and the assertion of the principle that human beings should be treated as ends rather than as mere means.

Kant's ideas have been incorporated into a variety of schools of thought. These include German idealism , [ 222 ] Marxism , [ 223 ] positivism , [ 224 ] phenomenology , [ 225 ] existentialism , [ 226 ] critical theory , [ 227 ] linguistic philosophy , [ 228 ] structuralism , [ 229 ] post-structuralism , [ 230 ] and deconstruction .

[ 231 ] Historical influence [ edit ] Statue of Kant in Kaliningrad , Russia. Replica by Harald Haacke [ de ] of the original by Christian Daniel Rauch was lost in 1945.

During his own life, much critical attention was paid to Kant's thought. He influenced Reinhold , Fichte , Schelling , Hegel , and Novalis during the 1780s and 1790s.

Samuel Taylor Coleridge was greatly influenced by Kant and helped to spread awareness of him, and of German Idealism generally, in the UK and the US. In his Biographia Literaria (1817), he credits Kant's ideas in coming to believe that the mind is not a passive, but an active agent in the apprehension of reality. Hegel was one of Kant's first major critics. In Hegel's view the entire project of setting a "transcendental subject" (i.e., human consciousness) apart from the living individual as well as from nature, history, and society was fundamentally flawed, [ 232 ] although parts of that very project could be put to good use in a new direction. Similar concerns motivated Hegel's criticisms of Kant's concept of moral autonomy, to which Hegel opposed an ethic focused on the "ethical life" of the community.

[ j ] In a sense, Hegel's notion of "ethical life" is meant to subsume, rather than replace, Kantian ethics . And Hegel can be seen as trying to defend Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "desires", by means of reason. Thus, in contrast to later critics like Nietzsche or Russell, Hegel shares some of Kant's concerns.

[ k ] Kant's thinking on religion was used in Britain by philosophers such as Thomas Carlyle [ 233 ] to challenge the nineteenth-century decline in religious faith. British Catholic writers, notably G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc , followed this approach.

[ 234 ] Criticisms of Kant were common in the realist views of the new positivism at that time.

Arthur Schopenhauer was strongly influenced by Kant's transcendental idealism . Like Gottlob Ernst Schulze , Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi , and Fichte before him, Schopenhauer was critical of Kant's theory of the thing-in-itself. Things-in-themselves, they argued, are neither the cause of what we observe, nor are they completely beyond our access. Ever since the Critique of Pure Reason , philosophers have been critical of Kant's theory of the thing-in-itself. Many have argued that, if such a thing exists beyond experience, then one cannot posit that it affects us causally, since that would entail stretching the category "causality" beyond the realm of experience.

[ l ] With the success and wide influence of Hegel's writings, Kant's own influence began to wane, but a re-examination of his ideas began in Germany in 1865 with the publication of Kant und die Epigonen by Otto Liebmann , whose motto was "Back to Kant". There proceeded an important revival of Kant's theoretical philosophy, known as Neo-Kantianism . Kant's notion of "critique" has been more broadly influential. The early German Romantics, especially Friedrich Schlegel in his "Athenaeum Fragments", used Kant's reflexive conception of criticism in their Romantic theory of poetry.

[ 235 ] Also in aesthetics, Clement Greenberg , in his classic essay "Modernist Painting", uses Kantian criticism, what Greenberg refers to as "immanent criticism", to justify the aims of abstract painting , a movement Greenberg saw as aware of the key limitation—flatness—that makes up the medium of painting.

[ 236 ] The French philosopher Michel Foucault was also greatly influenced by Kant's notion of "critique" and wrote several pieces on Kant for a re-thinking of the Enlightenment as a form of "critical thought". He went so far as to classify his own philosophy as a "critical history of modernity, rooted in Kant".

[ 237 ] Kant believed that mathematical truths were forms of synthetic a priori knowledge, which means they are necessary and universal, yet known through the a priori intuition of space and time, as transcendental preconditions of experience.

[ 238 ] Kant's often brief remarks about mathematics influenced the mathematical school known as intuitionism , a movement in philosophy of mathematics opposed to David Hilbert 's formalism , and Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell 's logicism .

[ m ] Influence on modern thinkers [ edit ] West German postage stamp, 1974, commemorating the 250th anniversary of Kant's birth With his Perpetual Peace , Kant is considered to have foreshadowed many of the ideas that have come to form the democratic peace theory , one of the main controversies in political science .

[ 239 ] More concretely, constructivist theorist Alexander Wendt proposed that the anarchy of the international system could evolve from the "brutish" Hobbesian anarchy understood by realist theorists, through Lockean anarchy, and ultimately a Kantian anarchy in which states would see their self-interests as inextricably linked to the well being of other states, thus transforming international politics into a far more peaceful form.

[ 240 ] Prominent recent Kantians include the British philosophers P. F. Strawson , [ n ] Onora O'Neill , [ 241 ] and Quassim Cassam , [ 242 ] and the American philosophers Wilfrid Sellars , [ 243 ] Lewis White Beck [ 244 ] [ 245 ] and Christine Korsgaard .

[ o ] Due to the influence of Strawson and Sellars, among others, there has been a renewed interest in Kant's view of the mind. Central to many debates in philosophy of psychology and cognitive science is Kant's conception of the unity of consciousness.

[ p ] Jürgen Habermas and John Rawls are two significant political and moral philosophers whose work is strongly influenced by Kant's moral philosophy.

[ q ] They have argued against relativism, [ 246 ] supporting the Kantian view that universality is essential to any viable moral philosophy.

Mou Zongsan 's study of Kant has been cited as a highly crucial part in the development of Mou's personal philosophy, namely New Confucianism . Widely regarded as the most influential Kant scholar in China, Mou's rigorous critique of Kant's philosophy—having translated all three of Kant's critiques —served as an ardent attempt to reconcile Chinese and Western philosophy whilst increasing pressure to Westernize in China.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] East German commemorative coin honoring Kant, 1974 Because of the thoroughness of Kant's paradigm shift, his influence extends well beyond this to thinkers who neither specifically refer to his work nor use his terminology. Kant's influence extended to the social, behavioral, and physical sciences—as in the sociology of Max Weber , the psychology of Jean Piaget , and Carl Jung .

[ 249 ] [ 250 ] Kant's work on mathematics and synthetic a priori knowledge is also cited by the theoretical physicist Albert Einstein as an early influence on his intellectual development, although it was one which he later criticized and rejected.

[ 251 ] In the 2020s, there was a renewed interest in Kant's theory of mind from the point of view of formal logic and computer science .

[ 252 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Unless otherwise noted, all citations are to The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant in English Translation , 16 vols., ed. Guyer, Paul, and Wood, Allen W. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. Citations in the article are to individual works per abbreviations in List of major works below.

Theoretical Philosophy, 1755–1770 . Ed. and trans. David Walford with Ralf Meerbote. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Lectures on Logic . Ed. and trans. J. Michael Young. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Opus postumum . Ed. Eckart Förster, trans. Eckart Förster and Michael Rosen. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993 Practical Philosophy . Ed. and trans. Mary J. Gregor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Religion and Rational Theology . Ed. and trans.

Allen W. Wood and George di Giovanni . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996 Lectures on Metaphysics . Ed. and trans. Karl Ameriks and Steve Naragon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Lectures on Ethics . Ed. Peter Heath and J.B. Schneewind, trans. Peter Heath. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Critique of Pure Reason . Ed. and trans. Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Correspondence . Ed. and trans. Arnulf Zweig. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Critique of the Power of Judgment . Ed. Paul Guyer, trans. Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

Theoretical Philosophy after 1781 . Ed. Henry Allison and Peter Heath, trans. Gary Hatfield, Michael Friedman, Henry Allison, and Peter Heath. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Notes and Fragments . Ed. Paul Guyer, trans. Curtis Bowman, Paul Guyer, and Frederick Rauscher. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

Anthropology, History, and Education , Ed. Günter Zöller and Robert B. Louden. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Lectures on Anthropology , Ed. Allen W. Wood and Robert B. Louden Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.

Natural Science , Ed. Eric Watkins. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.

List of major works [ edit ] Abbreviations used in body of article are boldface in brackets. Unless otherwise noted, pagination is to the critical Akademie edition, which can be found in the margins of the Cambridge translations.

1749: Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces ( Gedanken von der wahren Schätzung der lebendigen Kräfte ) 1755: Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens [ UNH ] ( Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels ) 1755: Brief Outline of Certain Meditations on Fire ( Meditationum quarundam de igne succinta delineatio ( master's thesis under Johann Gottfried Teske )) [ 253 ] [ 254 ] [ 255 ] [ 256 ] 1755: A New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition ( Principiorum primorum cognitionis metaphysicae nova dilucidatio ( doctoral thesis )) [ 257 ] [ r ] 1756: The Use in Natural Philosophy of Metaphysics Combined with Geometry, Part I: Physical Monadology [ PM ] ( Metaphysicae cum geometrica iunctae usus in philosophia naturali, cuius specimen I. continet monadologiam physicam , abbreviated as Monadologia Physica (thesis as a prerequisite of associate professorship)) [ 258 ] 1762: The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures ( Die falsche Spitzfindigkeit der vier syllogistischen Figuren ) 1763: The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God ( Der einzig mögliche Beweisgrund zu einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes ) 1763: Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy [ NQ ] ( Versuch den Begriff der negativen Größen in die Weltweisheit einzuführen ) 1764: Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime [ OFBS ] ( Beobachtungen über das Gefühl des Schönen und Erhabenen ) 1764: Essay on the Illness of the Head ( Über die Krankheit des Kopfes ) 1764: Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (the Prize Essay ) [ PNTM ] ( Untersuchungen über die Deutlichkeit der Grundsätze der natürlichen Theologie und der Moral ) 1766: Dreams of a Spirit-Seer [ DSS ] ( Träume eines Geistersehers ) [ 259 ] 1768: On the Ultimate Ground of the Differentiation of Regions in Space [1768] ( Von dem ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume ) [ 260 ] 1770: Dissertation on the Form and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible World [ ID ] ( De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis forma et principiis [doctoral thesis]) [ 261 ] [ 262 ] [ 263 ] 1775: On the Different Races of Man ( Über die verschiedenen Rassen der Menschen ) 1781: First edition of the Critique of Pure Reason [ CPuR A ] [ 264 ] ( Kritik der reinen Vernunft ) [ 265 ] 1783: Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics [ PFM ] ( Prolegomena zu einer jeden künftigen Metaphysik ) 1784: " An Answer to the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" [ WE?

] (" Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?

") [ 266 ] 1784: " Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose " [ UH ] (" Idee zu einer allgemeinen Geschichte in weltbürgerlicher Absicht ") 1785: "Determination of the Concept of a Human Race" [ DCHR ] ( Bestimmung des Begriffs einer Menschenrace ) 1785: Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals [ G ] ( Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten ) 1786: Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science [ MFNS ] ( Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft ) 1786: " What does it mean to orient oneself in thinking?

" [ OT ](" Was heißt: sich im Denken orientieren?

") 1786: Conjectural Beginning of Human History [ CB ] ( Mutmaßlicher Anfang der Menschengeschichte ) 1787: Second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason [ CPuR B ] [ 267 ] ( Kritik der reinen Vernunft ) [ 268 ] 1788: Critique of Practical Reason [ CPracR ] ( Kritik der praktischen Vernunft ) [ 269 ] 1790: Critique of Judgment [ CPJ ] ( Kritik der Urteilskraft ) [ 270 ] 1793: Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason [ RBMR ] ( Die Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der bloßen Vernunft ) [ 41 ] [ 271 ] 1793: On the Old Saw: That May be Right in Theory But It Won't Work in Practice [ TP ] (Über den Gemeinspruch: Das mag in der Theorie richtig sein, taugt aber nicht für die Praxis) 1795: Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch [ 272 ] [ PP ] (" Zum ewigen Frieden ") [ 273 ] 1797: Metaphysics of Morals [ MM ] ( Metaphysik der Sitten ). First part is The Doctrine of Right, which has often been published separately as The Science of Right.

1798: Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View [ APPV ] ( Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht ) 1798: Conflict of Faculties [ CF ] [ 274 ] ( Der Streit der Fakultäten ) [ 275 ] 1800: Logic ( Logik ) 1803: On Pedagogy ( Über Pädagogik ) [ 276 ] 1804: Opus Postumum [ OP ] 1817: Lectures on Philosophical Theology ( Immanuel Kants Vorlesungen über die philosophische Religionslehre edited by K.H.L. Pölitz) [The English edition of A.W. Wood & G.M. Clark (Cornell, 1978) is based on Pölitz' second edition, 1830, of these lectures.] [ s ] Collected works in German [ edit ] Wilhelm Dilthey inaugurated the Academy edition (the Akademie-Ausgabe abbreviated as AA or Ak ) of Kant's writings ( Gesammelte Schriften , Königlich-Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften , Berlin, 1902–38) in 1895, [ 277 ] and served as its first editor. The volumes are grouped into four sections: I. Kant's published writings (vols. 1–9), II. Kant's correspondence (vols. 10–13), III. Kant's literary remains, or Nachlass (vols. 14–23), and IV. Student notes from Kant's lectures (vols. 24–29).

An electronic version is also available: Elektronische Edition der Gesammelten Werke Immanuel Kants (vols. 1–23).

Notes [ edit ] ^ UK : / k æ n t / , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] US : / k ɑː n t / ; [ 3 ] [ 4 ] German: [ɪˈmaːnu̯eːl kant] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] ^ Kant himself seems to have found his contribution not significant enough that he published his arguments in a newspaper commentary on the prize question and did not submit them to the Academy: "Whether the Earth has Undergone an Alteration of its Axial Rotation" .

Kant's Cosmogony . Translated by Hastie, William. Glasgow: James Maclehose. 1900 [1754]. pp.

1– 11 . Retrieved 29 March 2022 .

. The prize was instead awarded in 1756 to P. Frisi, who incorrectly argued against the slowing down of the spin.

[ 22 ] ^ Since he had written his last habilitation thesis 14 years earlier, a new habilitation thesis was required (see S.J. McGrath, Joseph Carew (eds.), Rethinking German Idealism , Palgrave Macmillan, 2016, p. 24).

^ In 1778, in response to one of these offers by a former pupil, Kant wrote: "Any change makes me apprehensive, even if it offers the greatest promise of improving my condition, and I am persuaded by this natural instinct of mine that I must take heed if I wish that the threads which the Fates spin so thin and weak in my case to be spun to any length. My great thanks, to my well-wishers and friends, who think so kindly of me as to undertake my welfare, but at the same time a most humble request to protect me in my current condition from any disturbance." [ 32 ] ^ More technically, Kant puts his general point that all genuine knowledge requires both sensory input and intellectual organization by saying that all knowledge requires both "intuitions" and "concepts" (e.g., A 50 / B 74). Intuitions and concepts are two different species of the genus "representation" ( Vorstellung ), Kant's most general term for any cognitive state (see A 320 / B 376–7). At the outset of the "Transcendental Aesthetic", Kant states that an "intuition" is our most direct or "immediate" kind of representation of objects, in contrast to a "concept" which always represents an object "through a detour ( indirecte )"—that is, merely by some "mark" or property that the object has (A 19 / B 33). In his logic textbook, Kant defines an intuition as a " singular representation"—that is, one that represents a particular object—while a concept is always a " universal ( repraesentation per notas communes )", which represents properties common to many objects ( Logic , §1, 9:91).

[ 80 ] ^ Beardsley, Monroe. "History of Aesthetics".

Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 1, section on "Toward a unified aesthetics", p. 25, Macmillan 1973. Baumgarten coined the term "aesthetics" and expanded, clarified, and unified Wolffian aesthetic theory, but had left the Aesthetica unfinished (See also: Tonelli, Giorgio. "Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten".

Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 1, Macmillan 1973). In Bernard's translation of the Critique of Judgment he indicates in the notes that Kant's reference in § 15 in regard to the identification of perfection and beauty is probably a reference to Baumgarten.

^ Kant's general discussions of the distinction between "cognition" and "conscious of" are also given in the Critique of Pure Reason (notably A320/B376), and section V and the conclusion of section VIII of his Introduction in Logic .

^ Kant wrote that "[Whites] contain all the impulses of nature in affects and passions, all talents, all dispositions to culture and civilization and can as readily obey as govern. They are the only ones who always advance to perfection." He describes South Asians as "educated to the highest degree but only in the arts and not in the sciences". He goes on that Hindustanis can never reach the level of abstract concepts and that a "great hindustani man" is one who has "gone far in the art of deception and has much money". He states that the Hindus always stay the way they are and can never advance. About black Africans, Kant wrote that "they can be educated but only as servants, that is they allow themselves to be trained". To Kant, "the Negro can be disciplined and cultivated, but is never genuinely civilized. He falls of his own accord into savagery." Native Americans, Kant opined, "cannot be educated". He calls them unmotivated, lacking affect, passion and love, and describes them as too weak for labor, unfit for any culture, and too phlegmatic for diligence. He said that Native Americans are "far below the Negro, who undoubtedly holds the lowest of all remaining levels by which we designate the different races". Kant stated that "Americans and Blacks cannot govern themselves. They thus serve only for slaves." [ 208 ] [ 209 ] ^ Oliver A. Johnson claims, "With the possible exception of Plato's Republic , ( Critique of Pure Reason ) is the most important philosophical book ever written." Article on Kant within the collection Great thinkers of the Western World , Ian P. McGreal, Ed., HarperCollins, 1992.

^ Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Natural Law: The Scientific Ways of Treating Natural Law, Its Place in Moral Philosophy, and Its Relation to the Positive Sciences . trans. T.M. Knox. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1975. Hegel's mature view and his concept of "ethical life" is elaborated in his Philosophy of Right . Hegel, Philosophy of Right . trans. T.M. Knox. Oxford University Press, 1967.

^ Robert Pippin's Hegel's Idealism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989) emphasizes the continuity of Hegel's concerns with Kant's. Robert Wallace, Hegel's Philosophy of Reality, Freedom, and God (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005) explains how Hegel's Science of Logic defends Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "inclinations", contra skeptics such as David Hume.

^ For a review of this problem and the relevant literature see The Thing in Itself and the Problem of Affection in the revised edition of Henry Allison's Kant's Transcendental Idealism .

^ Körner, Stephan , The Philosophy of Mathematics , Dover, 1986. For an analysis of Kant's writings on mathematics see, Friedman, Michael, Kant and the Exact Sciences , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1992.

^ Strawson, P.F., The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason . Routledge: 2004. When first published in 1966, this book forced many Anglo-American philosophers to reconsider Kant's Critique of Pure Reason .

^ Korsgaard, Christine.

Creating the Kingdom of Ends . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.

ISBN 978-0521496445 Not a commentary, but a defense of a broadly Kantian approach to ethics .

^ Brook, Andrew .

Kant and the Mind . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994. See also, Meerbote, R. "Kant's Functionalism ". In: J.C. Smith, ed.

Historical Foundations of Cognitive Science . Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1991. Brook has an article on Kant's View of the Mind in the Stanford Encyclopedia Archived 9 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ See Habermas, J.

Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action . Trans. Christian Lenhardt and Shierry Weber Nicholsen. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1996. For Rawls see, Rawls, John.

Theory of Justice Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1971. Rawls has a well-known essay on Kant's concept of good. See, Rawls, "Themes in Kant's Moral Philosophy" in Kant's Transcendental Deductions . Ed. Eckart Förster. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1989.

^ available online at Bonner Kant-Korpus Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

^ As noted by Allen W. Wood in his Introduction, p. 12. Wood further speculates that the lectures themselves were delivered in the Winter of 1783–84.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Kant" Archived 27 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

Collins English Dictionary .

^ "Kant" Archived 23 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ Wells, John C.

(2008).

Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman.

ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 .

^ Jones, Daniel (2011).

Roach, Peter ; Setter, Jane ; Esling, John (eds.).

Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6 .

^ "Immanuel" .

Duden (in German).

Archived from the original on 20 December 2020 . Retrieved 20 October 2018 .

^ "Kant" .

Duden (in German).

Archived from the original on 20 October 2018 . Retrieved 20 October 2018 .

^ "Cosmopolis" .

Koenigsberg-is-dead.de . 23 April 2001.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2009 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ a b Kuehn 2001 , p. 26.

^ R.K. Murray, "The Origin of Immanuel Kant's Family Name", Kantian Review 13 (1), March 2008, pp. 190–193.

^ Rosa Kohlheim, Volker Kohlheim, Duden – Familiennamen: Herkunft und Bedeutung von 20.000 Nachnamen , Bibliographisches Institut & F.A. Brockhaus AG, Mannheim 2005, p. 365.

^ Haupt, Viktor.

"Rede des Bohnenkönigs – Von Petersburg bis Panama – Die Genealogie der Familie Kant" (PDF) .

freunde-kants.com (in German). p. 7. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015.

^ Pasternack, Lawrence; Fugate, Courtney (2020).

"Kant's Philosophy of Religion" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2020 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 25 February 2021 .

^ Kuehn 2001, p. 47.

^ Kuehn 2001 , p. 177.

^ Kuehn 2001 , p. 169.

^ The American International Encyclopedia (New York: J.J. Little & Ives, 1954), Vol. IX.

^ Porter, Burton (2010).

What the Tortoise Taught Us: The Story of Philosophy . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p.

133 .

^ "Die Freimaurer im Alten Preußen 1738–1806" (PDF) (in German).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 November 2020.

^ Kuehn 2001 , p. 94.

^ Kuehn 2001 , p. 98.

^ Eric Watkins (ed.), Immanuel Kant: Natural Science , Cambridge University Press, 2012: "Thoughts on the true estimation..." Archived 7 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Schönfeld, Martin (2000).

The Philosophy of the Young Kant: The Precritical Project . Oxford University Press. p. 84.

ISBN 978-0195132182 .

^ a b Brush, Stephen G. (2014).

A History of Modern Planetary Physics: Nebulous Earth . Cambridge University Press. p.

7 .

ISBN 978-0521441711 .

^ See: Kant, I. (1756a) "Von den Ursachen der Erderschütterungen bei Gelegenheit des Unglücks, welches die westliche Länder von Europa gegen das Ende des vorigen Jahres betroffen hat" [On the causes of the earthquakes on the occasion of the disaster which affected the western countries of Europe towards the end of last year] In: Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences), ed.s (1902) Kant's gesammelte Schriften [Kant's collected writings] (in German) Berlin, Germany: G. Reimer. vol. 1, pp. 417–427.

Kant, I. (1756b) "Geschichte und Naturbeschreibung der merkwürdigsten Vorfälle des Erdbebens, welches an dem Ende des 1755sten Jahres einen großen Theil der Erde erschüttert hat" [History and description of the nature of the most remarkable events of the earthquake which shook a large part of the Earth at the end of the year 1755], ibid. pp. 429–461.

Kant, I. (1756c) "Immanuel Kants fortgesetzte Betrachtung der seit einiger Zeit wahrgenommenen Erderschütterungen" [Immanuel Kant's continued consideration of the earthquakes that were felt some time ago], ibid. pp. 463–472.

Amador, Filomena (2004) "The causes of 1755 Lisbon earthquake on Kant" In: Escribano Benito, J.J.; Español González, L.; Martínez García, M.A., ed.s.

Actas VIII Congreso de la Sociedad Española de Historia de las Ciencias y de las Técnicas [Proceedings of the Eighth Congress of the Spanish Society of the History of the Sciences and Technology] (in English) Logroño, Spain: Sociedad Española de Historia de las Ciencias y de las Técnicas (Universidad de la Rioja), vol. 2, pp. 485–495.

^ a b Richards, Paul (1974). "Kant's Geography and Mental Maps".

Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers (61): 1– 16.

doi : 10.2307/621596 .

ISSN 0020-2754 .

JSTOR 621596 .

^ Elden, Stuart (2009).

"Reassessing Kant's geography" (PDF) .

Journal of Historical Geography .

35 (1): 3– 25.

doi : 10.1016/j.jhg.2008.06.001 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2019 .

^ Gamow, George (1947).

One Two Three... Infinity . New York: Viking P. pp. 300ff.

^ Cf., for example, Susan Shell, The Embodiment of Reason (Chicago, 1996) ^ Watkins, Erik (2009).

Kant's Critique of Pure Reason: Background Source Materials . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 276.

ISBN 978-0521781626 .

^ a b Smith, Homer W.

(1952).

Man and His Gods . New York: Grosset & Dunlap . p.

404 .

^ Kant, PFM 4:260 ^ Christopher Kul-Want and Andrzej Klimowski, Introducing Kant (Cambridge: Icon Books, 2005).

[ page needed ] ISBN 978-1840466645 ^ Kant, CPuR A188-211/B233-56 ^ Dorrien, Gary (2012).

Kantian Reason and Hegelian Spirit: The Idealistic Logic of Modern Theology . Malden, MA: John Wiley & Sons. p. 37.

ISBN 978-0470673317 .

^ Kuehn 2001 , pp. 250–254.

^ Copleston, Frederick Charles (2003).

The Enlightenment: Voltaire to Kant . p. 146.

^ Sassen, Brigitte.

Kant's Early Critics: The Empiricist Critique of the Theoretical Philosophy . 2000.

^ Ein Jahrhundert deutscher Literaturkritik , vol. III, Der Aufstieg zur Klassik in der Kritik der Zeit (Berlin, 1959), p. 315; as quoted in Gulyga, Arsenij.

Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought . Trans. Marijan Despaltović. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1987.

^ Kuehn 2001 , pp. 268–269.

^ Guyer, Paul (2006).

The Cambridge Companion to Kant and Modern Philosophy . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 631.

ISBN 978-0521823036 .

^ a b Werner S. Pluhar, Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Archived 4 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine . 2009.

Description Archived 1 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine & Contents.

With an Introduction Archived 3 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine by Stephen Palmquist. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, ^ "Open letter by Kant denouncing Fichte's Philosophy" .

Korpora.org (in German).

Archived from the original on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ Peirce, C.S., Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce , v. 1, (HUP, 1960), 'Kant and his Refutation of Idealism' p. 15 ^ Kant, Immanuel, Logic , G.B. Jäsche (ed), R.S. Hartman, W. Schwarz (translators), Indianapolis, 1984, p. xv.

^ Karl Vorländer, Immanuel Kant: Der Mann und das Werk , Hamburg: Meiner, 1992, p. II 332.

^ "Heine on Immanuel Kant" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved 10 July 2015 .

^ Examined Lives, From Socrates to Nietzsche , James Miller p. 284 ^ Immanuel Kant and the Bo(a)rders of Art History Mark Cheetham, in The Subjects of Art History: Historical Objects in Contemporary Perspectives , p. 16 ^ Beyer, Susanne (25 July 2014).

"Resurrecting Königsberg: Russian City Looks to German Roots" .

Spiegel Online .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2018 . Retrieved 3 February 2018 .

^ Zieliński, Miłosz J. (2018).

"Kant's Future: Debates about the Identity of Kaliningrad Oblast" .

Slavic Review .

77 (4): 937– 956.

doi : 10.1017/slr.2018.291 .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

JSTOR 26644305 .

^ "Kaliningrad Struggles With German Legacy" .

DW News . 2 July 2005 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ Dempsey, Judy (1 July 2005).

"Russian enclave lands in diplomatic donnybrook" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ "Iran the Topic in Baltic Sea Meeting" . Agence-France Press. 3 July 2005 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 – via DW News.

^ Ypi, Lea (20 April 2024).

"Kant and the case for peace" .

Financial Times .

ISSN 0307-1766 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ "Executive order on establishing Immanuel Kant University" .

President of Russia . 13 October 2010 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ Kant CPuR Bxxviii–Bxxx ^ di Giovanni 2005 .

^ Rohlf 2020 , §2.1.

^ Kant, CPuR A804–05/B833 ^ Kant, CPuR Bxxx ^ Guyer 2014 , pp. 7–8.

^ Jankowiak 2023 .

^ Guyer 2014 , pp. 6–8.

^ di Giovanni, George. (1996) "Translator's Introduction", In Religion and Rational Theology . Cambridge University Press. p.49, citing Kant in correspondence with Stäudlin.

^ Rohlf 2020 .

^ Rohlf, Michael.

"Immanuel Kant" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2019 . Retrieved 29 May 2019 .

^ Kant, CPuR B135 ^ Guyer 2014 , p. 51.

^ Kant, CPuR B1–3 ^ Kant, CPuR A6–8/B10–12 ^ Kant, CPuR B11 ^ a b Guyer 2014 , pp. 52–54.

^ Hume, David.

An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding . Section 4; Part 1.

^ Kant, CPuR B3–4 ^ Kant, CPuR B14–17 ^ Guyer 2014 , p. 55.

^ Kant, CPuR A15/B29, emphases added ^ Guyer 2014 , pp. 32, 61.

^ Rohlf 2020 , §2.12.

^ Guyer 2014 , pp. 60–61.

^ Kant, CPuR A51/B75 ^ Kant, CPuR Bxvi–xviii ^ Rohlf 2020 , §2.2.

^ Jankowiak 2023 , 2(g).

^ Guyer 2014 , ch. 4.

^ Kant, CPuR B21 ^ Kant, CPuR Axi–xii ^ Jankowiak 2023 , §2(d).

^ a b Rohlf 2020 , §3.

^ Kant CPuR A43/B59–60, A369 ^ Kant CPuR A28/B44, A34–35/B51–51 ^ Stang 2022 , §2.3.

^ Guyer 2014 , p. 60.

^ Allison, Henry E. (2004).

Kant's Transcendental Idealism: An Interpretation and Defense . Yale University Press. pp.

25– 28.

ISBN 978-0300102666 .

^ Rohlf 2020 , §§3.1–3.2.

^ Stang 2022 , §§4–5.

^ Langton, Rae (1998).

Kantian Humility: Our Ignorance of Things in Themselves . Oxford University Press. pp.

105– 107.

ISBN 978-0199243174 .

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , pp. 4–13.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 8.

^ Guyer 2014 , pp. 89–90.

^ Kant, CPuR Axi ^ Jankowiak 2023 , §2(e).

^ Rohlf 2020 , §4.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 9.

^ Kant, CPuR B131-32 ^ Rohlf 2020 , §4.1.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , pp. 9–10.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , pp. 10–11.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 11.

^ see Kant, CPuR A182–26/B224–36 ^ see Kant, CPuR A186–211/B232–56 ^ see Kant, CPuR A211-15/B256-62 ^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , pp. 11–12.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 12.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , pp. 12–13.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 13.

^ Kant, CPuR A5/B8 ^ Guyer, Paul (1987).

Kant and the Claims of Knowledge . Cambridge University Press. pp.

52– 55.

ISBN 978-0521317245 .

^ a b Jankowiak 2023 , §2(g).

^ a b Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 15.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 14.

^ Jankowiak 2023 , §2(g.i).

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 16.

^ a b Jankowiak 2023 , §2(g.ii).

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , pp. 16–17.

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 17.

^ Jankowiak 2023 , §2(g.iii).

^ Guyer & Wood 1998 , p. 18.

^ Kant, CPuR A806/B834 ^ a b c Kant, CPuR A448/B467 ^ Kant, CPuR A533–34/B561–62 ^ Kant, CPuR A800–02/B 828–30 ^ Susanne Bobzien , 'Die Kategorien der Freiheit bei Kant', in Kant: Analysen, Probleme, Kritik Vol. 1, 1988, 193–220.

^ Driver 2007, p. 83.

^ Johnson 2008 .

^ Schneewind 2010 , p. 261.

^ Kant, G . 4:420–421, 436.

^ Wood, Allen. (2017) Formulas of the Moral Law . Cambridge University Press, pp. 74–78 ^ a b Kant, G 4:421 ^ Kant, G 4:429 ^ Kant, G 4:431; cf. 4:432 ^ Kant, G 4:440; cf. 4:432, 434, 438 ^ Kant, G 4:439; cf. 4:433, 437–439 ^ Wood, Allen. (2017) Formulas of the Moral Law . Cambridge University Press, p.6 ^ Caygill, Howard. (1995) A Kant Dictionary . Blackwell Publishing, p. 289, citing GMM .

^ Kant, G 4:403.

^ Driver 2007, p. 88.

^ Kant, GMM 4:392.

^ Gregor, Mary J. (1996) "Translator's note on the text of The metaphysics of morals". In Practical Philosophy . The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant, p. 355.

^ a b c Wood 2006 , p. 68.

^ Kant, MM . 6:382–391.

^ Wood 2006 , p. 69.

^ Wood 2006 , p. 70.

^ Kant, PP 8:349–353 ^ Manfred Riedel, Between Tradition and Revolution: The Hegelian Transformation of Political Philosophy , Cambridge 1984 ^ Kant, PP 8:360–362 ^ Hassner, Pierre. "Immanuel Kant", in History of Political Philosophy , edited by Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, The University of Chicago Press, 1987, pp. 581–582 ^ Hassner, Pierre. "Immanuel Kant", in History of Political Philosophy , edited by Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, The University of Chicago Press, 1987, p. 603 ^ Kant, p. 8:352 ^ Kant, PP 8:352 ^ Kant, pp. 8:349–8:353 ^ Kant, MM 6:355 ^ Gregor, Mary J. "Introduction", in Practical Philosophy . Cambridge University Press, p. 313 ^ Ripstein, Arthur. (2009) Force and Freedom: Kant's Legal and Political Philosophy . Harvard University Press, p. 9.

^ Karl Leonhard Reinhold, Letters on the Kantian Philosophy (1786), 3rd Letter ^ Johann Schultz, Exposition of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (1784), 141.

^ Kant, RBMR Part IV, First part, First section [6:157–163] ^ E.g., Walsh, W.H., 1967, "Kant, Immanuel: Philosophy of Religion", The Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Volume Four, Paul Edwards (ed.), New York: Macmillan Publishing Co. Inc. & The Free Press, 322.

^ Pasternack, Lawrence; Rossi, Philip.

"Kant's Philosophy of Religion" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2014 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2010 . Retrieved 18 October 2019 .

^ For example Peter Byrne, who wrote about Kant's relationship with deism. Byrne, Peter (2007), Kant on God , London: Ashgate, p. 159.

^ Wood, Allen W. (1970), Kant's moral religion , London and Ithaca: Cornell University Press, p. 16.

^ Westphal, Merold (2010), The Emergence of Modern Philosophy of Religion , in Taliaferro, Charles, Draper, Paul and Quinn, Philip (editors), A Companion to Philosophy of Religion , Oxford: Blackwell, p. 135.

^ Iţu, Mircia (2004), Dumnezeu şi religia în concepţia lui Immanuel Kant din Religia în limitele raţiunii , in Boboc, Alexandru and Mariş, N.I. (editors), Studii de istoria filosofiei universale , volume 12, Bucharest: Romanian Academy.

^ Wood, Allen W. (2020), Kant and Religion , Cambridge University Press, p. 2.

^ See e.g., Lawrence Pasternack, Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Kant on Religion within the Boundaries of Mere Reason (New York, Routledge, 2014), pp. 239–240.

^ Palmquist, Stephen (1992), "Does Kant Reduce Religion to Morality?", Kant-Studien 83.2, pp. 129–148.

^ Critique of Judgment in "Kant, Immanuel", Encyclopedia of Philosophy , volume 5, Macmillan, 2006, accessed on 16 November 2024 ^ Kant, CPuR A22/B36 ^ German Idealism in "History of Aesthetics" Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol 1. Macmillan, 1973.

^ Kant, CPJ §1 ^ Kant, CPJ §§ 20–22 ^ Kant, CPJ §40 ^ Guyer, Paul (1997).

Kant and the Claims of Taste . Harvard University Press. pp.

15– 20.

ISBN 978-0674500358 .

^ Clewis, Robert R. (2009).

The Kantian Sublime and the Revelation of Freedom . Cambridge University Press. pp.

48– 52.

ISBN 978-0521760867 .

^ Kant, CPJ §24 ^ Clewis, Robert (2009).

"The Kantian Sublime and the Revelation of Freedom" . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 8 December 2011 .

^ Kant, CPJ §§23–25 ^ Kant, CPJ §§25–26 ^ Kant, CPJ §54 ^ Jakobidze-Gitman, Alexander (2020). "Kant's Situated Approach to Musicking and Joking".

Journal of Interdisciplinary Music Studies .

10 : 17– 33.

doi : 10.25364/24.10:2020.2 .

^ Kant, UH 8:20–22 ^ Kant, UH 8:24–26.

^ Wilson, Holly (2006).

Kant's Pragmatic Anthropology . Albany: State University of New York Press. p.

7 .

ISBN 978-0791468494 .

^ Thomas Sturm, Kant und die Wissenschaften vom Menschen (Paderborn: Mentis Verlag, 2009).

^ Piercey, Robert; Philosophy Documentation Center (2011).

"Kant and the Problem of Hermeneutics: Heidegger and Ricoeur on the Transcendental Schematism" .

Idealistic Studies .

41 (3): 187– 202.

doi : 10.5840/idstudies201141315 .

ISSN 0046-8541 .

^ Kant APPV 7:285 ^ Kant APPV 7:119 ^ a b c d Mikkelsen, Jon M., ed. (2013).

Kant and the Concept of Race . Albany, New York: State University of New York Press. pp.

12– 30.

ISBN 978-1438443614 .

^ a b c d Zorn, Daniel-Pascal (2020).

"Kant—a Racist?" .

Public History Weekly .

2020 (8).

doi : 10.1515/phw-2020-17156 .

ISSN 2197-6376 .

S2CID 225247836 .

^ a b c Kleingeld 2007 , pp. 573–592.

^ Eze, Emmanuel (1997). "The Color of Reason: the Idea of 'Race' in Kant's Anthropology". In Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (ed.).

Postcolonial African Philosophy: A Critical Reader . Blackwell. pp.

103– 140 . Retrieved 20 April 2023 .

^ Serequeberhan, T. (1996). "Eurocentrism in Philosophy: the Case of Immanuel Kant".

The Philosophical Forum .

S2CID 170547963 .

^ "The Philosophy Junkie: Immanuel Kant's Racism and Sexism with Professors Lucy Allais and Helga Varden on Apple Podcasts" .

Apple Podcasts . Retrieved 20 April 2023 .

^ Geismann, Georg (1 January 2022).

"Why Kant Was Not a 'Racist' " .

Jahrbuch für Recht und Ethik/Annual Review of Law and Ethics .

30 (1): 263– 357.

doi : 10.3790/jre.30.1.263 .

ISSN 0944-4610 .

S2CID 255676303 .

^ Mills 2017 , p. 95.

^ a b Kant, Immanuel (1997) [1775, 1777]. "On the Different Races of Man". In Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (ed.).

Race and the Enlightenment: a reader . Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell. pp.

38– 49.

ISBN 063120136X .

OCLC 34663347 .

^ Mills 2017 , pp. 91–112.

^ Mills 2017 , pp. 169–193.

^ Bowersox 2016 .

^ Kant APPV 7:320 ^ Shrage 2019 .

^ Mills 2017 , pp. 95–97.

^ Bouie 2018 .

^ Mikkelsen, Jon M., ed. (2013).

Kant and the Concept of Race: late eighteenth-century writings . Jon M. Mikkelsen. Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-1461943129 .

OCLC 861693001 .

^ Kuehn 2001 , pp. 298–301, 343–345.

^ cf. Kant, DCHR 8:91–106 ^ Strawson, Peter.

Bounds of Sense: Essay on Kant's "Critique of Pure Reason" .

ASIN 0415040302 .

^ "Einstein on Kant" . University of Pittsburgh.

Archived from the original on 9 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 September 2020 .

^ Perrick, Michael (1985). "Kant and Kripke on Necessary Empirical Truths".

Mind .

94 (376): 596– 598.

doi : 10.1093/mind/XCIV.376.596 .

ISSN 0026-4423 .

JSTOR 2254731 .

^ Stephen Palmquist, "The Architectonic Form of Kant's Copernican Logic", Metaphilosophy 17:4 (October 1986), pp. 266–288; revised and reprinted as Chapter III of Kant's System of Perspectives Archived 14 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine : An architectonic interpretation of the Critical philosophy (Lanham: University Press of America, 1993).

^ Kant, CPracR 5:161 ^ Beiser, Frederick C.

(2002).

German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism, 1781–1801 .

Harvard University Press . pp. Part I.

ISBN 978-0674007703 .

^ McLellan, David (1998).

Marxism after Marx . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

22– 25.

ISBN 978-0333738399 .

^ Kolakowski, Leszek (1972).

Positivist Philosophy: From Hume to the Vienna Circle . Penguin Books. pp.

67– 69.

ISBN 0140212248 .

^ Carman, Taylor (2008).

Merleau-Ponty . Routledge. pp.

34– 36.

ISBN 978-0415360616 .

^ Kaufmann, Walter (1989).

Existentialism: From Dostoevsky to Sartre . Meridian Books. pp.

9– 12.

ISBN 978-0452009301 .

^ Habermas, Jürgen (1987).

The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity: Twelve Lectures . MIT Press. pp.

109– 113.

ISBN 978-0745608303 .

^ Dummett, Michael (1996).

Origins of Analytical Philosophy . Harvard University Press. pp.

45– 47.

ISBN 978-0674644731 .

^ Piaget, Jean (2001).

Structuralism . Routledge. pp.

10– 12.

ISBN 978-0415262491 .

^ Norris, Christopher (2003).

Deconstruction: Theory and Practice . Routledge. pp.

40– 42.

ISBN 978-0415061742 .

^ Culler, Jonathan (2007).

On Deconstruction: Theory and Criticism after Structuralism . Cornell University Press. pp.

53– 56.

ISBN 978-0801479182 .

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1827).

Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Basic Outline . Heidelberg. pp.

14– 15.

^ Cody, David.

"Carlyle: Sources and Influence" .

The Victorian Web . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

^ Morse, David (2000).

The Age of Virtue: British Culture from the Restoration to Romanticism . Macmillan. pp.

198– 200.

ISBN 978-0333913918 .

^ Schlegel, Friedrich. "Athenaeum Fragments", in Philosophical Fragments . Trans. Peter Firchow. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1991. See especially fragments Nos. 1, 43, 44.

^ Greenberg, Clement. "Modernist Painting", in The Philosophy of Art , ed. Alex Neill and Aaron Ridley, McGraw-Hill, 1995.

^ See "Essential Works of Foucault: 1954–1984 vol. 2: Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology". Ed. by James Faubion, Trans. Robert Hurley et al. New York City: The New Press, 1998 (2010 reprint). See "Foucault, Michel, 1926 –" entry by Maurice Florence.

^ For a discussion and qualified defense of this position, see Stephen Palmquist, "A Priori Knowledge in Perspective: (I) Mathematics, Method and Pure Intuition", The Review of Metaphysics 41:1 (September 1987), pp. 3–22.

^ Ray, James Lee (1998).

"Does Democracy Cause Peace?" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

1 : 27– 46.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.polisci.1.1.27 . Archived from the original on 17 February 2008.

^ Wendt, Alexander (1999).

Social Theory of International Politics . Cambridge University Press. pp. chapter 6.

^ Aridi, Sara (14 March 2017).

"Onora O'Neill Wins Holberg Prize for Academic Research" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2019 . Retrieved 9 January 2019 .

^ Cassam, Q.

The Possibility of Knowledge Oxford: 2009 ^ Sellars, Wilfrid, Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes . Ridgeview Publishing Company, 1967 ^ Dictionary of Modern American Philosphers . Shook, John R. Ed. Thoemmes Continuum, Bristol , 2005 p. 166 ISBN 9781843710370 Lewis White Beck on Google Books ^ "Lewis White Beck On Reasons and Causes", Guyer, Paul.

Journal on the History of Ideas July, 2002 63 (3) pp. 539–548 Lewis White Beck on researchgate.net ^ Habermas, J. (1994): The Unity of Reason in the Diversity of Its Voices. In: Habermas, J. (Ed.): Postmetaphysical Thinking. Political Essays , Cambridge, Massachusetts: 115–148.

^ Palmquist, Stephen (2010).

Cultivating Personhood: Kant and Asian Philosophy . Hong Kong: De Gruyter, Inc. p.

25 .

ISBN 978-3110226249 .

^ Wing-Cheuk, Chan (21 February 2006). "Mou Zongsan's Transformation of Kant's Philosophy".

Journal of Chinese Philosophy .

33 (1): 1.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6253.2006.00340.x .

^ Balanovskiy, Valentin (2016).

"Whether jung was a kantian?" .

Con-Textos Kantianos (4): 118– 126.

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.2550828 .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2020 . Retrieved 29 May 2020 .

^ Balanovskiy, Valentin (2017).

"Kant and Jung on the prospects of Scientific Psychology" (PDF) .

Estudos Kantianos .

5 (1): 357– 390.

doi : 10.36311/2318-0501.2017.v5n1.26.p375 . Retrieved 29 May 2020 .

^ Isaacson, Walter. "Einstein: His Life and Universe". p. 20.

^ Theodora Achourioti & Michiel van Lambalgen, 'A Formalization of Kant's Transcendental Logic', The Review of Symbolic Logic , 4 (2011), 254–289.

^ The thesis was submitted on 17 April 1755. "The public examination was held four weeks later on 13 May, and the degree was formally awarded on 12 June" (Eric Watkins, Kant: Natural Science , Cambridge University Press, 2012, p. 309).

^ Eric Watkins (ed.), Kant and the Sciences , Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 27.

^ Martin Schonfeld, The Philosophy of the Young Kant: The Precritical Project , Oxford University Press, 2000, p. 74.

^ Available online at Bonner Kant-Korpus Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

^ The thesis was publicly disputed on 27 September 1755 (Kuehn 2001, p. 100).

^ Kant's application for the position was unsuccessful. He defended it on 10 April 1756 (Kuehn 2001, p. 102).

^ Available online at Archive.org .

^ Immanuel Kant, "Concerning the ultimate ground of the differentiation of directions in space" Archived 16 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

^ The thesis was publicly disputed on 21 August 1770 (Kuehn 2001, p. 189).

^ Available online at Google Books Archived 3 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine .

^ English translation available online at Wikisource .

^ Immanuel Kant.

"The Critique of Pure Reason" . Etext.library.adelaide.edu.au. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ Immanuel Kant.

"Immanuel Kant: Kritik der reinen Vernunft – 1. Auflage – Kapitel 1" (in German). Projekt Gutenberg-DE.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2007 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ Frank-Christian Lilienweihs (10 June 1999).

"Immanuel Kant: Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklaerung?" . Prometheusonline.de.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2009 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ "Critique of Pure Reason" . Hkbu.edu.hk. 31 October 2003.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2009 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ "Immanuel Kant: Kritik der reinen Vernunft – 2. Auflage – Kapitel 1" (in German). Projekt Gutenberg-DE. 20 July 2009.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2005 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ Immanuel Kant.

"Immanuel Kant: Kritik der praktischen Vernunft – Kapitel 1" (in German). Projekt Gutenberg-DE.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2007 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ s:The Critique of Judgment ^ Immanuel Kant.

"Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone by Immanuel Kant 1793" . Marxists.org.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2009 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ "Immanuel Kant, "Perpetual Peace" " . Mountr Holyoke.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2019 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ "Immanuel Kant: Zum ewigen Frieden, 12.02.2004 (Friedensratschlag)" . Uni-kassel.de.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2009 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ "Kant, The Contest of Faculties" . Chnm.gmu.edu. 1798.

Archived from the original on 4 August 2011 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ Immanuel Kant.

"Immanuel Kant: Der Streit der Facultäten – Kapitel 1" (in German). Projekt Gutenberg-DE.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2007 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ Available online at DeutschesTextArchiv.de Archived 10 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Immanuel Kant, Notes and Fragments , Cambridge University Press, 2005, p. xvi.

Works cited [ edit ] Bernasconi, Robert (2010). "Defining Race Scientifically: A response to Michael Banton".

Ethnicities .

10 (1): 141– 148.

doi : 10.1177/14687968100100010802 .

ISSN 1468-7968 .

JSTOR 23890861 .

S2CID 143925406 .

Bouie, Jamelle (5 June 2018).

"How the Enlightenment Created Modern Race Thinking and Why We Should Confront It" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2020 .

Bowersox, Jeff (4 February 2016).

"Kant on the different human races (1777)" .

Black Central Europe .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2020 .

Caygill, Howard (1995).

A Kant Dictionary . Blackwell Publishing.

Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (1997a).

Postcolonial African Philosophy: A Critical Reader . Wiley. pp.

103– 131.

ISBN 978-0631203391 .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2020 .

Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (1997b).

Race and the Enlightenment: A Reader . Wiley. pp.

39– 48.

ISBN 978-0631201366 .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2020 .

Driver, Julia (2007).

Ethics: The Fundamentals . Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1405111546 .

di Giovanni, George (2005).

Freedom and Religion in Kant and His Immediate Successors . Cambridge University Press.

Guyer, Paul (2014).

Kant . Routledge.

Guyer, Paul; Wood, Alan W. (1998). "Introduction to the Critique of Pure Reason [Editors' Introduction]".

The Critique of Pure Reason . Cambridge University Press.

Jankowiak, Tim (2023).

Immanuel Kant . The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 4 March 2023 .

Johnson, Robert (2008).

"Kant's Moral Philosophy" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 11 September 2013 .

Kant, Immanuel (2010). Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (ed.).

"Kant on the Different Races of Man" (PDF) . UMass Amherst.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2020 .

Kleingeld, Pauline (October 2007).

"Kant's Second Thoughts on Race" (PDF) .

The Philosophical Quarterly .

57 (229): 573– 592.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9213.2007.498.x .

hdl : 11370/e15b6815-5eab-42d6-a789-24a2f6ecb946 .

S2CID 55185762 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2019 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

Kuehn, Manfred (2001).

Kant: a Biography . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521497046 .

Mills, Charles W. (2017).

Black Rights/White Wrongs: The Critique of Racial Liberalism . Oxford University Press. pp.

169– 193.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190245412.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0190245450 .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2020 .

Rohlf, Michael (2020). Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Immanuel Kant . The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 Edition).

Schneewind, J. B. (2010). "Autonomy, Obligation, and Virtue: An Overview of Kant's Moral Philosophy".

Essays on the History of Moral Philosophy . Oxford University Press.

Shrage, Laurie (18 March 2019).

"Should we continue to teach thinkers like Kant, Voltaire and Hume without mention of the harmful prejudices they helped legitimize?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 10 November 2022 .

Stang, Nicholas F. (2022). Edward N. Zalta & Uri Nodelman (ed.).

Kant's Transcendental Idealism . The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2022 Edition).

Wood, Allen (1999).

Kant's Ethical Thought . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521648363 .

Wood, Allen (2006). "Kant's Practical Philosophy". In Karl Ameriks (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to German Idealism . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0801486043 .

Wood, Allen (2008).

Kantian Ethics . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521671149 .

External links [ edit ] Immanuel Kant at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Works by Immanuel Kant at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Immanuel Kant at the Internet Archive Works by Immanuel Kant at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) KantPapers , authors and papers database powered by PhilPapers, focused on Kant, and located at Cornell University At the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Immanuel Kant: An Overview Aesthetics Logic Metaphysics Philosophy of Mind Philosophy of Religion Radical Evil Transcendental Idealism At the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Immanuel Kant Kant and Hume on Causality Kant and Hume on Morality Kant's Account of Reason Kant's Aesthetics and Teleology Kant's Critique of Metaphysics Kant's Moral Philosophy Kant's Philosophical Development Kant's Philosophy of Mathematics Kant's Philosophy of Religion Kant's Philosophy of Science Kant's Social and Political Philosophy Kant's Theory of Judgment Kant's Transcendental Arguments Kant's View of the Mind and Consciousness of Self Kant's Views on Space and Time Kantian Conceptualism/Nonconceptualism Leibniz's Influence on Kant Articles related to Immanuel Kant v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH Google Scholar MathSciNet Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐s6z5g
Cached time: 20250817043650
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.618 seconds
Real time usage: 3.016 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 26703/1000000
Revision size: 156564/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 984185/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 261398/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 587033/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.482/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26563984/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2264.208      1 -total
 25.07%  567.669      2 Template:Reflist
 14.83%  335.776      1 Template:Navboxes
 13.26%  300.232     48 Template:Cite_book
 10.16%  230.080     19 Template:Efn
 10.08%  228.166     14 Template:Navbox
  9.82%  222.411      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  9.55%  216.134     76 Template:Sfn
  6.67%  151.045     27 Template:Cite_web
  5.87%  132.966      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14631:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043650 and revision id 1305565512. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Immanuel_Kant&oldid=1305565512 " Categories : Immanuel Kant 1724 births 1804 deaths 18th-century anthropologists 18th-century essayists 18th-century German male writers 18th-century German philosophers 18th-century German writers 18th-century Prussian people 19th-century German anthropologists 19th-century German essayists German male essayists 19th-century German male writers 19th-century German non-fiction writers 19th-century German philosophers 19th-century Prussian people 19th-century social scientists Academic staff of the University of Königsberg Age of Enlightenment Enlightenment philosophers German epistemologists German agnostics German ethicists German idealists German logicians German Lutherans German male non-fiction writers German political philosophers Humor researchers Idealists Kantianism Kantian philosophers German lecturers Logicians Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Metaphilosophers Natural philosophers Ontologists People of the Age of Enlightenment German philosophers of art German philosophers of culture German philosophers of education German philosophers of history German philosophers of law Philosophers of literature Philosophers of logic German philosophers of mind German philosophers of religion German philosophers of science Philosophers of social science Philosophers of war German philosophy writers Political liberals (international relations) Theoretical historians University of Königsberg alumni Writers about religion and science Natural law ethicists Hidden categories: Pages with German IPA Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2011 Articles using Template:ASIN with an all-numeric value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2024 Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles containing German-language text Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 20:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Immanuel Kant 177 languages Add topic

