Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Education 3 Calling to the Priesthood 4 Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer 5 Bishop of Sant' Agata de Goti and final years 6 Veneration and legacy 7 Works Toggle Works subsection 7.1 Overview 7.2 Moral theology 7.3 Dogmatic Works 7.4 Mariology 7.5 Other Ascetical works 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Alphonsus Liguori 42 languages العربية Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina Magyar മലയാളം Malti مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Sicilianu Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Catholic bishop (1696–1787) Saint Alphonsus Liguori CSsR Bishop of Sant'Agata de' Goti Doctor of the Church Metropolis Benevento Diocese Sant'Agata de' Goti See Sant'Agata de' Goti Appointed 14 June 1762 Installed 20 June 1762 Term ended 26 June 1775 Predecessor Flaminius Danza Successor Onofrio de Rossi Orders Ordination 21 December 1726 Consecration 20 June 1762 by Ferdinando Maria de Rossi Personal details Born ( 1696-09-27 ) 27 September 1696 Marianella , Campania , Kingdom of Naples Died 1 August 1787 (1787-08-01) (aged 90) Pagani , Campania, Kingdom of Naples Denomination Catholic Church Sainthood Feast day 1 August 2 August ( General Roman Calendar 1839–1969) [ 1 ] Venerated in Catholic Church Title as Saint Bishop, Moral Theologian, Confessor and Doctor of the Church Beatified 15 September 1816 Rome, Papal States by Pope Pius VII Canonized 26 May 1839 Rome, Papal States by Pope Gregory XVI Patronage Pagani , Cancello , Naples (co-patron); arthritis , lawyers , confessors, moralists, vocations Shrines Basilica Sanctuary of St. Alphonsus di Liguori 1, Piazza Sant'Alfonso di Liguori, Pagani, Salerno , Italy National Shrine of St. Alphonsus Liguori Baltimore, MD Alphonsus Maria de Liguori CSsR (27 September 1696 – 1 August 1787) was an Italian Catholic bishop and saint , as well as a spiritual writer, composer, musician, artist, poet, lawyer, scholastic philosopher , and theologian. He founded the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer , known as the Redemptorists, in November 1732.

In 1762 he was appointed Bishop of Sant'Agata dei Goti . A prolific writer, he published nine editions of his Moral Theology in his lifetime, in addition to other devotional and ascetic works and letters. Among his best known works are The Glories of Mary and The Way of the Cross , the latter still used in parishes during Lenten devotions. He is also associated with the manualist tradition of moral theology and seminary education, which was highly influential in the 19th and early 20th centuries.

He was canonized in 1839 by Pope Gregory XVI and proclaimed a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius IX in 1871. One of the most widely read Catholic authors, he is the patron saint of confessors.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Early years [ edit ] He was born in Marianella , near Naples , then part of the Kingdom of Naples , on 27 September 1696. He was the eldest of seven children of Giuseppe Liguori, a naval officer and Captain of the Royal Galleys, and Anna Maria Caterina Cavalieri. Two days after he was born, he was baptized at the Church of Our Lady the Virgin as Alphonsus Mary Anthony John Cosmas Damian Michael Gaspard de' Liguori. The family was of noble lineage, but the branch to which Liguori belonged had become somewhat impoverished.

[ 4 ] Education [ edit ] Liguori learned to ride and fence but was never a good shot because of poor eyesight.

[ 4 ] Myopia and chronic asthma precluded a military career, so his father had him educated in the legal profession. He was taught by tutors before entering the University of Naples, where he graduated with a doctorate in civil and canon law at 16.

[ 5 ] He remarked later that he was so small at the time that he was almost buried in his doctor's gown and that all the spectators laughed.

[ 4 ] When he was 18, like many other nobles, he joined the Confraternity of Our Lady of Mercy, with whom he assisted in the care of the sick at the hospital for "incurables".

[ 6 ] He became a successful lawyer. He was thinking of leaving the profession and wrote to someone, "My friend, our profession is too full of difficulties and dangers; we lead an unhappy life and run risk of dying an unhappy death".

[ 7 ] At 27, after having lost an important case, the first he had lost in eight years of practising law, he made a firm resolution to leave the profession of law.

[ 2 ] Moreover, he subsequently reporting hearing an "interior voice" saying: "Leave the world, and give yourself to me." [ 5 ] Calling to the Priesthood [ edit ] In 1723, he decided to offer himself as a novice to the Oratory of St. Philip Neri with the intention of becoming a priest. His father opposed the plan, but after two months (and with his Oratorian confessor's permission), he and his father compromised: he would study for the priesthood, but not as an Oratorian, and would live at home.

[ 4 ] He was ordained on 21 December 1726, at the age of 30. He lived his first years as a priest with the homeless and the marginalized youth of Naples. He became very popular because of his plain and simple preaching. He said: "I have never preached a sermon which the poorest old woman in the congregation could not understand".

[ 5 ] He founded the Evening Chapels , which were managed by the young people themselves. The chapels were centres of prayer and piety, preaching, community, social activities, and education. At the time of his death, there were 72, with over 10,000 active participants. His sermons were very effective at converting those who had been alienated from their faith.

Liguori suffered from scruples much of his adult life and felt guilty about the most minor issues relating to sin.

[ 8 ] Moreover, Liguori viewed scruples as a blessing at times and wrote: "Scruples are useful in the beginning of conversion.... they cleanse the soul, and at the same time make it careful".

[ 9 ] In 1729, Liguori left his family home and took up residence at the Chinese Institute in Naples.

[ 7 ] It was there that he began his missionary experience in the interior regions of the Kingdom of Naples, where he found people who were much poorer and more abandoned than any of the street children in Naples. In 1731, while he was ministering to earthquake victims in the town of Foggia, Alphonsus said he had a vision of the Virgin Mother in the appearance of a young girl of 13 or 14, wearing a white veil.

[ 7 ] Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer [ edit ] In devotional art, Liguori is often depicted bent over due to rheumatism .

[ 4 ] On 9 November 1732, he founded the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer , [ 10 ] when Sister Maria Celeste Crostarosa told him that it had been revealed to her that he was the one that God had chosen to found the congregation. He founded the congregation with the charism of preaching popular missions in the city and the countryside. Its goal was to teach and preach in the slums of cities and other poor places. The congregation also strongly opposed the development of Jansenism , a theological movement that to Alphonsus seem to exhibit excessive moral rigorism: "the penitents should be treated as souls to be saved rather than as criminals to be punished". He is said never to have refused absolution to a penitent himself.

[ 5 ] A gifted musician and composer, he wrote many popular hymns and taught them to the people in parish missions. In 1732, while he was staying at the Convent of the Consolation, one of his order's houses in the small city of Deliceto in the province of Foggia in Southeastern Italy, Liguori wrote the Italian carol " Tu scendi dalle stelle " ("From Starry Skies Descending") in the musical style of a pastorale. The version with Italian lyrics was based on his original song written in Neapolitan , which began Quanno nascette Ninno ("When the child was born"). As it was traditionally associated with the zampogna , or large-format Italian bagpipe , it became known as Canzone d'i zampognari , the "Carol of the Bagpipers".

[ 11 ] Bishop of Sant' Agata de Goti and final years [ edit ] Liguori was consecrated Bishop of Sant'Agata dei Goti in 1762.

[ 10 ] He tried to refuse the appointment by using his age and infirmities as arguments against his consecration. He wrote sermons, books, and articles to encourage devotion to the Blessed Sacrament and the Blessed Virgin Mary . He first addressed ecclesiastical abuses in the diocese, reformed the seminary and spiritually rehabilitated the clergy and faithful. He suspended those priests who celebrated Mass in less than 15 minutes and sold his carriage and episcopal ring to give the money to the poor.

San Alfonso María de Ligorio, at the Basilica in Pagani, Italy By May 1775, Alphonus was "deaf, blind, and laden with so many infirmities, that he has no longer even the appearance of a man", and his resignation was finally accepted by the recently crowned Pope Pius VI . He continued to live with the Redemptorist community in Pagani, Italy , where he died on 1 August 1787. His remains are now in display in the parochial church in Pagani.

[ 7 ] Veneration and legacy [ edit ] Town square of Pagani, Campania He was beatified on 15 September 1816 by Pope Pius VII and canonized on 26 May 1839 by Pope Gregory XVI .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In 1949, the Redemptorists founded the Alphonsian Academy for the advanced study of Catholic moral theology . He was named the patron of confessors and moral theologians by Pope Pius XII on 26 April 1950, who subsequently wrote of him in the encyclical Haurietis aquas .

In bestowing the title of "Prince of Moral Theologians", the church also gave the "unprecedented honour she paid to the Saint in her Decree of 22 July 1831, which allows confessors to follow any of St. Alphonsus's own opinions without weighing the reasons on which they were based".

[ 14 ] The church did not bestow this unique privilege lightly but was due to the extraordinary combination of exceptional knowledge and understanding of church teachings combined with the great precision in which he wrote.

Works [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Liguori was a prolific and popular author.

[ 10 ] He was proficient in the arts, his parents having had him trained by various masters, and he was a musician, painter, poet and author at the same time. Liguori wrote 111 works on spirituality and theology.

[ 15 ] The 21,500 editions and the translations into 72 languages that his works have undergone attest to the fact that he is one of the most widely read Catholic authors.

His best-known musical work is his Christmas hymn Quanno Nascetti Ninno , later translated into Italian by Pope Pius IX as Tu scendi dalle stelle ("From Starry Skies Thou Comest").

A strong defender of the Catholic Church , Liguori said : To reject the divine teaching of the Catholic Church is to reject the very basis of reason and revelation, for neither the principles of the one nor those of the other have any longer any solid support to rest on; they can then be interpreted by every one as he pleases; every one can deny all truths whatsoever he chooses to deny. I therefore repeat: If the divine teaching authority of the Church, and the obedience to it, are rejected, every error will be endorsed and must be tolerated." [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Moral theology [ edit ] Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Further information: Catholic moral theology § Birth of manualism Liguori's greatest contribution to the Catholic Church was in the area of moral theology. His masterpiece was The Moral Theology (1748), which was approved by the Pope himself [ 5 ] and was born of Liguori's pastoral experience, his ability to respond to the practical questions posed by the faithful and his contact with their everyday problems. He opposed sterile legalism and strict rigourism. According to him, those were paths closed to the Gospel because "such rigour has never been taught nor practised by the Church". His system of moral theology is noted for its prudence, avoiding both laxism and excessive rigour. He is credited with the position of Aequiprobabilism , which avoided Jansenist rigorism as well as laxism and simple probabilism . Since its publication, it has remained in Latin, often in 10 volumes or in the combined 4-volume version of Gaudé. It saw only recently its first publication in translation, in an English translation made by Ryan Grant and published in 2017 by Mediatrix Press. The English translation of the work is projected to be around 5 volumes.

[ 18 ] Dogmatic Works [ edit ] Moral Theology (4 volume set originally written in Latin) The Triumph of the Church over all heresies. A History of Heresies and Their Refutation Truth of the Faith (" Verità della Fede " , there is no known English translation of this book from the Italian/Latin) On The Council of Trent (Commentary) Mariology [ edit ] His Mariology, though mainly pastoral in nature, rediscovered, integrated and defended that of Augustine of Hippo , Ambrose of Milan and other Church Fathers ; it represented an intellectual defence of Mariology in the 18th century, the Age of Enlightenment , against the rationalism to which contrasted his fervent Marian devotion.

[ 19 ] The Glories of Mary [ 20 ] Marian Devotion Prayers to the Divine Mother Spiritual Songs The True Spouse of Jesus Christ [ 21 ] (original: La Vera Sposa di Gesù Cristo, cioè la Monaca Santa per Mezzo delle Virtù proprie d’una Religiosa (first edition: 1760–61)) [ 22 ] Other Ascetical works [ edit ] Great Means of Salvation and of Perfection [ 23 ] The Way of Salvation and of Perfection [ 24 ] The Way of the Cross [ 25 ] Preparation for Death The Incarnation, Birth and Infancy of Jesus Christ [ 26 ] The Holy Eucharist [ 27 ] Uniformity with God's Will (pamphlet) [ 28 ] Victories of the Martyrs [ 29 ] Sermons for all the Sundays in the year See also [ edit ] Catholicism portal Saints portal Index of Catholic Church articles Mental prayer St. Alphonsus 'Rock' Liguori Church (St. Louis) Teresa of Ávila Principle of double effect – Christian ethical consideration Formalism (philosophy) – Concept of focusing on form over concept Legalism (theology) – Pejorative for performative Christianity Neo-scholasticism – Revival of scholasticism References [ edit ] ^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 1969), p. 99 ^ a b Miller, D.F. and Aubin, L.X., St. Alphonsus Liguori , Tan Books, 2009, ISBN 9780895553294 ^ Lives of St. Alphonsus Liguori (from "Vita di S. A. M. de Liguori"), St. Francis de Girolamo (from "Vita del B. Francisco di Girolamo dal Padre L. degli Oddi"), St. John Joseph of the Cross (from "Compendio della vita di Giangiuseppe, data in luce dal Postulatore della causa"), St. Pacificus of San Severino (from "Compendio della vita del B. Pacifico"), and St. Veronica Giuliani (from "Vita della B. Veronica Giuliani, da F. M. Salvatori"); whose canonization took place on Trinity Sunday, May 26th, 1839 . C. Dolman. 1839.

^ a b c d e Castle, Harold (1913). " St. Alphonsus Liguori ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b c d e Paolo O. Pirlo (1997). "St. Alphonsus Liguori".

My First Book of Saints . Sons of Holy Mary Immaculate – Quality Catholic Publications. pp.

166– 167.

ISBN 971-91595-4-5 .

^ " "St. Alphonsus Liguori, Our Founder", Redemptorists, Baltimore Province" . Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 26 May 2023 .

^ a b c d Tannoja, Antonio (26 May 1855).

"The life of St. Alphonsus Maria de Liguori, Bishop of St. Agatha of the Goths and founder of the Congregation of the Holy Redeemer" . Baltimore, Md. : J. Murray ; London : C.Dolman . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive.

^ Selected writings by Saint Alfonso Maria de' Liguori, 1999 ISBN 0-8091-3771-2 p. 209 ^ The true spouse of Jesus Christ: The complete works of Saint Alphonsus de Liguori 1929, Redemptorist Fathers Press, ASIN B00085J4WM, p. 545 ^ a b c " "Saint Alphonsus Maria de Liguori", St. Alphonsus Liguori Parish, Peterborough, Ontario" . Archived from the original on 11 August 2014 . Retrieved 26 May 2023 .

^ "Carol of the Bagpipers" .

The Hymns and Carols of Christmas . Retrieved 11 December 2014 .

^ Mercy, Member of the Order of; Press, Aeterna (1906).

The Life of Saint Alphonsus Liguori . Aeterna Press.

^ Miller, Donald F.; Aubin, L. X. (1940).

St. Alphonsus Liguori: Doctor of the Church . TAN Books.

ISBN 978-1-5051-0374-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: St. Alphonsus Liguori" .

newadvent.org . Retrieved 4 August 2021 .

^ "dotPH domains available portal" .

saintalphonsus.ph . Retrieved 26 May 2023 .

^ Appendix to his work on the Council of Trent ^ Muller, Michael.

The Catholic Dogma: Extra Ecclesiam Nullus Omnino Salvatur .

^ "1st English Translation of St. Alphonsus Liguori's Moral Theology" .

Mediatrix Press . Archived from the original on 9 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 February 2019 .

^ P Hitz, Alfons v. Liguori , Paterborn 1967, p. 130.

^ Liguori, Alfonso Maria de' (26 May 1888).

"The glories of Mary" . New York : P.J. Kenedy . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive.

^ Liguori, Alfonso Maria de' (26 May 1887).

"The complete ascetical works of St. Alphonsus" . New York : Benziger . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive.

^ de Liguori, Alfonso Maria (1771).

La Vera Sposa di Gesu-Cristo, cioè la Monaca Santa per Mezzo delle Virtù proprie d'una Religiosa. Opera dell' Illustriss. e Reverendiss. Mons. D. Alfonso de Liguori Vescovo di Santagata de' Goti e Rettor Maggiore della Congregazione del SS. Redentore; Utile non solo per le Religiose, e Religiosi, ma anche per li Secolari, mentre in essa trattasi della Pratica delle Virtù Cristiane, che spettano ad ogni Stato di Persone. Terza Edizione. Divisa in due tomi. Tomo primo. In fine del Secondo Tomo vi saranno di più le Meditazioni per otto giorni degli Esercizi Spirituali, che sogliono fare molte Religiose privatamente in solitudine. Inoltre vi saranno alcune divote Riflessioni, ed Affetti sull' Istoria della Passione di Gesu-Cristo (3 ed.). Bassano: Spese Remondini di Venezia.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Trench, Richard Chenevix (26 May 1886).

"Shipwrecks of faith : three sermons preached before the University of Cambridge" . London : Kegan Paul, Trench . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive.

^ Liguori, Alfonso Maria de' (26 May 1887).

"The complete ascetical works of St. Alphonsus" . New York : Benziger . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive.

^ Stations of the Cross St Liguori avemarialynnfield.org Archived 5 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ Liguori, Alfonso Maria de'; Grimm, Eugene (26 May 1886).

"The incarnation, birth, and infancy of Jesus Christ, or, The mysteries of the faith" . New York : Benziger Brothers . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive.

^ Liguori, Alfonso Maria de' (26 May 1887).

"The complete ascetical works of St. Alphonsus" . New York : Benziger . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive.

^ Liguori, Alphonsus (1755).

Uniformity with God's Will . Grand Rapids, MI: Christian Classics Ethereal Library .

ISBN 978-0895550194 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Liguori, Alfonso Maria de' (26 May 1887).

"The complete ascetical works of St. Alphonsus" . New York : Benziger . Retrieved 26 May 2023 – via Internet Archive.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " St. Alphonsus Liguori ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alphonsus Liguori .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Alphonsus Liguori Wikiquote has quotations related to Alphonsus Liguori .

Cacciatore, Giuseppe (1960).

"ALFONSO MARIA de Liguori, santo" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 2: Albicante–Ammannati (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

OCLC 883370 .

Works by or about Alphonsus Liguori at the Internet Archive Works by Alphonsus Liguori at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Saints Books , E-Book Library of the Works of St. Alphonsus Maria de Liguori Founder Statue in St Peter's Basilica Free scores by Alphonsus Liguori in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki) Liguori, Alphonsus. The Holy Mass, Eugene Grimm ed., Benziger Brothers, New York, 1887 Liguori, Alphonsus. Preaching, Eugene Grimm ed., Benziger Brothers, New York, 1887 Liguori, Alphonsus. Dignity and Duties of the Priest, Eugene Grimm ed., Benziger Brothers, New York, 1889 Free scores by Alphonsus Maria de' Liguori in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki) "Tu scendi dalle stele", Pavaroti "St Alphonsus", St. Alphonsus on Catholic Online v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia 2 Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium 2 Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz Discography of American Historical Recordings People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐m6dr9
Cached time: 20250817044010
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.958 seconds
Real time usage: 1.130 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5326/1000000
Revision size: 26475/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 225384/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7134/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 186436/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.589/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27791824/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  916.639      1 -total
 26.18%  239.973      1 Template:Reflist
 15.56%  142.586      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.99%  119.094      1 Template:Infobox_Christian_leader
 12.50%  114.569      1 Template:Infobox
 10.70%   98.041      3 Template:Sister_project
 10.54%   96.637      3 Template:Side_box
 10.04%   92.014      1 Template:Catholic_philosophy
  9.12%   83.593      3 Template:Lang
  8.52%   78.125     14 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1545671:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044010 and revision id 1305511797. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alphonsus_Liguori&oldid=1305511797 " Categories : 1696 births 1787 deaths 18th-century Christian saints 18th-century Italian composers 18th-century Italian male writers 18th-century Italian Roman Catholic bishops 18th-century Italian Roman Catholic theologians Beatifications by Pope Pius VII Bishops in Campania Canonizations by Pope Gregory XVI Catholic Mariology Doctors of the Church Founders of Catholic religious communities Italian male composers Italian male non-fiction writers Italian religious writers Italian Roman Catholic saints Italian Roman Catholic writers Musicians from Naples Redemptorist bishops Redemptorist saints Roman Catholic moral theologians Roman Catholic mystics University of Naples Federico II alumni Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: publisher location Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Infobox person using a missing image Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Articles containing Neapolitan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 13:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alphonsus Liguori 42 languages Add topic

