Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Waterworks 2 Design and symbolism 3 Academic research 4 Sites Toggle Sites subsection 4.1 Afghanistan 4.2 Bangladesh 4.3 India 4.3.1 Delhi 4.3.2 Haryana 4.3.3 Jammu and Kashmir 4.3.4 Karnataka 4.3.5 Maharashtra 4.3.6 Punjab 4.3.7 Rajasthan 4.3.8 Uttar Pradesh 4.4 Pakistan 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Mughal garden 21 languages العربية বাংলা Català Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Shqip తెలుగు Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia South Asian style of garden The Shalimar Gardens in Lahore , Pakistan, are among the most famous of all Mughal-era gardens.

19th century photochrom of the Taj Mahal showing its gardens before they were levelled by the British to resemble formal English lawns A Mughal garden is a type of garden built by the Mughals . This style was influenced by the Persian gardens particularly the Charbagh structure, [ 1 ] which is intended to create a representation of an earthly utopia in which humans co-exist in perfect harmony with all elements of nature.

[ 2 ] Significant use of rectilinear layouts are made within the walls enclosures. Some of the typical features include pools , fountains and canals inside the gardens.

Afghanistan , Bangladesh and India have a number of gardens which differ from their Central Asian predecessors with respect to "the highly disciplined geometry".

History [ edit ] Mughal Emperor Babur supervising the creation of a garden The founder of the Mughal empire , Babur , described his favourite type of garden as a charbagh . The term bāgh , baug , bageecha or bagicha is used for the garden. This word developed a new meaning in South Asia, as the region lacked the fast-flowing streams required for the Central Asian charbagh. The Aram Bagh of Agra is thought to have been the first charbagh in South Asia.

From the beginnings of the Mughal Empire, the construction of gardens was a beloved imperial pastime.

[ 3 ] Babur, the first Mughal conqueror-king, had gardens built in Lahore and Dholpur . Humayun, his son, does not seem to have had much time for building—he was busy reclaiming and increasing the realm—but he is known to have spent a great deal of time at his father's gardens.

[ 4 ] Akbar built several gardens first in Delhi, [ 5 ] then in Agra, Akbar's new capital.

[ 6 ] These tended to be riverfront gardens rather than the fortress gardens that his predecessors built. Building riverfront rather than fortress gardens influenced later Mughal garden architecture considerably.

Akbar's son, Jahangir , did not build as much, but he helped to lay out the famous Shalimar garden and was known for his great love for flowers.

[ 7 ] His trips to Kashmir are believed to have begun a fashion for naturalistic and abundant floral design.

[ 8 ] Bird's Eye View of the Taj Mahal at Agra, showing its gardens as well as the Mahtab Bagh Jahangir's son, Shah Jahan , marks the apex of Mughal garden architecture and floral design . He is famous for the construction of the Taj Mahal , a sprawling funereal paradise in memory of his favorite wife, Mumtaz Mahal .

[ 9 ] He is also responsible for the Red Fort at Delhi and the Mahtab Bagh , a night garden that was filled with night-blooming jasmine and other pale flowers, located opposite the Taj across the Yamuna river at Agra.

[ 10 ] The pavilions within are faced with white marble to glow in the moonlight. This and the marble of the Taj Mahal are inlaid with semiprecious stone depicting scrolling naturalistic floral motifs, the most important being the tulip , which Shah Jahan adopted as a personal symbol.

[ 11 ] Gol Bagh was the largest recorded garden of the Indian subcontinent , [ 12 ] encompassing the town of Lahore with a five-mile belt of greenery; [ 13 ] it existed until as late as 1947.

[ 13 ] The initiator of the Mughal gardens in India was Zaheeruddin Babur who had witnessed the beauty of Timurid gardens in Central Asia during his early days. In India, Babur laid out the gardens more systematically. Fundamentally, the Mughal gardens have had edifices in a symmetrical arrangement within enclosed towns with provisions for water channels, cascades, water tanks and fountains etc. Thus, the Mughals maintained the tradition of building fourfold (chaharbagh)-symmetrical garden. Babur, however, applied the term chaharbagh in its widest sense which includes terraced gardens on mountain slopes and his extravagant rock cut garden, the Bagh-i Nilufar at Dholpur.

After Babur, the tradition of building chaharbagh touched its zenith during the time of Shah Jahan. However, modern scholars are now increasingly questioning the excessive use of the term chaharbagh in the interpretation of Mughal gardens, since it was not always symmetrical. This view finds archaeological support also. The excavated Mughal garden at Wah (12 km west of Taxila), near Hasan Abdal, associated with Mughal emperors Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan reveals that the pattern and overall design has not been symmetrical on the first and second terraces.

As for location, the Mughal emperors were much particular in selecting places of great natural beauty. Often they selected mountain slopes with gushing water to layout gardens, the finest example being Bagh-i Shalimar and Bagh-i Nishat in Kashmir.

Almost all the Mughal gardens contained buildings such as residential palaces, forts, mausoleums, and mosques. The gardens became an essential feature of almost each kind of Mughal monuments and were interrelated to these monuments which can be categorized as: (i) gardens attached with Imperial palaces, forts and gardens which beautified private residential buildings of the nobles (ii) Religious and sacred structures i.e., tombs and mosques erected in the gardens, and (iii) Resort and public building in the pleasure gardens.

Waterworks [ edit ] Verinag spring , enclosed in an octagonal stone basin at the head of a Mughal garden at the southern tip of the Kashmir valley Like Persian and Central Asian gardens, water became the central and connecting theme of the Mughal gardens. Water played an effective role in the Mughal gardens right from the time of Babur. He was more interested in 'beauty' than 'ecclesiastical prescription. The beauty of Babur's classic chaharbagh was the central watercourse and its flowing water. Most of these gardens were divided into four quadrants by two axis comprised with water channels and pathways to carry the water under gravitational pressure. At every intersecting point, there used to be a tank. In India, the early gardens were irrigated from the wells or tanks, but under the Mughals the construction of canals or the use of existing canals for the gardens provided more adequate and dependable water supply. Thus, the most important aspect of the waterworks of gardens was the permanent source of water supply. The hydraulic system needs enquiry about the 'outside water source' as well as 'inside distribution of water' in the paradisiacal Mughal gardens. The principal source of water to the Mughal gardens were: (i) lakes or tanks (ii) wells or step-wells (iii) canals, harnessed from the rivers, and (iv) natural springs.

The fountain was the symbol of 'life cycle' which rises and merges and rises again. The Paradise possessed two fountains: 'salsabil' and 'uyun'. 131 Salih Kambuh, a native of Lahore, described very artistically the water system and its symbolic meaning in the garden of Shalamar at Lahore that 'in the center of this earthly paradise a sacred stream flows with its full elegance and chanting, fascinating and exhilarating nature and passes through the gardens irrigating the flower beds. Its water is as beautiful as greenery. The vast stream is just like clouds pouring rains and opens the doors of divine mercy. Its chevron patterns (abshar) are like an institution of worship where the hearts of believers are enlightened. The Mughals developed hydraulic system by using Persian wheel to lift the water and obtained adequate pressure necessary for gardens. The main reason behind the location of gardens on the bank of river was that water was raised to the level of the enclosure wall by Persian Wheel standing on the bank from where it was conducted through aqueduct, to the garden where it ran from the top of the wall in a terra-cotta pipe which also produced adequate pressure needed to work the fountains.

[ 14 ] Design and symbolism [ edit ] Mughal gardens design derives primarily from the medieval Islamic garden , although there are nomadic influences that come from the Mughals' Turkic-Mongolian ancestry as well as inherent elements from Ancient Persia . Julie Scott Meisami describes the medieval Islamic garden as "a hortus conclusus , walled off and protected from the outside world; within, its design was rigidly formal, and its inner space was filled with those elements that man finds most pleasing in nature. Its essential features included running water (perhaps the most important element) and a pool to reflect the beauties of sky and garden; trees of various sorts, some to provide shade merely, and others to produce fruits; flowers, colorful and sweet-smelling; grass, usually growing wild under the trees; birds to fill the garden with song; the whole is cooled by a pleasant breezes.

The Hiran Minar complex in Sheikhupura , Pakistan, embodies the Mughal relationship between humans, pets, and hunting.

[ 15 ] The garden might include a raised hillock at the center, reminiscent of the mountain at the center of the universe in cosmological descriptions, and often surmounted by a pavilion or palace." [ 16 ] The Turkish-Mongolian elements of the Mughal garden are primarily related to the inclusion of tents, carpets and canopies reflecting nomadic roots. Tents indicated status in these societies, so wealth and power were displayed through the richness of the fabrics as well as by size and number.

[ 17 ] Nishat Bagh , Srinagar , Kashmir Fountainry and running water was a key feature of Mughal garden design. Water-lifting devices like geared Persian wheels ( saqiya) were used for irrigation and to feed the water-courses at Humayun's Tomb in Delhi, Akbar's Gardens in Sikandra and Fatehpur Sikhri, the Lotus Garden of Babur at Dholpur and the Shalimar Bagh in Srinagar. Royal canals were built from rivers to channel water to Delhi, Fatehpur Sikhri and Lahore. The fountains and water-chutes of Mughal gardens represented the resurrection and regrowth of life, as well as to represent the cool, mountainous streams of Central Asia and Afghanistan that Babur was famously fond of. Adequate pressure on the fountains was applied through hydraulic pressure created by the movement of Persian wheels or water-chutes ( chaadar) through terra-cotta pipes, or natural gravitational flow on terraces. It was recorded that the Shalimar Bagh in Lahore had 450 fountains, and the pressure was so high that water could be thrown 12 feet into the air, falling back down to create a rippling floral effect on the surface of the water.

[ 18 ] The Mughals were obsessed with symbol and incorporated it into their gardens in many ways. The standard Quranic references to paradise were in the architecture, layout, and in the choice of plant life; but more secular references, including numerological and zodiacal significances connected to family history or other cultural significance, were often juxtaposed. The numbers eight and nine were considered auspicious by the Mughals and can be found in the number of terraces or in garden architecture such as octagonal pools.

[ 19 ] Garden flora also had symbolic meanings. The Cypress trees represented eternity and flowering fruit trees represented renewal.

[ 19 ] Academic research [ edit ] An early textual references about Mughal gardens are found in the memoirs and biographies of the Mughal emperors, including those of Babur , Humayun and Akbar . Later references are found from "the accounts of India" written by various European travellers (Bernier for example). The first serious historical study of Mughal gardens was written by Constance Villiers-Stuart , with the title Gardens of the Great Mughals (1913).

[ 20 ] She was consulted by Edwin Lutyens and this may have influenced his choice of Mughal style for the Viceroy's Garden in 1912.

Sites [ edit ] Humayun's Tomb garden, Delhi Nishat Bagh is a terraced Mughal garden built on the banks the Dal Lake in Jammu and Kashmir , India .

Rashtrapati Bhavan was built in 1912 in a Mughal style.

Tomb of Jahangir in Shahdara Bagh Pinjore Gardens , 17th century terraced Mughal gardens with significant later renovations by Sikh rulers of Patiala Bagh-e Babur in Kabul , Afghanistan Afghanistan [ edit ] Bagh-e Babur , Kabul Bangladesh [ edit ] Lalbagh Fort India [ edit ] Delhi [ edit ] Humayun's Tomb , Nizamuddin East Qudsia Bagh Amrit Udyan Red Fort Roshanara Bagh Safdarjung's Tomb Shalimar Bagh, Delhi Haryana [ edit ] Pinjore Gardens Sheikh Chilli's Tomb Jammu and Kashmir [ edit ] Naseem Bagh Achabal Gardens Chashma Shahi Nishat Bagh Pari Mahal Shalimar Bagh, Srinagar Verinag Karnataka [ edit ] Lal Bagh Brindavan Gardens Daria Daulat Bagh Maharashtra [ edit ] Bani Begum Garden Bibi Ka Maqbara Himayat Bagh Punjab [ edit ] Aam Khas Bagh Rajasthan [ edit ] Jahangir's Garden at Ajmer Lotus Garden at Dholpur Uttar Pradesh [ edit ] Agra Fort Akbar's Tomb Aram Bagh Khusro Bagh Mehtab Bagh Taj Mahal Tomb of I'timād-ud-Daulah Tomb of Mariam-uz-Zamani Zenana Gardens Pakistan [ edit ] Chauburji Gulabi Bagh Hazuri Bagh Hiran Minar , Sheikhupura Quadrangle gardens at Lahore Fort Shahdara Bagh Shalimar Gardens, Lahore Tomb of Asif Khan Tomb of Jahangir Wah Gardens Gardens of Mahabat Khan Baradari of Kamran Mirza Shahi Bagh See also [ edit ] Indo-Persian culture List of parks in Delhi References [ edit ] ^ Penelope Hobhouse; Erica Hunningher; Jerry Harpur (2004).

Gardens of Persia . Kales Press. pp.

7– 13.

ISBN 9780967007663 .

^ REHMAN, ABDUL (2009). "Changing Concepts of Garden Design in Lahore from Mughal to Contemporary Times".

Garden History .

37 (2): 205– 217.

ISSN 0307-1243 .

JSTOR 27821596 .

^ Jellicoe, Susan. "The Development of the Mughal Garden", MacDougall, Elisabeth B.; Ettinghausen, Richard. The Islamic Garden, Dumbarton Oaks, Trustees for Harvard University, Washington D.C. (1976). p109 ^ Hussain, Mahmood; Rehman, Abdul; Wescoat, James L. Jr. The Mughal Garden: Interpretation, Conservation and Implications, Ferozsons Ltd., Lahore (1996). p 207 ^ Neeru Misra and Tanay Misra, Garden Tomb of Humayun: An Abode in Paradise, Aryan Books International, Delhi, 2003 ^ Koch, Ebba. "The Char Bagh Conquers the Citadel: an Outline of the Development if the Mughal Palace Garden," Hussain, Mahmood; Rehman, Abdul; Wescoat, James L. Jr. The Mughal Garden: Interpretation, Conservation and Implications, Ferozsons Ltd., Lahore (1996). p. 55 ^ With his son Shah Jahan.

Jellicoe, Susan "The Development of the Mughal Garden" MacDougall, Elisabeth B.; Ettinghausen, Richard. The Islamic Garden, Dumbarton Oaks, Trustees for Harvard University, Washington D.C. (1976). p 115 ^ Moynihan, Elizabeth B. Paradise as Garden in Persia and Mughal India, Scholar Press, London (1982)p 121-123.

^ Villiers-Stuart, C. M.

(1913).

The Gardens of the Great Mughals . Adam and Charles Black, London. p. 53.

^ Jellicoe, Susan "The Development of the Mughal Garden" MacDougall, Elisabeth B.; Ettinghausen, Richard. The Islamic Garden, Dumbarton Oaks, Trustees for Harvard University, Washington D.C. (1976). p 121 ^ Tulips are metaphorically considered to be "branded by love" in Persian poetry. Meisami, Julie Scott. "Allegorical Gardens in the Persian Poetic Tradition: Nezami, Rumi, Hafez", International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 17, No. 2 (May, 1985), p. 242 ^ Dar 1982 , p. 45 ^ a b Dickie 1985 , p. 136 ^ "History Of Mughal Gardens" .

^ Brown, Rebecca (2015).

A Companion to Asian Art and Architecture . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9781119019534 . Retrieved 20 May 2017 .

^ Meisami, Julie Scott. "Allegorical Gardens in the Persian Poetic Tradition: Nezami, Rumi, Hafez," International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 17, No. 2 (May, 1985), p. 231; The Old Persian word pairideaza (transliterated to English as paradise) means "walled garden". Moynihan, Elizabeth B. Paradise as Garden in Persia and Mughal India, Scholar Press, London (1982), p. 1.

^ Allsen, Thomas T. Commodity and Exchange n the Mongol Empire: A Cultural History of Islamic Textiles, Cambridge University Press (1997). p 12-26 ^ Fatima, Sadaf (2012). "Waterworks in Mughal Gardens".

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress .

73 : 1268– 1278.

JSTOR 44156328 .

^ a b Moynihan, Elizabeth B. Paradise as Garden in Persia and Mughal India, Scholar Press, London (1982). p100-101 ^ Villiers-Stuart, Constance Mary (1913).

Gardens of the great Mughals . A. & C. Black.

Sources [ edit ] Dar, Saifur Rahman (1982).

Historical Gardens of Lahore .

Dickie, James (1985). "The Mughal Garden". In Grabar, Oleg (ed.).

Muqarnas: An Annual on Islamic Art and Architecture . Vol. 3. Leiden: E. J. Brill.

ISBN 9004076115 .

Further reading [ edit ] Crowe, Sylvia (2006).

The gardens of Mughul India: a history and a guide . Jay Kay Book Shop.

ISBN 978-8-187-22109-8 .

Lehrman, Jonas Benzion (1980).

Earthly paradise: garden and courtyard in Islam . University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-04363-4 .

Ruggles, D. Fairchild (2008).

Islamic Gardens and Landscapes . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 0-8122-4025-1 .

Wescoat, James L.; Wolschke-Bulmahn, Joachim (1996).

Mughal gardens: sources, places, representations, and prospects . Dumbarton Oaks.

ISBN 978-0-884-02235-0 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mughal gardens .

The Herbert Offen Research Collection of the Phillips Library at the Peabody Essex Museum v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Islamic architecture Styles Abbasid Anatolian Seljuk Ayyubid Chinese Fatimid Hausa Indo-Islamic Bengali Deccan Qutb Shahi Mughal Indonesian / Malaysian Ilkhanid Iranian Great Seljuk Ilkhanid Timurid Safavid Mamluk Moorish Aghlabid Almoravid Almohad Hafsid Zayyanid Ottoman Somali Sudano-Sahelian Swahili Tatar Umayyad Yemeni Elements Materials Qadad Tadelakt Arches Chahartaq Discharging arch Four-centred arch Horseshoe arch Lambrequin arch Multifoil arch Ogee arch Pointed arch Squinch Vaulting Roofs Dome ( Arabic dome / Onion dome / Persian dome / South Asian dome ) Semi-dome Tajug Chhajja Religious objects Anaza Bedug Dikka (or müezzin mahfili) Gonbad Hussainiya Imamzadeh Kiswah Loudspeakers Maqsurah Mihrab Minaret Minbar Qibla Zarih Decorations ( For overview, see Islamic ornament ) Ablaq Āina-kāri Alfiz Arabesque Banna'i Girih Girih tiles Haft-rang Islamic calligraphy Islamic geometric patterns Jali Mo'araq Mosque lamp Muqarnas Nagash painting Qashani Sebka (Darj-wa-ktaf) Shabaka Shamsa Sitara Socarrat Stucco decoration Zellij Rooms Andaruni Harem Iwan Liwan Mirador Hosh Qa’a Zenana Gardens Bagh Charbagh Islamic garden Mughal garden Paradise garden Persian gardens Reflecting pool Riad Outdoor objects Chhatri Eidgah Fina Mechouar Sebil Shadirvan Passive cooling Hypostyle Howz Jharokha Kucheh Mashrabiya Riwaq Sahn Salsabil Shabestan Shading Umbrellas Windcatcher Types Religious Congregational mosque Dar al-Muwaqqit Dargah Gongbei Jama'at Khana Külliye Kuttab (or maktab) Madrasa Maqam Maqbara Mazar Mosque Musalla Qubba Rauza Surau Sufi lodge (khanqah) Takyeh Türbe Zawiya Civilian Baradari Bazaar Caravanserai Bimaristan Ghorfa Hammam Hasht-Bihisht Kasbah Mahal Medina quarter Souq Well house Military Albarrana tower Alcázar Amsar Kasbah Ksar Qalat Ribat Resources Aga Khan Award for Architecture ArchNet Museum with No Frontiers Influences Indo-Saracenic Revival Influences on Western architecture Moorish Revival Mudéjar Part of Islamic arts • Architecture portal • Islam portal v t e Islamic art Architecture Regional styles Abbasid Ayyubid Anatolian Seljuk Chinese Fatimid Great Seljuk Hausa Indo-Islamic Bengali Bahmani and Deccan Mughal Indonesian / Malaysian Iranian Mamluk Moorish Ottoman Sudano-Sahelian Swahili Tatar Timurid Umayyad Yemeni Elements Ablaq Banna'i Iwan Jali Mashrabiya Mihrab Minaret Mocárabe Muqarnas Sitara Stucco decoration See also Decoration Arts Periods and regional styles Abbasid art Fatimid art Mudéjar Bangladeshi Persian ( Early , Qajar , Safavid ) Turkish ( Ottoman ) Carpets Gul Kilim Motifs Persian Turkish Prayer Pottery Fritware Hispano-Moresque Iznik Lustreware Mina'i ware Persian Chinese influence Textiles Batik Damask Ikat Embroidery Soumak Suzani Woodwork Khatam Minbar Other media Music Brass Damascus steel Enamelled glass Haft-rang Glass Hardstone carving Ivory carving Mo'araq Mosque lamp Stained glass Shabaka Arts of the book Miniatures Arabic Mughal Ottoman Persian Calligraphy Arabic Diwani Indo-Muslim Kufic Muhaqqaq Naskh Nastaliq Persian Sini Taliq Thuluth Tughra Other arts Muraqqa Hilya Ottoman illumination Decoration Arabesque Geometric patterns Girih ( tiles ) Zellij See also Calligraphy The garden Charbagh Mughal Ottoman Paradise Persian Museums, collections Berlin Cairo Doha Ghazni Istanbul ( Arts , Calligraphy Art ) Jerusalem ( Islamic Museum , Museum for Islamic Art, Jerusalem ) Kuala Lumpur London ( British Museum , V&A , Khalili Collection ) Los Angeles Marrakech ( Museum , Majorelle Garden ) Melbourne Paris ( Arab World Institute , Louvre ) Singapore Toronto (Aga Khan) Tripoli Exhibitions Empire of the Sultans Heaven on Earth: Art from Islamic Lands Hajj: Journey to the Heart of Islam Principles, influences Islamic Art: Mirror of the Invisible World Aniconism in Islam Indo-Saracenic Revival Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe Influences on Western art Grotesque Moresque Mathematics and architecture Moorish Revival Mudéjar Oriental carpets in Renaissance painting Pseudo-Kufic Stilfragen Topkapı Scroll v t e Mughal Empire Emperors Babur Humayun Akbar Jahangir Shahryar Shah Jahan Aurangzeb (Alamgir I) Muhammad Azam Shah Bahadur Shah I Jahandar Shah Farrukhsiyar Rafi ud-Darajat Shah Jahan II Muhammad Shah Ahmad Shah Bahadur Alamgir II Shah Jahan III Shah Alam II Shah Jahan IV Akbar II Bahadur Shah II Administration Dynasty family tree Economy Flag Foreign relations Government Military Mughal artillery Provinces Agra Ajmer Awadh Bengal Berar Bihar Gujarat Delhi Hyderabad Lahore Malwa Multan Sira Conflicts Mughal-Rajput wars Mughal conquest of Malwa Gujarat conquest Mughal–Safavid war (1622–1623) Mughal–Safavid war (1649–1653) Suppression of Tilpat rebellion Ahom–Mughal conflicts Tibet–Ladakh–Mughal war Mughal–Maratha wars Child's war Carnatic wars Bengal war Indian Rebellion of 1857 Mughal–Portuguese conflicts Battles Agra Badli-ki-Serai Bhuchar Mori Buxar Chanderi Chausa Ghagra Haldighati Karnal Khajwa Khanwa Najafgarh Panipat (1526) Panipat (1556) Panipat (1761) Plassey Raj Mahal Samugarh Sirhind Thanesar (1567) Thanesar (1710) Tukaroi Bakla Bhulua Sieges Bijapur Chittorgarh Delhi Daman Daulatabad Golconda Hooghly Jinji Kandahar Mankot Purandhar Ranthambore Sambhal Adversaries Baro-Bhuyan Isa Khan Khwaja Usman Bayazid of Sylhet Musa Khan Pratapaditya Ibrahim Lodi Rana Sanga Sher Shah Suri Hemu Maharana Pratap Malik Ambar Gokula Shivaji Lachit Borphukan Khushal Khattak Josiah Child Guru Gobind Singh Henry Every Bajirao I Nader Shah Hector Munro Architecture Forts and palaces Agra Fort Lahore Fort Lalbagh Fort Red Fort Jahangir Mahal Sheesh Mahal Mosques Alamgir Mosque, Aurangabad Jama Masjid (Delhi) Chawk Mosque Badshahi Mosque Shah Jahan Mosque, Thatta Sunehri Masjid Wazir Khan Mosque Tombs and mausoleums Akbar's Tomb Bibi Ka Maqbara Gardens of Babur Humayun's Tomb Jahangir's Tomb Taj Mahal Tomb of Salim Chishti Tomb of Aurangzeb Tomb of Nur Jahan List of tombs of Mughal Empire Others Fatehpur Sikri Shalimar Gardens Achabal Gardens Shahi Bridge more See also Art Cuisine Culture Fashion Gardens Language Painting Iranian immigrants Tribe Weapons Foreign relations Successor states Sur Empire ( interrupted ) Maratha Empire Rajput states Jats Sikh Empire Nawabs of Bengal Nawabs of Awadh Nizam of Hyderabad Carnatic Kingdom of Mysore Rohilkhand Authority control databases : National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mughal_garden&oldid=1300571940 " Categories : Mughal gardens Islamic gardens Mughal architecture elements Gardens in India Gardens in Pakistan Types of garden by country of origin Islamic architectural elements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Use Indian English from February 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 04:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mughal garden 21 languages Add topic

