Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Posterior Analytics 13 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Text of Aristotle pertaining to scientific knowledge This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Posterior Analytics ( Ancient Greek : Ἀναλυτικὰ Ὕστερα ; Latin : Analytica Posteriora ) is a text from Aristotle 's Organon that deals with demonstration , definition , and scientific knowledge . The demonstration is distinguished as a syllogism productive of scientific knowledge , while the definition marked as the statement of a thing's nature, ... a statement of the meaning of the name, or of an equivalent nominal formula .

Content [ edit ] In the Prior Analytics , syllogistic logic is considered in its formal aspect; in the Posterior it is considered in respect of its matter. The "form" of a syllogism lies in the necessary connection between the premises and the conclusion. Even where there is no fault in the form, there may be in the matter, i.e. the propositions of which it is composed, which may be true or false, probable or improbable.

When the premises are certain, true, and primary, and the conclusion formally follows from them, this is demonstration, and produces scientific knowledge of a thing. Such syllogisms are called apodeictical , and are dealt with in the two books of the Posterior Analytics . When the premises are not certain, such a syllogism is called dialectical , and these are dealt with in the eight books of the Topics . A syllogism which seems to be perfect both in matter and form, but which is not, is called sophistical , and these are dealt with in the book On Sophistical Refutations .

The contents of the Posterior Analytics may be summarised as follows: All demonstration must be founded on principles already known. The principles on which it is founded must either themselves be demonstrable, or be so-called first principles , which cannot be demonstrated, nor need to be, being evident in themselves ("nota per se").

We cannot demonstrate things in a circular way, supporting the conclusion by the premises, and the premises by the conclusion. Nor can there be an infinite number of middle terms between the first principle and the conclusion.

In all demonstration, the first principles, the conclusion, and all the intermediate propositions, must be necessary, general and eternal truths. Of things that happen by chance, or contingently, or which can change, or of individual things, there is no demonstration.

Some demonstrations prove only that the things are a certain way, rather than why they are so. The latter are the most perfect.

The first figure of the syllogism (see term logic for an outline of syllogistic theory) is best adapted to demonstration, because it affords conclusions universally affirmative. This figure is commonly used by mathematicians.

The demonstration of an affirmative proposition is preferable to that of a negative; the demonstration of a universal to that of a particular; and direct demonstration to a reductio ad absurdum .

The principles are more certain than the conclusion.

There cannot be both opinion and knowledge of the same thing at the same time.

In the second book, Aristotle starts with a remarkable statement, the kinds of things determine the kinds of questions, which are four: Whether the relation of a property (attribute) with a thing is a true fact (τὸ ὅτι).

What is the reason of this connection (τὸ διότι).

Whether a thing exists (εἰ ἔστι).

What is the nature and meaning of the thing (τί ἐστιν).

Or in a more literal translation (Owen): 1.

that a thing is, 2.

why it is, 3.

if it is, 4.

what it is.

The last of these questions was called by Aristotle, in Greek , the "what it is" of a thing. Scholastic logicians translated this into Latin as " quiddity " ( quidditas ). This quiddity cannot be demonstrated, but must be fixed by a definition. He deals with definition , and how a correct definition should be made. As an example, he gives a definition of the number three, defining it to be the first odd prime number.

Maintaining that "to know a thing's nature is to know the reason why it is" and "we possess scientific knowledge of a thing only when we know its cause", Aristotle posited four major sorts of cause as the most sought-after middle terms of demonstration: the definable form; an antecedent which necessitates a consequent; the efficient cause; the final cause.

He concludes the book with the way the human mind comes to know the basic truths or primary premises or first principles, which are not innate, because people may be ignorant of them for much of their lives. Nor can they be deduced from any previous knowledge, or they would not be first principles. He states that first principles are derived by induction, from the sense-perception implanting the true universals in the human mind. From this idea comes the scholastic maxim "there is nothing in the understanding which was not prior in the senses".

Of all types of thinking, scientific knowing and intuition are considered as only universally true, where the latter is the originative source of scientific knowledge.

References [ edit ] Aristotle, Analytica Priora et Posteriora . Ed. Ross and Minio-Paluello. Oxford University Press, 1981. ISBN 9780198145622. Greek text.

Aristotle, Posterior Analytics; Topica . Greek text with translation by Hugh Tredennick, E. S. Forster. Loeb Classical Library 391. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1960.

Aristotle (2007), Posterior Analytics , translated by Mure, G. R. G.

, The University of Adelaide : eBooks @ Adelaide, archived from the original on 2007-04-27 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Posterior Analytics .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Posterior Analytics Ἀναλυτικὰ ὕστερα , at Bibliotheca Augustana Posterior Analytics , trans. by Mure, G. R. G. at Logic Museum Posterior Analytics , trans. by Octavius Freire Owen Public domain audiobook version of Posterior Analytics , trans. by Octavius Freire Owen Posterior Analytics public domain audiobook at LibriVox Text of Posterior Analytics , (in html, epub or mobi format) as translated by G. R. G. Mure v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Spain Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐scswz
Cached time: 20250814220949
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.417 seconds
Real time usage: 0.539 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1031/1000000
Revision size: 7211/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 62615/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1204/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 20178/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.319/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14459141/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  478.069      1 -total
 21.20%  101.353      2 Template:Langx
 18.77%   89.736      3 Template:Navbox
 18.27%   87.358      1 Template:Aristotelianism
 17.81%   85.153      2 Template:Sister_project
 17.56%   83.960      2 Template:Side_box
 13.11%   62.654      1 Template:Citation
 11.75%   56.193      1 Template:Wikisource
 11.35%   54.240      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 11.08%   52.993      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1692809:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220949 and revision id 1260059755. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Posterior_Analytics&oldid=1260059755 " Categories : Logic literature Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 16:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Posterior Analytics 13 languages Add topic

