Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Retention 2 Physiology Toggle Physiology subsection 2.1 Motor behavior 2.2 Muscle memory encoding 2.3 Muscle memory consolidation 2.4 Sleep effects on muscle memory 2.5 Strength training and adaptations 3 Fine motor memory Toggle Fine motor memory subsection 3.1 Music memory 3.2 Puzzle cube memory 4 Gross motor memory Toggle Gross motor memory subsection 4.1 Learning in childhood 4.2 Effect of Alzheimer's disease 5 Impairment Toggle Impairment subsection 5.1 Consolidation deficit 5.2 Dysgraphia for the alphabet 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Muscle memory 9 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Nederlands Polski Svenska 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Consolidating a motor task into memory through repetition For the term "muscle memory" as related to strength training, see Muscle memory (strength training) .

Entering the same code into a keypad may, over time, become a muscle memory Muscle memory is a form of procedural memory that involves consolidating a specific motor task into memory through repetition, which has been used synonymously with motor learning . When a movement is repeated over time, the brain creates a long-term muscle memory for that task, eventually allowing it to be performed with little to no conscious effort. This process decreases the need for attention and creates maximum efficiency within the motor and memory systems. Muscle memory is found in many everyday activities that become automatic and improve with practice, such as riding bikes , driving motor vehicles , playing ball sports , musical instruments , [ 1 ] and poker , [ 2 ] typing on keyboards , entering PINs , performing martial arts , swimming , [ 3 ] dancing , and drawing .

History [ edit ] The origins of research for the acquisition of motor skills stem from philosophers such as Plato , Aristotle and Galen .  After the break from tradition of the pre-1900s view of introspection , psychologists emphasized research and more scientific methods in observing behaviours.

[ 4 ] Thereafter, numerous studies exploring the role of motor learning were conducted. Such studies included the research of handwriting, and various practice methods to maximize motor learning.

[ 5 ] Retention [ edit ] The retention of motor skills, now referred to as muscle memory, also began to be of great interest in the early 1900s. Most motor skills are thought to be acquired through practice; however, more observation of the skill has led to learning as well.

[ 6 ] Research suggests we do not start off with a blank slate with regard to motor memory although we do learn most of our motor memory repertoire during our lifetime.

[ 7 ] Movements such as facial expressions, which are thought to be learned, can actually be observed in children who are blind; thus there is some evidence for motor memory being genetically pre-wired.

[ 7 ] In the early stages of empirical research of motor memory Edward Thorndike , a leading pioneer in the study of motor memory, was among the first to acknowledge learning can occur without conscious awareness.

[ 8 ] One of the earliest and most notable studies regarding the retention of motor skills was by Hill, Rejall, and Thorndike, who showed savings in relearning typing skills after a 25-year period with no practice.

[ 5 ] Findings related to the retention of learned motor skills have been continuously replicated in studies, suggesting that through subsequent practice, motor learning is stored in the brain as memory. This is why performing skills such as riding a bike or driving a car are effortlessly and 'subconsciously' executed, even if someone had not performed these skills in a long period of time.

[ 5 ] Physiology [ edit ] Motor behavior [ edit ] When first learning a motor task, movement is often slow, stiff and easily disrupted without attention. With practice, execution of the motor task becomes smoother, there is a decrease in limb stiffness, and the muscle activity necessary to the task is performed without conscious effort.

[ 9 ] Muscle memory encoding [ edit ] The neuroanatomy of memory is widespread throughout the brain ; however, the pathways important to motor memory are separate from the medial temporal lobe pathways associated with declarative memory .

[ 10 ] As with declarative memory, motor memory is theorized to have two stages: a short-term memory encoding stage, which is fragile and susceptible to damage, and a long-term memory consolidation stage, which is more stable.

[ 11 ] The memory encoding stage is often referred to as motor learning , and requires an increase in brain activity in motor areas as well as an increase in attention. Brain areas active during motor learning include the motor and somatosensory cortices; however, these areas of activation decrease once the motor skill is learned. The prefrontal and frontal cortices are also active during this stage due to the need for increased attention on the task being learned.

[ 9 ] The main area involved in motor learning is the cerebellum . Some models of cerebellar-dependent motor learning, in particular the Marr-Albus model, propose a single plasticity mechanism involving the cerebellar long-term depression (LTD) of the parallel fiber synapses onto Purkinje cells .  These modifications in synapse activity would mediate motor input with motor outputs critical to inducing motor learning.

[ 12 ] However, conflicting evidence suggests that a single plasticity mechanism is not sufficient and a multiple plasticity mechanism are needed to account for the storage of motor memories over time. Regardless of the mechanism, studies of cerebellar-dependent  motor tasks show that cerebral cortical plasticity is crucial for motor learning, even if not necessarily for storage.

[ 13 ] The basal ganglia also play an important role in memory and learning, in particular in reference to stimulus-response associations and the formation of habits. The basal ganglia-cerebellar connections are thought to increase with time when learning a motor task.

[ 14 ] Muscle memory consolidation [ edit ] Muscle memory consolidation involves the continuous evolution of neural processes after practicing a task has stopped. The exact mechanism of motor memory consolidation within the brain is controversial. However, most theories assume that there is a general redistribution of information across the brain from encoding to consolidation.

Hebb's rule states that "synaptic connectivity changes as a function of repetitive firing." In this case, that would mean that the high amount of stimulation coming from practicing a movement would cause the repetition of firing in certain motor networks, presumably leading to an increase in the efficiency of exciting these motor networks over time.

[ 13 ] While the exact location of muscle memory storage is not known, studies have suggested that it is the inter-regional connections that play the most important role in advancing motor memory encoding to consolidation, rather than decreases in overall regional activity.  These studies have shown a weakened connection from the cerebellum to the primary motor area with practice, it is presumed, because of a decreased need for error correction from the cerebellum. However, the connection between the basal ganglia and the primary motor area is strengthened, suggesting the basal ganglia play an important role in the motor memory consolidation process.

[ 13 ] Sleep effects on muscle memory [ edit ] Sleep and quality habits are required for maximizing motor memory and motor skill consolidation. Sleep has been shown to consolidate motor skills acquired via the reactivation and consolidation of neural pathways .

[ 15 ] This is particularly beneficial with complex motor movements, where motor performance is improved following sleep.

Sleep duration and exercise also influence motor skill learning and memory. It has been proven through experiments that sleep after night training improves skill consolidation compared to morning training without sleep .

[ 16 ] This therefore implies that sleep is a time of heightened processing and consolidation of motor learning, allowing athletes and individuals maximizing their motor skills to attain maximum performance.

Furthermore, formal sleep therapies have also been discovered to enhance the performance of sports through enhanced reaction time, coordination, and overall execution of skills. Maintenance of proper quantities of sleep in addition to strict compliance to consistency in sleeping schedule can maximize the results of motor learning as well as support long-term memory for body skills .

[ 17 ] The application of sleep-based interventions, including following a constant sleeping pattern and minimizing disruptions to an absolute degree, can therefore be a significant assistant for the person who wants to optimize their motor capacity.

Strength training and adaptations [ edit ] See also: Muscle memory (strength training) When participating in any sport, new motor skills and movement combinations are frequently being used and repeated. All sports require some degree of strength, endurance training, and skilled reaching in order to be successful in the required tasks. Muscle memory related to strength training involves elements of both motor learning, described below, and long-lasting changes in the muscle tissue.

Evidence has shown that increases in strength occur well before muscle hypertrophy , and decreases in strength due to detraining or ceasing to repeat the exercise over an extended period of time precede muscle atrophy .

[ 18 ] To be specific, strength training enhances motor neuron excitability and induces synaptogenesis , both of which would help in enhancing communication between the nervous system and the muscles themselves.

[ 18 ] However, neuromuscular efficacy is not altered within a two-week time period following cessation of the muscle usage; instead, it is merely the neuron 's ability to excite the muscle that declines in correlation with the muscle's decrease in strength.

[ 19 ] This confirms that muscle strength is first influenced by the inner neural circuitry, rather than by external physiological changes in the muscle size.

Previously untrained muscles will acquire newly formed nuclei through the fusion of satellite cells preceding hypertrophy. Subsequent detraining will result in atrophy and the loss of myo-nuclei. While it was long believed that a muscle memory effect related to myo-nuclei permanence existed, current studies establish that during detraining, myo-nuclei will be lost.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Reorganization of motor maps within the cortex are not altered in either strength or endurance training. However, within the motor cortex, endurance induces angiogenesis within as little as three weeks to increase blood flow to the involved regions.

[ 18 ] In addition, neurotropic factors within the motor cortex are upregulated in response to endurance training to promote neural survival.

[ 18 ] Skilled motor tasks have been divided into two distinct phases: a fast-learning phase, in which an optimal plan for performance is established, and a slow-learning phase, in which longer-term structural modifications are made on specific motor modules.

[ 22 ] Even a small amount of training may be enough to induce neural processes that continue to evolve even after the training has stopped, which provides a potential basis for consolidation of the task. In addition, studying mice while they are learning a new complex reaching task, has found that "motor learning leads to rapid formation of dendritic spines (spinogenesis) in the motor cortex contralateral to the reaching forelimb".

[ 23 ] However, motor cortex reorganization itself does not occur at a uniform rate across training periods. It has been suggested that the synaptogenesis and motor map reorganization merely represent the consolidation, and not the acquisition itself, of a specific motor task.

[ 24 ] Furthermore, the degree of plasticity in various locations (namely motor cortex versus spinal cord) is dependent on the behavioural demands and nature of the task (i.e., skilled reaching versus strength training).

[ 18 ] Whether strength or endurance related, it is plausible that the majority of motor movements would require a skilled moving task of some form, whether it be maintaining proper form when paddling a canoe, sitting with a neutral posture, or bench pressing a heavier weight.

[ citation needed ] Endurance training assists the formation of these new neural representations within the motor cortex by up regulating neurotropic factors that could enhance the survival of the newer neural maps formed due to the skilled movement training.

[ 18 ] Strength training results are seen in the spinal cord well before any physiological muscular adaptation is established through muscle hypertrophy or atrophy.

[ 18 ] The results of endurance and strength training, and skilled reaching, therefore, combine to help each other maximize performance output.

More recently, research has suggested that epigenetics may play a distinct role in orchestrating a muscle memory phenomenon [ 25 ] Indeed, previously untrained human participants experienced a chronic period of resistance exercise training (7 weeks) that evoked significant increases in skeletal muscle mass of the vastus lateralis muscle, in the quadriceps muscle group. Following a similar period of physical in-activity (7 weeks), where strength and muscle mass returned to baseline, participants performed a secondary period of resistance exercise.

[ 26 ] Importantly, these participants adapted in an enhanced manner, whereby the amount of skeletal muscle mass gained was greater in the second period of muscle growth than the first, suggesting a muscle memory concept. The researchers went on to examine the human epigenome in order to understand how DNA methylation may aid in creating this effect. During the first period of resistance exercise, the authors identify significant adaptations in the human methylome, whereby over 9,000 CpG sites were reported as being significantly hypomethylated, with these adaptations being sustained during the subsequent period of physical in-activity. However, upon secondary exposure to resistance exercise, a greater frequency of hypomethylated CpG sites was observed, where over 18,000 sites reported as being significantly hypomethylated. The authors went on to identify how these changes altered the expression of relevant transcripts, and subsequently correlated these changes with adaptations in skeletal muscle mass. Collectively, the authors conclude that skeletal muscle mass and muscle memory phenomenon is, at least in part, modulated due to changes in DNA methylation.

[ 26 ] Further work is now needed to confirm and explore these findings.

Fine motor memory [ edit ] Fine motor skills are often discussed in terms of transitive movements, which are those done when using tools (which could be as simple as a tooth brush or pencil).

[ 27 ] Transitive movements have representations that become programmed to the premotor cortex , creating motor programs that result in the activation of the motor cortex and therefore the motor movements.

[ 27 ] In a study testing the motor memory of patterned finger movements (a fine motor skill) it was found that retention of certain skills is susceptible to disruption if another task interferes with one's motor memory.

[ 1 ] However, such susceptibility can be reduced with time. For example, if a finger pattern is learned and another finger pattern is learned six hours later, the first pattern will still be remembered. But attempting to learn two such patterns one immediately after the other could cause the first one to be forgotten.

[ 1 ] Furthermore, the heavy use of computers by recent generations has had both positive and negative effects. One of the main positive effects is an enhancement of children's fine motor skills.

[ 28 ] Repetitive behaviors, such as typing on a computer from a young age, can enhance such abilities. Therefore, children who learn to use computer keyboards at an early age could benefit from the early muscle memories.

Music memory [ edit ] Playing the piano requires complex actions.

Fine motor skills are very important in playing musical instruments. Muscle memory is relied on when playing the clarinet, specifically to help create special effects through certain tongue movements when blowing air into the instrument.

[ 29 ] Certain human behaviours, especially actions like the finger movements in musical performances, are very complex and require many interconnected neural networks where information can be transmitted across multiple brain regions.

[ 30 ] It has been found that there are often functional differences in the brains of professional musicians, when compared to other individuals. This is thought to reflect the musician's innate ability, which may be fostered by an early exposure to musical training.

[ 30 ] An example of this is bimanual synchronized finger movements, which play an essential role in piano playing. It is suggested that bimanual coordination can come only from years of bimanual training, where such actions become adaptations of the motor areas.

[ 31 ] When comparing professional musicians to a control group in complex bimanual movements, professionals are found to use an extensive motor network much less than those non-professionals.

[ 31 ] This is because professionals rely on a motor system that has increased efficiency, and, therefore, those less trained have a network that is more strongly activated.

[ 31 ] It is implied that the untrained pianists have to invest more neuronal activity to have the same level of performance that is achieved by professionals.

[ 31 ] This, yet again, is said to be a consequence of many years of motor training and experience that helps form a fine motor memory skill of musical performance.

It is often reported that, when a pianist hears a well-trained piece of music, synonymous fingering can be involuntarily triggered.

[ 30 ] This implies that there is a coupling between the perception of music and the motor activity of those musically trained individuals.

[ 30 ] Therefore, one's muscle memory in the context of music can easily be triggered when one hears certain familiar pieces. Overall, long-term musical fine motor training allows for complex actions to be performed at a lower level of movement control, monitoring, selection, attention, and timing.

[ 31 ] This leaves room for musicians to focus attention synchronously elsewhere, such as on the artistic aspect of the performance, without having to consciously control one's fine motor actions.

[ 31 ] Puzzle cube memory [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Erik Akkersdijk is solving a 3×3×3 Rubik's Cube in 10.50s.

Speed cubers use muscle memory when attempting to solve puzzle cubes, such as the Rubik's Cube , in the fastest possible time.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Solving these puzzles in an optimally efficient manner requires the cube to be manipulated according to a set of complex algorithms .

[ 34 ] By building their muscle memory of each algorithm's movements, speed cubers can implement them at very fast speeds without conscious effort .

[ 35 ] This plays a role in major speedcubing methods such as Fridrich for the 3×3×3 Rubik's Cube and EG for the 2×2×2 Pocket Cube .

Gross motor memory [ edit ] Gross motor skills are concerned with the movement of large muscles, or major body movements, such as those involved in walking or kicking, and are associated with normal development.

[ 36 ] The extent to which one exhibits gross motor skills depends largely on their muscle tone and the strength.

[ 36 ] In a study looking at people with Down Syndrome, it was found that the pre-existing deficits, with regard to verbal-motor performance, limits the individual's transfer of gross motor skills following visual and verbal instruction to verbal instruction only.

[ 37 ] The fact that the individuals could still exhibit two of the three original motor skills may have been a result of positive transfer in which previous exposure allows the individual to remember the motion, under the visual and verbal trial, and then later perform it under the verbal trial.

[ 37 ] Learning in childhood [ edit ] The way in which a child learns a gross motor skill can affect how long it takes to consolidate it and be able to reproduce the movement.  In a study with preschoolers, looking at the role of self-instruction on acquiring complex gross motor chains using ballet positions, it was found that the motor skills were better learned and remembered with the self-instruction procedure over the no-self-instruction procedure.

[ 38 ] This suggests that the use of self-instruction will increase the speed with which a preschooler will learn and remember a gross motor skill. It was also found that once the preschoolers learned and mastered the motor chain movements, they ceased the use of self-instruction. This suggests that the memory for the movements became strong enough that there was no longer a need for self-instruction and the movements could be reproduced without it.

[ 38 ] Effect of Alzheimer's disease [ edit ] It has been suggested that consistent practice of a gross motor skill can help a patient with Alzheimer's disease learn and remember that skill.  It was thought that the damage to the hippocampus may result in the need for a specific type of learning requirement.

[ 39 ] A study was created to test this assumption in which the patients were trained to throw a bean bag at a target.

[ 39 ] It was found that the Alzheimer's patients performed better on the task when learning occurred under constant training as opposed to variable.  Also, it was found that gross motor memory in Alzheimer's patients was the same as that of healthy adults when learning occurs under constant practice.

[ 39 ] This suggests that damage to the hippocampal system does not impair an Alzheimer's patient from retaining new gross motor skills, implying that motor memory for gross motor skills is stored elsewhere in the brain. However there isn't much evidence provided on this.

Impairment [ edit ] It is difficult to display cases of "pure" motor memory impairment because the memory system is so widespread throughout the brain that damage is not often isolated to one specific type of memory.  Likewise,  diseases commonly associated with motor deficits, such as Huntington's and Parkinson's disease , have a wide variety of symptoms and associated brain damage that make it impossible to pinpoint whether or not motor memory is in fact impaired.  Case studies have provided some examples of how motor memory has been implemented in patients with brain damage.

As Edward S. Casey notes in Remembering, Second Edition: A Phenomenological Study,  declarative memory, a process that involves an initial fragile learning period. "The activity of the past, in short, resides in its habitual enactment in the present." Consolidation deficit [ edit ] A recent issue in motor memory is whether or not it consolidates in a manner similar to declarative memory, a process that involves an initial fragile learning period that eventually becomes stable and less susceptible to damage over time.

[ 1 ] An example of stable motor memory consolidation in a patient with brain damage is the case of Clive Wearing . Clive has severe anterograde and retrograde amnesia owing to damage in his temporal lobes, frontal lobes, and hippocampi, which prevents him from storing any new memories and making him aware of only the present moment. However, Clive still retains access to his procedural memories, to be specific, the motor memories involved in playing the piano. This could be because motor memory is demonstrated through savings over several trials of learning, whereas declarative memory is demonstrated through recall of a single item.

[ 1 ] This suggests that lesions in certain brain areas normally associated with declarative memory would not affect motor memory for a well-learned skill.

Dysgraphia for the alphabet [ edit ] Case study: 54-year-old man with known history of epilepsy This patient was diagnosed with a pure form of dysgraphia of letters, meaning he had no other speech or reading impairments.

[ 40 ] His impairment was specific to letters in the alphabet. He was able to copy letters from the alphabet, but he was not able to write these letters.

[ 40 ] He had previously been rated average on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 's vocabulary subtest for writing ability comparative to his age before his diagnosis.

[ 40 ] His writing impairment consisted of difficulty remembering motor movements associated with the letters he was supposed to write.

[ 40 ] He was able to copy the letters, and also form images that were similar to the letters.

[ 40 ] This suggests that dysgraphia for letters is a deficit related to motor memory.

[ 40 ] Somehow there is a distinct process within the brain related to writing letters, which is dissociated from copying and drawing letter-like items.

See also [ edit ] Automaticity – Ability to do things without occupying the mind with the low-level details required Aphantasia – Inability to picture something in one's mind Motor learning – Organism's movements that reflect changes in the structure / function of the nervous system Motor coordination – Directed movement of body parts to accomplish an action Muscle – Biological tissue that allows movement Memory consolidation – Category of memory stabilizing processes Overlearning – Practicing newly acquired skills beyond the point of initial mastery Procedural memory – Unconscious memory used to perform tasks Yips – Condition of sudden skill or control loss in an athlete Mentalism – Performing art in which the practitioners appear to demonstrate exceptional mental abilities References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Krakauer, J.W.; Shadmehr, R. (2006).

"Consolidation of motor memory" .

Trends in Neurosciences .

29 (1): 58– 64.

doi : 10.1016/j.tins.2005.10.003 .

PMC 2553888 .

PMID 16290273 .

^ Poker Face: How to win poker at the table and online - Judi James.

^ "Using Neuroscience to Train Smarter, Not Harder" .

Swimming World News . 2019-01-04 . Retrieved 2023-03-09 .

^ Adams, A.J. (1987). "Historical Review and Appraisal of Research on the Learning, Retention, and Transfer of Human Motor Skills".

Psychological Bulletin .

101 (1): 41– 74.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.101.1.41 .

^ a b c Lee, D.T., & Schmidt, A.R. (2005). Motor Control and Learning: A Behavioural Emphasis. (4th ed). Windsor, ON: Human Kinetics ^ Celnik, P.; Classen, J.; Cohen, G.L.; Duque, J.; Mazzocchio, R.; Sawaki, L.; Stephan, K.; Ungerleider, L. (2005).

"Formation of a Motor Memory by Action Observation" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

25 (41): 9339– 9346.

doi : 10.1523/jneurosci.2282-05.2005 .

PMC 6725701 .

PMID 16221842 .

^ a b Flanagan, R.J.; Ghahramani, Z.; Wolpert, M.D. (2001). "Perspectives and Problems in Motor Learning".

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

5 (11): 487– 494.

doi : 10.1016/s1364-6613(00)01773-3 .

PMID 11684481 .

S2CID 6351794 .

^ Shanks, D.R.; St; John, M.F. (1994).

"Characteristics of Dissociable Human Learning Systems" (PDF) .

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

17 (3): 367– 447.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x00035032 .

S2CID 14849936 .

^ a b Shadmehr, R; Holcomb, HH (1997). "Neural correlates of motor memory consolidation".

Science .

277 (5327): 821– 25.

doi : 10.1126/science.277.5327.821 .

PMID 9242612 .

^ Brashers-Krug, T; Shadmehr, R.; Bizzi, E. (1996). "Consolidation in human motor memory".

Nature .

382 (6588): 252– 255.

Bibcode : 1996Natur.382..252B .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.39.3383 .

doi : 10.1038/382252a0 .

PMID 8717039 .

S2CID 4316225 .

^ Atwell, P.; Cooke, S.; Yeo, C. (2002).

"Cerebellar function in consolidation of motor memory" .

Neuron .

34 (6): 1011– 1020.

doi : 10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00719-5 .

PMID 12086647 .

^ Boyden, E.; Katoh, A.; Raymond, J. (2004). "Cerebellum-dependent learning: the role of multiple plasticity mechanisms".

Annu. Rev. Neurosci .

27 : 581– 609.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144238 .

PMID 15217344 .

^ a b c Ma, L.; et al. (2010).

". (2010). Changes in regional activity are accompanied with changes in inter-regional connectivity during 4 weeks motor learning" .

Brain Res .

1318 : 64– 76.

doi : 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.073 .

PMC 2826520 .

PMID 20051230 .

^ Packard, M.; Knowlton, B. (2002). "Learning and memory functions of the basal ganglia".

Annu. Rev. Neurosci .

25 : 563– 93.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.neuro.25.112701.142937 .

PMID 12052921 .

^ Cheng, Larry Y.; Che, Tiffanie; Tomic, Goran; Slutzky, Marc W.; Paller, Ken A. (2021-11-17).

"Memory Reactivation during Sleep Improves Execution of a Challenging Motor Skill" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

41 (46): 9608– 9616.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0265-21.2021 .

ISSN 0270-6474 .

PMC 8612481 .

PMID 34663626 .

^ Truong, Charlène; Ruffino, Célia; Gaveau, Jérémie; White, Olivier; Hilt, Pauline M.; Papaxanthis, Charalambos (2023-09-01).

"Time of day and sleep effects on motor acquisition and consolidation" .

npj Science of Learning .

8 (1): 30.

Bibcode : 2023npjSL...8...30T .

doi : 10.1038/s41539-023-00176-9 .

ISSN 2056-7936 .

PMC 10474136 .

PMID 37658041 .

^ Cunha, Lúcio A.; Costa, Júlio A.; Marques, Elisa A.; Brito, João; Lastella, Michele; Figueiredo, Pedro (2023-07-18).

"The Impact of Sleep Interventions on Athletic Performance: A Systematic Review" .

Sports Medicine - Open .

9 (1): 58.

doi : 10.1186/s40798-023-00599-z .

ISSN 2198-9761 .

PMC 10354314 .

PMID 37462808 .

^ a b c d e f g Adkins, DeAnna L.; Boychuck, Jeffery (2006). "Motor training induces experience specific patterns of plasticity across motor cortex and spinal cord".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

101 (6): 1776– 1782.

doi : 10.1152/japplphysiol.00515.2006 .

PMID 16959909 .

S2CID 14285824 .

^ Deschenes Michael, R.; Giles Jennifer, A. (2002). "Neural factors account for strength decrements observed after short-term muscle unloading".

American Journal of Physiology. Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology .

282 (2): R578 – R583 .

doi : 10.1152/ajpregu.00386.2001 .

PMID 11792669 .

^ Snijders, Tim; Aussieker, Thorben; Holwerda, Andy; Parise, Gianni; van Loon, Luc J C; Verdijk, Lex B (2020).

"The concept of skeletal muscle memory: Evidence from animal and human studies" .

Acta Physiologica .

229 (3): e13465.

doi : 10.1111/apha.13465 .

PMC 7317456 .

PMID 32175681 .

^ Rahmati, Masoud; Mc Carthy, John H.; Malakoutinia, Fatemeh (2022).

"Myonuclear permanence in skeletal muscle memory: a systematic review and meta-analysis of human and animal studies" .

Journal of Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle .

13 (5): 2276– 2297.

doi : 10.1002/jcsm.13043 .

PMC 9530508 .

PMID 35961635 .

^ Karni, Avi; Meyer, Gundela (1998).

"The acquisition of skilled motor performance: Fast and slow experience-driven changes in primary motor cortex" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

95 (3): 861– 868.

Bibcode : 1998PNAS...95..861K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.95.3.861 .

PMC 33809 .

PMID 9448252 .

^ Xu, Tonghui; Perlik, Andrew J (2009).

"Rapid formation and selective stabilisation of synapses for enduring motor memories" .

Nature .

462 (7275): 915– 20.

Bibcode : 2009Natur.462..915X .

doi : 10.1038/nature08389 .

PMC 2844762 .

PMID 19946267 .

^ Kleim Jerrery, L.; Hogg Theresa, M. (2004).

"Cortical Synaptogenesis and Motor Map Reorganization Occur during Late, But not Early, Phase of Motor Skill Learning" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

24 (3): 629– 633.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.320.2189 .

doi : 10.1523/jneurosci.3440-03.2004 .

PMC 6729261 .

PMID 14736848 .

^ Sharples, Adam P.; Stewart, Claire E.; Seaborne, Robert A. (1 August 2016).

"Does skeletal muscle have an 'epi'-memory? The role of epigenetics in nutritional programming, metabolic disease, aging and exercise" .

Aging Cell .

15 (4): 603– 616.

doi : 10.1111/acel.12486 .

ISSN 1474-9726 .

PMC 4933662 .

PMID 27102569 .

^ a b Seaborne, Robert A.; Strauss, Juliette; Cocks, Matthew; Shepherd, Sam; O’Brien, Thomas D.; Someren, Ken A. van; Bell, Phillip G.; Murgatroyd, Christopher; Morton, James P.; Stewart, Claire E.; Sharples, Adam P. (30 January 2018).

"Human Skeletal Muscle Possesses an Epigenetic Memory of Hypertrophy" .

Scientific Reports .

8 (1): 1898.

Bibcode : 2018NatSR...8.1898S .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-018-20287-3 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 5789890 .

PMID 29382913 .

^ a b Dowell, L. R.; Mahone, E. M.; Mostofsky, S. H. (2009).

"Associations of postural knowledge and basic motor skill with dyspraxia in autism: Implication for abnormalities in distributed connectivity and motor learning" .

Neuropsychology .

23 (5): 563– 570.

doi : 10.1037/a0015640 .

PMC 2740626 .

PMID 19702410 .

^ Straker, L.; Pollock, C.; Maslen, B. (2009). "Principles for the wise use of computers by children".

Ergonomics .

52 (11): 1386– 1401.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.468.7070 .

doi : 10.1080/00140130903067789 .

PMID 19851906 .

S2CID 11366796 .

^ Fritz, C.; Wolfe, J. (2005). "How do clarinet players adjust the resonances of their vocal tracts for different playing effects?".

Journal of the Acoustical Society of America .

118 (5): 3306– 3315.

arXiv : physics/0505195 .

Bibcode : 2005ASAJ..118.3306F .

doi : 10.1121/1.2041287 .

PMID 16334701 .

S2CID 1814740 .

^ a b c d Kim, D.; Shin, M.; Lee, K.; Chu, K.; Woo, S.; Kim, Y.; Song, E.; Lee, Jun; Park, S.; Roh, J. (2004).

"Musical Training-Induced Functional Reorganization of the Adult Brain: Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Study on Amateur String Players" .

Human Brain Mapping .

23 (4): 188– 199.

doi : 10.1002/hbm.20058 .

PMC 6871859 .

PMID 15449354 .

^ a b c d e f Haslinger, B.; Erhard, P.; Altenmüller, E.; Hennenlotter, A.; Schwaiger, M.; von Einsiedel, H. G.; Rummeny, E.; Conrad, B.; Ceballos-Baumann, A. O. (2004).

"Reduced Recruitment of Motor Association Areas During Bimanual Coordination in Concert Pianists" .

Human Brain Mapping .

22 (3): 206– 215.

doi : 10.1002/hbm.20028 .

PMC 6871883 .

PMID 15195287 .

^ "Speedcubers are solving Rubik's Cubes at ever-faster speeds" .

The Economist . 2019-07-11.

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 2021-12-10 .

^ Barron, James (2014-04-25).

"A Cube With a Twist: At 40, It Puzzles Anew" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2021-12-10 .

^ Demaine, Erik D.; Demaine, Martin L.; Eisenstat, Sarah; Lubiw, Anna; Winslow, Andrew (2011). "Algorithms for Solving Rubik's Cubes". In Demetrescu, Camil; Halldórsson, Magnús M. (eds.).

Algorithms – ESA 2011 . Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. pp.

689– 700.

arXiv : 1106.5736 .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-23719-5_58 .

ISBN 978-3-642-23719-5 .

S2CID 664306 .

^ Saunokonoko, Mark (2015-09-12).

"Feliks Zemdegs: cracking the Rubik's Cube" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 2021-12-10 .

^ a b "Gross motor Skills – What are Gross Motor Skills" . Archived from the original on 2009-02-01 . Retrieved 2010-03-24 .

^ a b Meegan, S.; Maraj, B. K. V.; Weeks, D.; Chua, R. (2006).

"Gross Motor Skill Acquisition in Adolescents With Downs Syndrom" (PDF) .

Down Syndrome Research and Practice .

9 (3): 75– 80.

doi : 10.3104/reports.298 .

PMID 16869378 .

^ a b Vintere, P.; Hemmes, N. S.; Brown, B. L.; Poulson, C. L. (2004).

"Gross-Motor Skill Acquisition by Preschool Dance Stoudents Under Self-Instruction Procedures" .

Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis .

37 (3): 305– 322.

doi : 10.1901/jaba.2004.37-305 .

PMC 1284506 .

PMID 15529888 .

^ a b c Dick, M. B.; Shankle, R. W.; Beth, R. E.; Dick-Muehlke, C.; Cotman, C. W.; Kean, M. L. (1996).

"Acquisition and long-term retention of a gross motor skill in Alzheimer's disease patients under constant and varied practice conditions" .

The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences .

51B (2): 103– 111.

doi : 10.1093/geronb/51B.2.P103 .

PMID 8785686 .

^ a b c d e f Kapur, N.; Lawton, N. F. (1983).

"Dysgraphia for Letters: a Form of Motor Memory Deficit?" .

Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry .

46 (6): 573– 575.

doi : 10.1136/jnnp.46.6.573 .

PMC 1027454 .

PMID 6875593 .

Look up muscle memory in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Human memory Basic concepts Encoding Storage Recall Attention Consolidation Neuroanatomy Types Sensory Echoic Eidetic Eyewitness Haptic Iconic Motor learning Visual Short-term " The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two " Working memory Long-term Active recall Autobiographical Explicit Declarative Episodic Semantic Flashbulb Hyperthymesia Implicit Meaningful learning Personal-event Procedural Rote learning Selective retention Tip of the tongue Forgetting Amnesia anterograde childhood post-hypnotic post-traumatic dissociative (psychogenic) retrograde selective transient global Decay theory Forgetting curve Interference theory Memory erasure Memory inhibition Motivated forgetting avoidance repression suppression Repressed memory Retrieval-induced forgetting Weapon focus Memory errors Confabulation Cryptomnesia Hindsight bias Imagination inflation Memory biases Memory conformity Misattribution of memory Misinformation effect Source-monitoring error False memory Deese–Roediger–McDermott paradigm False memory syndrome Memory implantation Lost in the mall technique Recovered-memory therapy Research methods Exceptional memory Indirect tests of memory Memory disorder In groups Collective memory Politics of memory Cultural memory Memory and social interactions Memory conformity Transactive memory Other topics Aging Art of memory chunking encoding memorization mnemonic rehearsal repetition Effects of alcohol Effects of exercise Effects of stress Emotion Memory improvement Nutrition Sleep Trauma In society Memory sport World Memory Championships Shas Pollak Related Absent-mindedness Atkinson–Shiffrin memory model Context-dependent and state-dependent memory Childhood memory Exosomatic memory Free recall Intermediate-term memory Involuntary memory flashbacks Levels of Processing model Metamemory Muscle memory Priming intertrial Prospective and retrospective memory The Seven Sins of Memory People Researchers Richard C. Atkinson Robert A. Bjork Stephen J. Ceci Susan Clancy Hermann Ebbinghaus Sigmund Freud Patricia Goldman-Rakic Ivan Izquierdo Marcia K. Johnson Eric Kandel Elizabeth Loftus Geoffrey Loftus James McGaugh Eleanor Maguire George Armitage Miller Brenda Milner Lynn Nadel Henry L. Roediger III Daniel Schacter Richard Shiffrin Arthur P. Shimamura Larry Squire Susumu Tonegawa Anne Treisman Endel Tulving Robert Stickgold Patients HM KC NA Clive Wearing Other Jonathan Hancock Paul R. McHugh Dominic O'Brien Ben Pridmore Cosmos Rossellius Andriy Slyusarchuk Category Psychology portal Philosophy portal v t e Muscular system Tissue Muscle tissue Cardiac muscle Skeletal muscle Smooth muscle Fascia Superficial Deep Visceral Fascial compartment Arm Forearm Thigh Leg Tendon / Aponeurosis Shape Fusiform Pennate muscle Unipennate Bipennate Other Anatomical terms of muscle Origin Insertion List of muscles of the human body Composite muscle v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐br9zf
Cached time: 20250817061929
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.308 seconds
Real time usage: 1.687 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6559/1000000
Revision size: 42143/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 646634/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1656/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 194926/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.756/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23677150/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1205.582      1 -total
 36.27%  437.318      1 Template:Reflist
 29.84%  359.725     32 Template:Cite_journal
 21.29%  256.655     39 Template:Navbox
 16.01%  193.009     10 Template:Annotated_link
 13.28%  160.151      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 12.77%  153.907      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.70%  104.839      1 Template:Memory
  6.04%   72.845      1 Template:Short_description
  3.44%   41.510      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:530708:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817061929 and revision id 1300172760. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Muscle_memory&oldid=1300172760 " Category : Memory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles needing additional references from March 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 17:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Muscle memory 9 languages Add topic

