Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization and governance Toggle Organization and governance subsection 2.1 Leadership 2.2 Constituent colleges and professional schools 3 Academics and research Toggle Academics and research subsection 3.1 Rankings 3.2 Faculty 3.3 Research 3.4 Libraries 3.5 Galleries 3.6 Artist in residence 3.7 Community engagement 4 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 4.1 Diversity 4.2 Admissions and financial aid 4.3 Student housing 4.4 Student media 4.5 Safety and security 5 Athletics Toggle Athletics subsection 5.1 Facilities 6 Alumni 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Rutgers University–Newark 2 languages Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°44′28″N 74°10′26″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.741°N 74.174°W ﻿ / 40.741; -74.174 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Regional campus in Newark, New Jersey, US This article is about the Rutgers University campus in Newark, New Jersey. For general information on the university as a whole, see Rutgers University .

Rutgers University–Newark Former names New Jersey Law School (1908–1936) Seth Boyden School of Business (1929–1936) Dana College (1927–1936) Newark Institute of Arts and Sciences (1909–1936) Mercer Beasley School of Law (1926–1936) University of Newark (1936–1946) [ 1 ] Motto Sol iustitiae et occidentem illustra Motto in English Sun of righteousness, shine upon the West also.

Type Public research university Established 1909 ; 116 years ago ( 1909 ) (predecessor) 1946 ; 79 years ago ( 1946 ) (Rutgers system) Academic affiliations Space-grant Endowment $1.22 billion (2016, system-wide) [ 2 ] Chancellor Jeffrey Robinson (interim) President William F. Tate IV Academic staff 585 Administrative staff 819 Students 12,321 Undergraduates 8,170 Postgraduates 4,151 Location Newark, New Jersey , U.S.

Campus Urban Colors Scarlet Nickname Scarlet Raiders Sporting affiliations NCAA Division III New Jersey Athletic Conference Mascot Scarlett Raider the Fox Website newark.rutgers.edu Rutgers University–Newark is one of three regional campuses of Rutgers University , a public land-grant research university consisting of four campuses in New Jersey . It is located in Newark .  Rutgers, founded in 1766 in New Brunswick , is the eighth oldest college in the United States and a member of the Association of American Universities .  In 1945, the state legislature voted to make Rutgers University, then a private liberal arts college , into the state university and the following year merged the school with the former University of Newark (1936–1946), which became the Rutgers–Newark campus.  Rutgers also incorporated the College of South Jersey and South Jersey Law School, in Camden, as a constituent campus of the university and renamed it Rutgers–Camden in 1950.

Rutgers–Newark offers undergraduate (bachelors) and graduate (masters, doctoral) programs to more than 12,000 students. It is classified among "R2: Doctoral Universities – High research activity".

[ 3 ] It also offers cross-registration with the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) which borders its campus.  The campus is located on 38 acres in Newark's University Heights section.  The university host seven degree-granting undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools, including the School of Public Affairs and Administration, Rutgers Business School (which has another campus in New Brunswick) and Rutgers Law School (which has another campus in Camden), and several research institutes, including the Institute of Jazz Studies .  According to U.S. News & World Report , Rutgers–Newark is the most diverse national university in the United States.

History [ edit ] The roots of Rutgers–Newark date back to 1908 when the New Jersey Law School first opened its doors. That law school, along with four other educational institutions in Newark— Dana College (founded in 1927), Newark Institute of Arts and Sciences (founded in 1909), Seth Boyden School of Business (founded 1929), and Mercer Beasley School of Law (founded 1926)—would form a series of alliances over the following four three decades, resulting in a final merger as the University of Newark in 1936.

In 1946, a decade later, the University of Newark was absorbed into Rutgers University after a vote by the New Jersey State Legislature, thus transforming into Rutgers–Newark .

Organization and governance [ edit ] Leadership [ edit ] As a constituent unit of Rutgers University , ultimate authority for Rutgers–Newark rests with the central administration of the university, including its president and governing boards.

However, the campus has its own chief executive ( Nancy Cantor ). Up until 2008, the chief executive was known as the provost, but then-president Richard L. McCormick changed the title of the chief executive to chancellor.

[ 4 ] Constituent colleges and professional schools [ edit ] Rutgers–Newark is located on a campus of 38 acres in Newark's University Heights neighborhood.  This neighborhood is within blocks of the commercial center of the city and located near mass transit (bus, rail, and light rail stations).  The campus consists of seven degree-granting undergraduate, graduate and professional schools, including: Newark College of Arts and Sciences, University College, School of Criminal Justice, Graduate School-Newark, School of Public Affairs and Administration, Rutgers Business School-Newark and New Brunswick, and Rutgers Law School (Newark campus).

The Newark College of Arts and Sciences (NCAS) enrolls more than 60 percent of the undergraduates at Rutgers University in Newark and is the largest school on campus. With majors in almost 40 fields offering BA, BS, and BFA degrees.

University College–Newark offers undergraduate programs that cater to non-traditional or part-time adult students who have obligations during the day and attend class in the evening or on Saturday.

Rutgers–Newark offers MA, MS, MFA, and Ph.D. degrees.

The School of Public Affairs and Administration offers masters and doctoral degrees in public administration (MPA, Ph.D.).

Founded in 1929, Rutgers Business School–Newark and New Brunswick offers undergraduate and graduate business programs on the Newark and New Brunswick campuses. Accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business International, Rutgers Business School awards B.S., Master of Business Administration (M.B.A.) (including international executive and executive MBAs), and doctoral degrees in management.

The School of Criminal Justice is a national and international center for scholarly research on all aspects of policing, delinquency, crime, and criminal justice administration. The school also provides educational programs that fulfill public service obligations by helping to address the needs of criminal justice agencies within the city, state, nation, and world.

The Rutgers Law School (Newark campus) is the oldest law school in New Jersey.

Academics and research [ edit ] Rankings [ edit ] University rankings National Times/WSJ [ 5 ] 198 U.S. News & World Report [88] 82 Washington Monthly [89] 42 National Program Rankings [114] Program Ranking Biological Sciences 121 Business 44 Chemistry 81 Criminology 9 Law 74 Mathematics 74 Nursing: Master's 20 Psychology 81 Public Affairs 33 Public Management and Leadership 13 Supply Chain / Logistics 6 Urban Policy 10 As of 2022 [update] , Rutgers–Newark enrolls more than 12,000 students (more than 7,500 undergraduate, more than 3,500 graduate). Rutgers–Newark awards approximately 80 doctoral degrees, 250 juris doctor degrees, 1,050 master's degrees, and 1,500 baccalaureate degrees each year and was ranked 12th in the nation for quality among small research universities by the 2005 Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index.

Faculty [ edit ] There are more than 500 full-time faculty members at Rutgers–Newark, 99 percent of whom hold doctor of philosophy or juris doctor degrees.

[ citation needed ] Faculty on the Newark campus include or have included Pulitzer Prize recipients and members of the National Academy of Sciences, the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Letters, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and the New York Academy of Medicine Fellow. A number of Rutgers–Newark faculty members have been awarded the prestigious Guggenheim Fellowship and named as Fulbright Fellows. Other faculty honors include the National Book Award, Japan's Order of the Rising Sun, Gold Rays with Neck Ribbon, the Grete Lundbeck European Brain Research Foundation Award ("The Brain Prize"), the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers.

[ citation needed ] Research [ edit ] Select centers and institutes at Rutgers–Newark: [ 6 ] Institute of Jazz Studies – founded 1952 National Center for Public Performance – founded 1972 New Jersey Small Business Development Center – founded 1977 Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience – founded 1985 Center for Information Management, Integration and Connectivity – founded 1995 Division of Global Affairs – founded 1996 Clement A. Price Institute on Ethnicity, Culture, and the Modern Experience – founded 1998 Joseph C. Cornwall Center for Metropolitan Studies – founded 2000 Institute on Education Law and Policy – founded 2000 Institute for Ethical Leadership – founded 2004 Center for Urban Entrepreneurship & Economic Development – founded 2008 Newark Schools Research Collaborative – founded 2009 Center on Law, Inequality and Metropolitan Equity – founded 2011 Libraries [ edit ] John Cotton Dana Library (including the Institute of Jazz Studies ) Rutgers Law Library – Newark Don M. Gottfredson Library of Criminal Justice Rutgers University – Newark Archives Galleries [ edit ] Paul Robeson Galleries Artist in residence [ edit ] The Paul Robeson Galleries (PRG) has an Artist in Residence (AiR) program open to visual artists who live or work within a 10-mile radius of Newark. It is a six months residency with a private studio located at Express Newark (EN), part of Rutgers University – Newark (it is in the former Hahne Department Store). There is an exhibition at the end of the residency at the Robeson Campus Center Gallery.

[ 7 ] Community engagement [ edit ] In 2006, the university applied for classification as a "community engaged" university. Specifically, Rutgers–Newark was classified in the Outreach and Partnerships category, recognizing the university for its ability to apply and provide collaboratively institutional resources that benefit both campus and community.

[ 8 ] Student life [ edit ] Robeson Student Center Diversity [ edit ] U.S. News & World Report "Best Colleges" has named Rutgers University's Newark campus, the most [ethnically] diverse national university in the United States since 1997.

[ 9 ] Admissions and financial aid [ edit ] Undergraduate admissions to Rutgers–Newark are classified as “selective” by U.S. News & World Report . Rutgers University in Newark receives almost 17,000 freshman and transfer applications and enrolls about 1,700 new students each year. Admissions decisions are based on academic potential as demonstrated by grades, grade-point average, class rank and test scores as well as extracurricular activities and demonstrated leadership such as volunteer work, school clubs and organizations, community service and paid employment. Merit scholarships are offered at the acceptance stage to students who demonstrate outstanding academic achievement.

Tuition for full-time, New Jersey residents attending Rutgers University in Newark is $10,954; for non-residents it is $25,732. Fees are $2,343, and the cost of room and board is $12,509.

Typically, nearly 75 percent of the entering class received an offer of financial aid from Rutgers–Newark. Using a student's Free Application for Financial Student Aid, Rutgers develops a customized financial-aid package based on the student's qualifications, financial need, and funds available to the university. A financial aid package may include any or a combination of these major financial aid sources: gift aid ( e.g.

, grants, scholarships, and awards), loans, and work-study. Offers typically range from $500 to $24,000, with the average financial aid package reaching $16,000.

[ citation needed ] Student housing [ edit ] Freshman students living on campus are assigned to Woodward Hall. These suite style accommodations are non-cooking and contain three double bedrooms, as well as a bathroom. The rooms and suites are fully furnished, and the building includes a 24-hour computer lab and laundry room.

Returning and transfer students under the age of 21 are assigned to University Square while returning and transfer students who are at least 21 years old are assigned to Talbott Apartments. Both complexes offer single rooms in either a three-person or four-person shared apartment and include a computer lab, study/social lounges, television lounges, a laundry room, and vending area.

Currently under construct, 5-story mixed use development will include a 391-bed honors dorm, [ 10 ] and a university owned parking garage at 155 Washington Street is set to become an 18-story market rate residential building.

[ 11 ] Attached to Woodward Hall is Stonsby Commons & Eatery for residents who are on a meal plan. While Woodward Hall residents are required to be on a meal plan, any student may purchase a meal plan and eat in all campus dining halls.

A limited number of family apartment options are available for married or domestic partners and students with children in university-owned brownstones.

The American Insurance Company Building at 15 Washington Park provides graduate student housing [ 12 ] and includes public performance spaces and a penthouse for the school's chancellor.

[ 13 ] Student media [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) There are two student-run newspapers distributed at the Newark Campus: The Observer (covering the Newark campus and surrounding University Heights community) began in 1936. It is published every Tuesday morning during the fall and spring semesters.

The Newark Targum , also published weekly, began in 2006.

The campus also has a student magazine, which was founded in 2011. Early publications of Scarlet Magazine were published and distributed monthly. As of the 2023–2024 school year, issues are published each semester.

Encore is the student yearbook of the Rutgers Newark Campus. It has published a yearbook for the graduating senior class since 1936.

WRNU radio station is located in the Paul Robeson Campus Center. It offers a variety of diverse musical and talk-show programs and can be heard by residents in student housing on radio dial 103.9 FM.

The Newark Metro , a multimedia web magazine, covers metropolitan life from Newark and North Jersey to New York City. It is produced by students at Rutgers–Newark under the direction of Professor Robert W. Snyder .

Safety and security [ edit ] Residence halls operate on electronic lock systems requiring card access 24 hours a day or are staffed 24 hours a day by security guards. Security cameras in residence halls, parking lots, and in other locations act as a deterrent to criminal behavior and serve as an investigative tool. Commissioned police officers supported by other trained personnel patrol regularly.

[ citation needed ] Each year, the Division of Public Safety conducts workshops for students at orientation, in residence halls, and through “RU Safe” events, which are broadcast over the Rutgers television network. More detailed information on safety procedures is available through the Safety Matters newsletter published annually.

Athletics [ edit ] See also: List of college athletic programs in New Jersey, USA § Division III Rutgers-Newark athletics logo The Rutgers–Newark's athletic teams are called the Scarlet Raiders. The university is a member in the Division III level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), primarily competing in the New Jersey Athletic Conference (NJAC) for most of its sports since the 1985–86 academic year; [ 14 ] except men's volleyball, which the NJAC does not sponsor. In that sport, the Scarlet Raiders are members of the Continental Volleyball Conference (CVC).

Rutgers–Newark competes in 14 intercollegiate varsity sports (7 each for men and women): Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, soccer, track & field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, soccer, softball, track & field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball.

Facilities [ edit ] Built in 1977, the Golden Dome Athletic Center is the hub of Rutgers–Newark athletics, seating 2,000. Soccer and softball games are held on Alumni Field, while the Rutgers–Newark baseball team plays at Bears & Eagles Riverfront Stadium , a 6,200-seat ballpark that was home to the Newark Bears , a minor-league professional baseball franchise.

[ 15 ] Alumni [ edit ] Richard H. Bagger , former chief of staff, New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, former state senator Michael Patrick Carroll , New Jersey assemblyman (R-25th District) Ida L. Castro , first Latina commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Personnel Raymond G. Chambers , philanthropist and humanitarian; chairman, MCJ Amelior Foundation Ronald Chen , former New Jersey Public Advocate, acting dean of Rutgers School of Law-Newark Alex Chilowicz , professional soccer referee and musician [ 16 ] Marianne Espinosa , judge, Supreme Court of New Jersey Charles Evered , writer/director Zulima Farber , former New Jersey Attorney General Louis J. Freeh , former director, Federal Bureau of Investigation Nia Gill , New Jersey Senator representing the 34th district Paula Grossman , music educator and transsexual activist Wade Henderson , president & chief executive officer, The Leadership Conference on Civil & Human Rights Richard J. Hughes , former governor of New Jersey ; chief justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey Frank Iero , rhythm guitarist and back-up vocalist of rock band My Chemical Romance and post-hardcore band Leathermouth Jerry Izenberg , syndicated daily sports columnist Jaynee LaVecchia , justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey Virginia Long , retired justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey George McPhee , vice president and general manager for the Vegas Golden Knights of the National Hockey League Robert Menendez , United States Senator representing New Jersey Patrick Morrisey Ozzie Nelson , radio and television entertainer Ronald L. Rice , New Jersey Senator representing the 32nd district Esther Salas , judge, United States District Court for the District of New Jersey Judith Viorst , author and columnist for Redbook magazine; recipient of Emmy Award in 1970 Elizabeth Warren , United States Senator representing Massachusetts; Leo Gottlieb Professor of Law at Harvard Law School ; named one of the "100 Most Influential People in the World" by Time magazine in 2009 Tracey Scott Wilson , playwright Ramy Youssef , stand-up comedian and writer best known for his work on the Golden Globe -winning Hulu series Ramy [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] New Jersey portal Colonial colleges Henry Rutgers Public Ivy Post-secondary education in New Jersey List of American state universities References [ edit ] ^ Bennett, Hugh (1956).

A History of the University of Newark, 1908-1946 . New York City: New York University.

^ "U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2017 Endowment Market Value and Percentage Change in Endowment Market Value from FY2016 to FY2017" .

National Association of College and University Business Officers and Commonfund Institute . 2018 . Retrieved August 9, 2018 .

^ "Carnegie Classifications Institution Lookup" .

carnegieclassifications.iu.edu . Center for Postsecondary Education . Retrieved September 13, 2020 .

^ President's Letter to the Community . Accessed 2013-05-14 ^ "Rutgers University-Newark" .

Times Higher Education (THE) . Retrieved August 9, 2018 .

^ Rutgers–Newark Centers and Institutes . Accessed 2012-07-5 ^ "OPEN CALL – ARTIST IN RESIDENCE – Paul Robeson Galleries" . Retrieved February 19, 2024 .

^ "Rutgers University in Newark Again Classified as a 'Community Engaged Institution' by The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching" . Retrieved August 17, 2020 .

^ "Also Rated 'Most Diverse,' and in Top Tier of Best National Universities" .

rutgers.edu .

^ Kofsky, Jared (February 19, 2019).

"Construction on Rutgers-Newark Development Could Wrap Up This Summer" .

Jersey Digs . Retrieved April 30, 2019 .

^ Kofsky, Jared (April 29, 2019).

"EXCLUSIVE: Renderings of 18-Story Rutgers-Newark Redevelopment Released" .

Jersey Digs . Retrieved April 30, 2019 .

^ "Neo-Classical Rutgers Building Will Become Graduate Student Housing" . Studenthousingbusiness.com. February 20, 2012. Archived from the original on March 10, 2012 . Retrieved March 28, 2012 .

^ "Rutgers prepares to bring new life to one of Newark's original skyscrapers" .

NJ.com . Retrieved November 6, 2017 .

^ Rutgers–Newark official athletics website Retrieved on 2017-01-10.

^ Rutgers–Newark Athletic Facilities . Rutgers-Newark Scarlet Raiders official website. Accessed 2009-08-14 ^ https://id.loc.gov/authorities/names/no2013128867.html ^ Azadi, Elahe (April 23, 2019).

"Comedian Ramy Youssef is still figuring out life as a Muslim millennial. So he made a show about it" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 3, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rutgers University–Newark .

Official website Athletics website Scarlet Magazine v t e Rutgers University Located in : New Brunswick , Newark , and Camden , New Jersey History History Traditions " On the Banks of the Old Raritan " 2023 strike People Alumni & Faculty Presidents Henry Rutgers (benefactor) Jonathan Holloway (current president) University Police Research BioMaPS Institute for Quantitative Biology Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine Center of Alcohol Studies Center for Urban Policy Research Computationally Advanced Infrastructure Partnerships Center Eagleton Institute of Politics Institute of Jazz Studies Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences National Transit Institute Network Contagion Research Institute New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station Rutgers Health Rutgers Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Rutgers Cooperative Extension Rutgers University Press Waksman Institute of Microbiology New Brunswick/Piscataway Campus New Brunswick, New Jersey Piscataway, New Jersey Academics Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy Graduate School of Applied and Professional Psychology Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences (Piscataway campus) Graduate School of Education Mason Gross School of the Arts Robert Wood Johnson Medical School ( The Hub ) Rutgers Business School (New Brunswick campus) School of Arts and Sciences Raritan School of Communication and Information School of Engineering School of Environmental and Biological Sciences School of Health Professions (Piscataway campus) School of Management and Labor Relations School of Nursing (New Brunswick campus) School of Public Health (Piscataway campus) School of Social Work Campus Archibald S. Alexander Library Busch Campus College Avenue Campus Daniel S. Schanck Observatory Douglass Residential College Center for Women's Global Leadership Grease trucks Geology Hall Livingston Campus Kirkpatrick Chapel Old Queens Queens Campus Rutgers Campus Buses Rutgers Gardens Rutgers Ecological Preserve Sustainable Farm Voorhees Chapel Voorhees Mall William the Silent WINLAB Wood Lawn Zimmerli Art Museum Student life Greek Life Rutgers Day Rutgers Formula Racing Cap and Skull The Centurion The Daily Targum Debate Union Glee Club The Medium Peithessophian Society Philoclean Society Tent State University Rutgers Agricultural Field Day WRSU WVPH (The Core) Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Field hockey Football Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Women's soccer Softball Track and field Wrestling Venues College Avenue Gymnasium SHI Stadium Jersey Mike's Arena Yurcak Field Rivalries Connecticut (women's basketball) Princeton Related Rutgers Glacier Newark Campus Newark, New Jersey Academics College of Arts and Sciences Graduate School Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences (Newark campus) New Jersey Medical School Rutgers Business School (Newark campus) Rutgers Law School (Newark campus) School of Criminal Justice School of Dental Medicine School of Health Professions (Newark campus) School of Nursing (Newark campus) School of Public Affairs and Administration School of Public Health (Newark campus) University College (Newark campus) Student life The Newark Targum Rutgers Law Review Rutgers Computer and Technology Law Journal Athletics Scarlet Raiders Golden Dome Athletic Center Bears & Eagles Riverfront Stadium Campus American Insurance Company Building John Cotton Dana Library One Washington Park George F Smith Library of the Health Sciences Camden Campus Camden, New Jersey Academics College of Arts and Sciences StoryQuarterly Cooper Library Graduate School Rutgers School of Business Rutgers Law School (Camden campus) Rutgers Law Journal School of Nursing (Camden campus) University College (Camden campus) Athletics Scarlet Raptors (Camden) Campbell's Field Founded : 1766 Students : 40,720 Endowment : 1.009 billion Articles related to Rutgers University–Newark v t e City of Newark Neighborhoods North Ward Broadway Forest Hill Mount Pleasant Roseville Seventh Avenue Woodside South Ward Clinton Hill Dayton Port Newark South Broad Valley Weequahic Central Ward Chinatown Downtown Four Corners Government Center Lincoln Park/The Coast Springfield/Belmont University Heights Teachers Village East Ward Five Corners The Ironbound West Ward Fairmount Ivy Hill Vailsburg West Side Transportation NJ Transit ( Broad Street Station , Pennsylvania Station , Newark Light Rail ) Port Authority of New York and New Jersey ( Newark Liberty International Airport ( AirTrain Newark ), PATH , Port Newark–Elizabeth Marine Terminal ) Jackson Street Bridge Education Newark Public Schools Newark Arts HS American History HS Barringer HS Bard HS Early College Central HS Eagle Academy for Young Men East Side HS Girls' Academy Malcolm X Shabazz HS (former South Side HS) Newark Vocational HS Science Park HS Technology HS University HS Weequahic HS West Side HS Charter school Newark Collegiate Academy Private schools St. Benedict's Preparatory School (Catholic) Saint Vincent Academy (Catholic) Closed Christ the King Prep.

(Cristo Rey Newark HS) Our Lady of Good Counsel HS Tertiary/Misc.

Essex County College New Jersey Institute of Technology Pillar College Rutgers University–Newark Seton Hall University School of Law Newark Public Library Government Essex County Government Complex Government Center Mayor of Newark Municipal Council of Newark Newark Police Department History Timeline List of people from Newark, New Jersey Parks and Landmarks Branch Brook Park Military Park The Newark Museum of Art Newark Riverfront Park New Jersey Historical Society New Jersey Performing Arts Center Prudential Center ( New Jersey Devils , Seton Hall Pirates ) Riverbank Park Weequahic Park Public art Tallest buildings Media The Star-Ledger WBGO Religion Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Newark Pro-Cathedral of Saint Patrick in Newark St. Stephan's Church v t e Colleges and universities in New Jersey Public research universities Kean University Montclair State University New Jersey Institute of Technology Rowan University Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey New Brunswick Newark Camden Rutgers Health State colleges and universities The College of New Jersey New Jersey City Ramapo Stockton Thomas Edison State William Paterson Independent four-year colleges Bloomfield Caldwell Centenary Drew Fairleigh Dickinson Felician Georgian Court Monmouth Pillar Princeton Rider Saint Elizabeth University Saint Peter's Seton Hall Stevens Institute of Technology Community colleges Atlantic Cape Bergen Brookdale Camden Essex Hudson Mercer Middlesex Morris Ocean Passaic Raritan Valley Rowan College at Burlington County Rowan College of South Jersey Salem Sussex Union Warren Religious colleges v t e Religious colleges and schools in New Jersey Protestant theological seminaries Drew Theological Seminary New Brunswick Theological Seminary Princeton Theological Seminary Rabbinical schools Bais Medrash Toras Chesed Beth Medrash Govoha Mesivta Keser Torah Rabbi Jacob Joseph School Rabbinical College of America Talmudical Academy of Central New Jersey Yeshivas Be'er Yitzchok Yeshiva Gedolah Zichron Leyma Yeshiva Toras Chaim Yeshiva Yesodei Hatorah Independent religious colleges Assumption College for Sisters Pillar College Defunct colleges and universities Junior College of Bergen County Upsala College v t e Coalition of Urban and Metropolitan Universities American University Arizona State University Augsburg University Barnard College Baylor University Brown University Buffalo State University California State University, Dominguez Hills California State University, Los Angeles California State University, Northridge California State University, Sacramento California State University, San Bernardino California State University, San Marcos Case Western Reserve University Central Connecticut State University Clayton State University Community College of Philadelphia Coppin State University Dallas College DePaul University Drexel University Duquesne University Fairleigh Dickinson University Florida Atlantic University Florida International University George Washington University Georgetown University Georgia Tech Guilford College Hunter College Indiana University Northwest Indiana University Indianapolis Indiana University South Bend Johns Hopkins University Kean University Leeds Beckett University Lone Star College Loyola University Chicago Loyola University Maryland Macalester College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Medgar Evers College Medical College of Wisconsin Metropolitan Community College Metropolitan State University Michigan State University Montclair State University Morgan State University The New School New York University Northeastern Illinois University Northeastern University Oakland University Ohio State University Pace University Portland State University Purdue University Fort Wayne Purdue University Northwest Rochester Institute of Technology Rollins College Rutgers University–Camden Rutgers University–Newark Saint Louis University Saint Paul College San Diego State University Stanford University Stockton University Swarthmore College Syracuse University Temple University Towson University Tulane University University of Akron University of Arkansas at Little Rock University of Baltimore University of Central Florida University of Central Oklahoma University of Chicago University of Colorado Denver University of Connecticut University of Dayton University of Denver University of Houston University of Houston–Downtown University of Kansas Medical Center University of Louisville University of Maryland, Baltimore University of Maryland Baltimore County University of Massachusetts Boston University of Massachusetts Lowell University of Michigan–Dearborn University of Michigan–Flint University of Minnesota University of Missouri Extension and Engagement University of Missouri–Kansas City University of Missouri–St. Louis University of Nebraska at Omaha University of Nevada-Las Vegas University of North Carolina at Charlotte University of North Carolina at Greensboro University of North Texas at Dallas University of Pennsylvania University of Pittsburgh University of San Diego University of South Carolina Upstate University of Tennessee at Chattanooga University of Texas at Dallas University of Texas at El Paso University of Texas Rio Grande Valley University of Utah University of the District of Columbia University of the Western Cape Vanderbilt University Virginia Commonwealth University Wagner College Washington State University Tri-Cities Washington University in St. Louis Weber State University West Chester University Xavier University of Louisiana v t e New Jersey Athletic Conference Full members Kean Cougars Montclair State Red Hawks New Jersey Lions New Jersey City Gothic Knights 1 Ramapo Roadrunners 1 Rowan Profs Rutgers–Camden Scarlet Raptors 1 Rutgers–Newark Scarlet Raiders 1 Stockton Ospreys William Paterson Pioneers Future members New Paltz Hawks 2 Affiliate members Football Christopher Newport Captains Salisbury Sea Gulls Men's tennis Oneonta Red Dragons Wisconsin–Eau Claire Blugolds Wisconsin–La Crosse Eagles Wisconsin–Whitewater Warhawks Track & field Farmingdale State Rams Penn State Harrisburg Lions St. Joseph's Golden Eagles 1 non-football member 2 joining in 2026 v t e Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association Current members Charleston Golden Eagles George Mason Patriots Harvard Crimson NJIT Highlanders Penn State Nittany Lions Princeton Tigers Sacred Heart Pioneers Former members Concordia Clippers East Stroudsburg Warriors Juniata Eagles New Haven Chargers New Paltz Hawks NYU Violets Queens Knights Rutgers–Newark Scarlet Raiders St. Francis Brooklyn Terriers Saint Francis Red Flash Springfield Pride Vassar Brewers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States 40°44′28″N 74°10′26″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.741°N 74.174°W ﻿ / 40.741; -74.174 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐df9rw
Cached time: 20250817053706
Cache expiry: 1275781
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.651 seconds
Real time usage: 0.851 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4943/1000000
Revision size: 27262/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 329170/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 67902/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 120015/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.353/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10940933/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  671.073      1 -total
 32.67%  219.233     15 Template:Navbox
 19.74%  132.458      1 Template:Reflist
 16.63%  111.618      1 Template:Rutgers
 16.56%  111.128      1 Template:Infobox_university
 15.35%  103.005      1 Template:Infobox
  9.86%   66.141      1 Template:Cite_book
  8.55%   57.403      1 Template:Short_description
  7.56%   50.716      1 Template:Navboxes
  6.77%   45.398     10 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2336320:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817053706 and revision id 1298048971. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rutgers_University–Newark&oldid=1298048971 " Categories : Rutgers University–Newark Universities and colleges established in 1936 Universities and colleges established in 1946 Universities and colleges in Newark, New Jersey 1946 establishments in New Jersey Public universities and colleges in New Jersey Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2019 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles needing additional references from December 2022 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 06:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rutgers University–Newark 2 languages Add topic

