Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Albanophobia in the 19th century 1.2 20th century 1.3 Origins and forms 2 In countries Toggle In countries subsection 2.1 Serbia 2.2 Greece 2.3 Italy 2.4 Switzerland 2.5 United Kingdom 2.6 Montenegro 2.7 North Macedonia 3 Derogatory terms 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Albanian sentiment 8 languages العربية Bosanski Español Français Hrvatski Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prejucide and/or discrimination towards Albanians as an ethnic group Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Albanian sentiment or Albanophobia is discrimination and prejudice towards Albanians as an ethnic group, described primarily in countries with a large Albanian population as immigrants, seen throughout Europe.

A similar term used with the same denotation is anti-albanianism [ 1 ] used in many sources similarly with albanophobia , although its similarities and/or differences are not defined. The opposite for Albanophobia is Albanophilia .

History [ edit ] Albanophobia in the 19th century [ edit ] Main articles: The Expulsion of the Albanians and Massacre of the Albanian Beys In 1889, Spiridon Gopčević published an ethnographic study titled Old Serbia and Macedonia that was a Serbian nationalist book on Kosovo and Macedonia and contained a pro-Serbian ethnographic map of Macedonia.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Gopčević's biographer argues that he did not actually go to Kosovo and the study is not based on authentic experiences.

[ 3 ] Within scholarship, Gopčević's study has been noted for its plagiarisms, manipulations and misrepresentations, especially overstressing the Serbian character of Macedonia.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Gopčević's views on Serbian and Albanian populations in Kosovo and also the issue of the Arnautaš theory or Albanians of alleged Serbian (descent) have only been partially examined by some authors.

[ 3 ] Noted for being an ardent Serbian nationalist, his book Old Serbia and Macedonia is seen as a work that opened the path for unprecedented Serbian territorial claims in the region.

[ 4 ] The Expulsion of the Albanians was a lecture presented by the Yugoslav historian Vaso Čubrilović (1897–1990) on 7 March 1937.

[ 5 ] 20th century [ edit ] Main article: Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars A series of massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars were committed by the Montenegrin Army , Serbian Army and paramilitaries , according to international reports.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] During the First Balkan War of 1912–13, the Serbia and Montenegro fought against the Ottoman Empire (many Albanians were among the Ottoman forces) and expelled the Ottoman forces in present-day Albania and Kosovo . The anti-Ottoman forces committed numerous war crimes against the Albanian population, which were reported by the European, American and Serbian opposition press.

[ 8 ] Most of the crimes happened between October 1912 and summer of 1913. The goal of the forced expulsions and massacres of ethnic Albanians was statistic manipulation before the London Ambassadors Conference which was to decide on the new Balkan borders.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] According to contemporary accounts, between 20,000 and 25,000 Albanians were killed during the first two to four months of the Balkan Wars.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Many of the victims were children, women and old people and were part of a warfare of extermination.

[ 13 ] Aside from massacres, civilians had their lips and noses severed.

[ 14 ] After the Second World War , thousands of Cham Albanians in Thesprotia , Greece were victims of forced migration and ethnic cleansing by the National Republican Greek League (EDES) from 1944 to 1945.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Origins and forms [ edit ] The term "Albanophobia" was coined by Anna Triandafyllidou in a report analysis called Racism and Cultural Diversity in the Mass Media published in 2002.

[ 17 ] Although, the first recorded usage of the term comes from 1982 in The South Slav journal, Volume 8 by Albanian author Arshi Pipa .

[ 18 ] The report by Triandafyllidou represented Albanian migrants in Greece.

[ 19 ] In countries [ edit ] Serbia [ edit ] Main articles: Expulsion of the Albanians 1877–1878 and Yugoslav colonization of Kosovo The Expulsion of the Albanians by Vaso Čubrilović Albanians in Belgrade Prison, 1912.  After the First Balkan War in 1912, thousands of Albanians were captured and sent to prison in Niš and Belgrade. Most of them were killed.

[ citation needed ] The origins of anti-Albanian propaganda in Serbia started in the 19th century with claims made by Serbian state on territories that were about to be controlled by Albanians after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire.

[ 20 ] By the late nineteenth century, Albanians were being characterized by Serbian government officials as a "wild tribe" with "cruel instincts".

[ 21 ] Although Jovan Cvijić acknowledged that Albanians were an autochthonous population of the Balkans, predating the arrival of the Slavs, he nevertheless described them as "the most barbarous tribes of Europe." [ 21 ] Meanwhile, politician Vladan Đorđević described Albanians as "modern Troglodytes " and "prehumans who slept in the trees", claiming they still had "tails" in the nineteenth century.

[ 22 ] Throughout the 1930s, a strong anti-Albanian sentiment existed in the country and solutions for the "Kosovo question" were put forward, and it involved large-scale deportation.

[ 23 ] These included Yugoslav -Turkish negotiations (1938) that outlined the removal of 40,000 Albanian families from the state to Turkey and another was a memorandum (1937) entitled The Expulsion of the Albanians written by a Serbian scholar Vaso Čubrilović (1897–1990).

[ 23 ] The document proposed methods for expelling Albanians [ 23 ] that included creating a "psychosis" by bribing clergymen to encourage the Albanians to leave the country, enforcing the law to the letter, secretly razing Albanian inhabited villages, ruthless application of all police regulations, ruthless collection of taxes and the payment of all private and public debts, the requisitioning of all public and municipal pasture land, the cancellation of concessions, the withdrawal of permits to exercise an occupation, dismissal from government, the demolition of Albanian cemeteries and many other methods.

[ 24 ] Aleksandar Ranković , the Yugoslav security chief, had a strong dislike of Albanians.

[ 25 ] Following the Second World War and until 1966, Ranković upheld Serbian control of Kosovo through repressive anti-Albanian policies.

[ 26 ] [ 25 ] According to historian Olivera Milosavljević , part of the modern intellectuals in Serbia wrote about Albanians mainly within the framework of stereotypes, regarding their "innate" hatred and desire for the destruction of Serbs, which was a product of their dominant characteristic of "primitivism" and "robbery". Beginning in the mid-1980s, words such as "genocide", "oppression", "robbery", and "rape" were used when referring to Albanians in speeches, so that any mention of Albanians as a national minority contained negative connotations.

[ 27 ] Milosavljević has also described how earlier authors depicted Albanians as incapable of having an autonomous state due to their "incivility", leading to the contemporary thesis that Skanderbeg was a Serb.

[ 28 ] During the end of the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s, activities undertaken by Serbian officials in Kosovo have been described as Albanophobic.

[ 29 ] The Serbian media during Milošević's era was known to espouse Serb nationalism while promoting xenophobia toward the other ethnicities in Yugoslavia . Ethnic Albanians were commonly characterized in the media as anti-Yugoslav counter-revolutionaries, rapists, and a threat to the Serb nation.

[ 30 ] During the Kosovo War , Serbian forces continually discriminated Kosovo Albanians : Throughout Kosovo , the forces of the FRY and Serbia have harassed, humiliated, and degraded Kosovo Albanian civilians through physical and verbal abuse. Policemen, soldiers, and military officers have persistently subjected Kosovo Albanians to insults, racial slurs, degrading acts, beatings, and other forms of physical mistreatment based on their racial, religious, and political identification.

[ 31 ] — War Crimes Indictment against Milosevic and others A 2011 survey in Serbia showed that 40% of the Serbian population would not like Albanians to live in Serbia, while 70% would not enter into a marriage with an Albanian individual.

[ 32 ] In 2012, Vuk Jeremić , the-then Serbian  Minister of Foreign Affairs, while commenting on Twitter about the Kosovo dispute, compared Albanians to the "evil Orcs " from the movie The Hobbit .

[ 33 ] In 2016, Minister of Foreign Affairs Aleksandar Vulin stated that Albania has no history and wants to steal the Serbian one.

[ 34 ] Before the start and during the 2016 UEFA European qualifier between Serbia and Albania in Belgrade that was abandoned, Serbian fans chanted 'Ubij, ubij Šiptara' (Kill, kill the Albanian). During the game, a drone carrying a banner depicting an image of Greater Albania was flown into the pitch, leading to on-field violence. After the game in Serbia, mostly in its northern province Vojvodina , after the match, at least a dozen bakeries and snack bars owned by ethnic Albanians were set on fire in Novi Sad , Sombor and Stara Pazova , and a bomb was used in one case.

[ 35 ] During 2017, amidst a background of political tension between Serbia and Kosovo , Serbian media engaged in warmongering and anti-Albanian sentiment by using ethnic slurs such as " Šiptar " in their coverage.

[ 36 ] In 2018, the Belgrade Supreme Court acknowledged that the word "Šiptar" is racist and discriminatory towards Albanians. According to the court, "Šiptar" is a term that defines Albanians as racially inferior to Serbs.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] However, some Serbian politicians still claim that the word is just an Albanian word for Albanians.

[ 39 ] In 2021, the tabloid Večernje novosti published an article claiming that in the second half of the 19th century, Albanians did not have any written documents.

[ 40 ] In 2024, the Serbian tabloid Informer reportedly published an article claiming that Gjergj Arianiti was of Serbian origin, referring to him as "Đorđe Arijanit Komninović Golemi." The article alleged that Albanians had "stolen Serbian history" and called for its defense, describing this narrative as part of a "neglected and forgotten" Serbian past appropriated by Albanians.

[ 41 ] Greece [ edit ] In Greece, the sentiment has existed mainly post-1990s, when many immigrants escaped from Albania to Greece .

[ 17 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] The stereotype by some in Greece of Albanians as criminal and poor has been subject of a 2001 study by the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights (IHFHR) and by the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC).

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] As of 2003, it was considered that prejudices and mistreatment of Albanians are still present in Greece, [ 44 ] but as of 2007 it was observed that such sentiments are gradually receding.

[ 46 ] According to a 2002 statement of the IHFUR, the Albanians are more likely to be killed by law enforcement officials than Romani people .

[ 44 ] In addition, the EUMC singles out ethnic Albanians as principal targets of racism. Furthermore, the EUMC found that undocumented Albanian migrants "experience serious discrimination in employment, particularly with respect to the payment of wages and social security contributions".

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Albanians are often pejoratively named and or called by Greeks as "Turks", represented in the expression " Turkalvanoi " .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Albanians in Greece are also classified in terms as "savage", while the Greeks view themselves as "civilized".

[ 49 ] Prejudicial representations of Albanians and Albanian criminality by the Greek media is largely responsible for the social construction of negative stereotypes, in contrast to the commonly held belief that Greek society is neither xenophobic nor racist.

[ 50 ] Anti-Albanian sentiment in Greece is more of a Greek media product, rather than a reflection of social and political attitudes.

[ 51 ] Although the Greek media have largely abandoned their negative stereotyping of Albanian immigrants (since c. 2000), public perception had already been negatively influenced.

[ 52 ] In March 2010, during an official military parade in Athens , Greek soldiers chanted "They are Skopians , they are Albanians, they are Turks we will make new clothes out of their skins". The Civil Protection Ministry of Greece reacted to this by suspending the coast guard officer who was in charge of the parade unit, and pledged to take tough action against the unit's members.

[ 53 ] Albanophobia in Greece is primarily due to post-communist migration as well as the fact that until the mid 2000s, Albanians formed the primary immigrant population.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Italy [ edit ] Albanophobia in Italy is primarily related to the Albanian immigrants mainly young adults who are stereotypically seen as criminals, drug dealers and rapists.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Italian media provide a lot of space and attention to crimes committed by ethnic Albanians, even those just presumed.

[ 58 ] After the Albanian crisis and subsequent Albanian mass migration to Italy, it was observed that Italian public opinion was "solidly and remarkably" anti-Albanian.

[ 59 ] In the 21st century, anti-Albanian sentiment remains widespread and prevalent in Italian society.

[ 60 ] Anti-Albanian sentiment is almost nonexistent in Italian media and among the general population, as the two countries enjoy excellent relations and Albanians are considered among the most well-integrated communities. In Italy, there are nearly 45,000 businesses owned or run by people of Albanian origin.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Switzerland [ edit ] Not infrequently, the Albanian diaspora in Switzerland is affected by xenophobia and racism . Integration difficulties and some criminal offences of some Albanians caused many Swiss to be prejudiced against Albanians, which has led to fear, hatred and insecurity.

[ 64 ] Political parties that publicly oppose excessive immigration and the conservatism of traditional Swiss culture - in particular the Swiss People's Party (SVP) - strengthen this negative attitude among many party supporters.

[ 65 ] These parties have already launched a number of popular initiatives, which were referred to by the Albanians as discriminatory.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In 1998, the Zurich SVP created an election poster with the words " Kosovo Albanians " and "No" in large letters when it came to financing an integration project for Albanians .

[ 68 ] In 2009, the Swiss People's Initiative "Against the Construction of Minarets" was adopted by the Swiss people . Many Muslim Albanians were outraged by this result and expressed their rejection. In 2010, the so-called "expulsion initiative" followed, which was also adopted by the voters. According to the law, foreigners who have committed serious crimes should be expelled from the country. The initiative on foreigners crime should thus reduce the crime rate and make the naturalization of foreigners more difficult. The "Sheep's Poster" designed by the SVP attracted international attention and was again described by many immigrant organisations in Switzerland as discriminatory.

[ 69 ] Economic integration continues to present difficulties for Albanians in Switzerland . In October 2018, Kosovo 's unemployment rate was 7.0% and in Macedonia population 5.3%, well above the figure for the rest of the permanent resident population. A study by the Federal Office for Migration justifies this with in part low vocational qualifications among the older generation and the reservations that Albanian youth are exposed to when entering the world of work. In the 1990s, many well-qualified Albanians, because of unrecognized diplomas, with jobs such as in construction or in the catering trade, in which the unemployment is generally higher. This also has implications for the social assistance rate, which is higher for ethnic Albanians , with significant differences depending on the country of origin. The most affected are people from Albania . In contrast, the number of students of Albanian descent is increasing today. In 2008, only 67 people were enrolled at Swiss universities, there are already 460 in 2017. Albanologists and migration researchers today assume that the integration and assimilation of Albanians are slowly increasing.

In its annual report, Amnesty International stated in 2010 that the "anti-minaret initiative" stigmatized Albanian Muslims in Switzerland and increased racism in Switzerland in general.

United Kingdom [ edit ] In recent years, there has been a significant increase in the number of Albanians arriving in the UK , many of them via small boat crossings from France . In 2022, Albanians made up around 35-45% of all migrants arriving by boat.

[ 70 ] A large number of these migrants tend to originate from Albania’s impoverished north, with Kukës, Dibër, and Shkodër counties in particular being areas of origin for these migrants.

[ 71 ] The trend raised concerns among some politicians and the public, with Albanian migrants being scrutinized.

[ 72 ] Since September 2022, British media has focused on Albanian migrants, portraying them negatively using xenophobic terms.

[ 73 ] Right-wing politicians have capitalized on public fears regarding immigration, often using inflammatory language that paints migrants as criminals or "invaders." Home Secretary Suella Braverman has been a prominent figure in this discourse.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Albanians are significantly overrepresented in the UK prison population . In 2020, Albanians made up over 1,500 inmates, representing roughly 10% of the foreign prison population, rising from 2% in 2013.

[ 76 ] By June 2022, the number of Albanian inmates had fallen to 1,336, but their proportion rose to 14%, maintaining the highest percentage of the foreign prison population in the UK. On a proportional basis, Albanians are 10 times more likely than the general public to be incarcerated.

[ 77 ] Albanians make up 1.6% of all prisoners despite representing fewer than 0.05% of the UK population. Convictions range from serious offenses such as murder , manslaughter , rape , and firearms offenses to drug-related crimes like producing cannabis in gang-run farms.

[ 78 ] This overrepresentation has contributed to negative perceptions and stereotypes about Albanians and their involvement in criminal activities.

Montenegro [ edit ] See also: Bar massacre By 1942, the city of Bar became a home to many Serbians. Many of these joined the Partisan forces and participated in their activities at Bar.

[ 79 ] The Bar massacre ( Albanian : Masakra e Tivarit ) was the killings of an unknown number of mostly ethnic Albanians from Kosovo [a] Yugoslav Partisans in late March or early April 1945 in Bar , a municipality in Montenegro, at the end of World War II .

The victims were Albanian recruits from Kosovo , who had been pressed by the Yugoslav Partisans into service. These men were then assembled in Prizren and marched on foot in three columns to Bar where they were supposed to receive short training and then sent off to the front.

[ 79 ] The march took the rugged mountain ranges of Kosovo and Montenegro to reach its destination. Upon arrival locals reported that these men, who had marched a considerable distance, were "exhausted" and "distressed". The column of men which stretched a few kilometres was then gathered on the Barsko Polje. At one point, in Polje, one of the Albanians from the column attacked and killed one of the Yugoslav officers, Božo Dabanović.

[ 79 ] Very soon after that somebody from the column threw a smuggled bomb at the commander of the brigade.

[ 79 ] This created a panic among the Partisans. The guards watching over the recruits then fired into the crowd killing many and prompting the survivors to flee into the surrounding mountains.

[ 79 ] In another case, several hundred Albanians were herded into a tunnel, near Bar, which was subsequently sealed off so that all of those trapped within the tunnel were asphyxiated .

[ 80 ] Yugoslav sources put the number of victims at 400 [ 79 ] while Albanian sources put the figure at 2,000 killed in Bar alone.

[ 81 ] According to Croatian historian Ljubica Štefan , the Partisans killed 1,600 Albanians in Bar on 1 April after an incident at a fountain.

[ 82 ] There are also accounts claiming that the victims included young boys.

[ 83 ] Other sources cited that the killing started en route for no apparent reason and this was supported by the testimony of Zoi Themeli in his 1949 trial.

[ 84 ] Themeli was a collaborator who worked as an important official of the Sigurimi , the Communist Albanian secret police.

[ 85 ] After the massacre, the site was immediately covered in concrete by the Yugoslav communist regime and built an airport on top of the mass grave.

[ 83 ] North Macedonia [ edit ] Anti-Albanian inscription written in Macedonian on a mosque, meaning "Death for Albanians " Ethnic tensions have simmered in North Macedonia since the end of an armed conflict in 2001 , where the ethnic Albanian National Liberation Army fought against the security forces of North Macedonia.

The Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts was accused of Albanophobia in 2009 after it published its first encyclopedia in which was claimed that the Albanian endonym , Shqiptar , means "highlander" and is primarily used by other Balkan peoples to describe Albanians if used in South Slavic languages the endonym is considered derogatory by the Albanian community. The encyclopedia also claimed that the Albanians settled in the region in the 16th century.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Distribution of the encyclopedia was ceased after a series of public protests.

In a terrorist act known as the Smilkovci lake killings , on 12 April 2012, five young ethnic Macedonian teenagers were shot dead by persons of ethnic Albanian origin. They were later found guilty and sentenced to life.

[ 89 ] This provoked anti-Albanian sentiment. 
On 16 April 2012, a protest against these attacks and demanding justice was held in Skopje. Some of the participants in the protests were chanting anti-Albanian slogans.

[ 90 ] On 1 March 2013 in Skopje , a mob of ethnic Macedonians protested against the decision to appoint Talat Xhaferi , an ethnic Albanian politician, as Minister of Defence .

[ 91 ] The protest turned violent when the mob started hurling stones and also attacking Albanian bystanders and police officers alike. The police reported 3 injured civilians, five injured police officers and much damage to private property. Although the city hospital reported treating five heavily injured Albanian men, two of which are on Intensive-care unit . During this protest part of the mob burned the Albanian flag. A mob of Macedonian nationalists also stormed the Macedonian Parliament on 27 April 2017 in reaction to the election of Talat Xhaferi as Speaker of the Assembly, numerous were injured during the riot.

On the 108th anniversary of the Congress of Manastir the museum of the Albanian alphabet in Bitola was vandalized, and the windows and doors were broken. A poster with the words "Death to Albanians" and with the drawing of a lion cutting the heads of the Albanian double-headed eagle was placed on the front doors of the museum.

[ 92 ] One week after this incident, on the day of the Albanian Declaration of Independence graffiti with the same messages, as those of the previous week, were placed on the directorate of Pelister National Park .

[ 93 ] Amongst the unemployed, Albanians are overrepresented. In public institutions as well as many private sectors they are underrepresented. They also face hidden discrimination by public officials.

[ 94 ] According to the United States' Country Report on Human Rights 2012 for Macedonia "certain ministries declined to share information about ethnic makeup of employees".

The same report also added: "...ethnic Albanians and other national minorities, with the exception of ethnic Serbs and Vlachs, were underrepresented in the civil service and other state institutions, including the military, the police force, and the intelligence services, as well as the courts, the national bank, customs, and public enterprises, in spite of efforts to recruit qualified candidates from these communities. Ethnic Albanians constituted 18 percent of army personnel, while minority communities as a whole accounted for 25 percent of the population according to statistics provided by the government." [ 95 ] Derogatory terms [ edit ] Greek terms: Turkoalvanós/Tourkalvanoí/Τουρκαλβανοί (" Turco-Albanian ").

[ 96 ] Derogatory term for Albanian.

The neutral terms are Αλβανός/Alvanós (m.), Αλβανή/Alvaní (f.) and Αλβανίδα/Alvanída (f.).

Tourkotsámides / Τουρκοτσάμηδες ('Turco-Chams') [ 97 ] —derogatory term for Cham Albanians .

The neutral term is Tsámides/Τσάμηδες (Chams).

South-Slavic terms: Former Yugoslavia (most notably Serbia , North Macedonia and Montenegro ) Šiptar/Шиптар (derogatory) (m.) [ 98 ] and Šiptarka/Шиптарка (f.) – are derogatory terms for Albanians. Formed from their endonym Shqiptar which is used by Balkan Slavic ethnicities such as the Serbs and Macedonians and it carries pejorative meanings which classify a person as being somewhat backward or aggressive.

[ 99 ] The Albanian term 'Shqiptar' was originally borrowed into south-Slavic as Šćìpetār/Шћѝпета̄р [ 100 ] (with a 'ć', now archaic form) and it wasn't considered offensive - unlike the term without 'ć' (Šiptar).

The neutral terms are Albanac/Албaнац (m., srb-cro); Albanec/Албанец (m., mac.) and Albanka/Албанка (f.).

See also [ edit ] Turco-Albanian Discrimination Racism Xenophobia Islamophobia References [ edit ] ^ Michael Mandelbaum (2000) The new European diasporas: national minorities and conflict in Eastern Europe , Council on Foreign Relations Press p. 234 ^ Yosmaolğu, Ipek K. (2010).

"Constructing national identity in Ottoman Macedonia" . In Zartman, I. William (ed.).

Understanding life in the borderlands: Boundaries in depth and in motion .

University of Georgia Press . p. 168.

ISBN 9780820336145 .

^ a b c d Promitzer 2015 , pp. 204–205."In 1889 the journalist Spiridon Gopčević (1855-1936) published an allegedly scientific, but for all intents and purposes Serbian nationalist monograph on Macedonia and "Old Serbia" (i.e. Kosovo). Gopčević’s biographer nevertheless argues that the monograph is not the result of authentic experiences and that he was never in Kosovo. While his manipulations with respect to the allegedly Serbian character of Macedonia have already been the topic of exhaustive research, his views on the mutual relations between the Serbian and Albanian populations of Kosovo, in particular with respect to the contested notion of so-called Arnautaš" (Albanians of alleged Serbian (descent), have been only addressed superficially by various authors. Whatever the final judgment might be, Gopčević’s monograph represents a singular attempt to combine sympathies for the cultural development of the Serbian nation with the aspirations of Austria-Hungary as a Great Power in the Balkans." ^ a b Elsie, Robert (2012).

A biographical Dictionary of Albanian history . IB Tauris. p. 117.

ISBN 9781780764313 .

^ Roger D. Petersen (30 September 2011).

Western Intervention in the Balkans: The Strategic Use of Emotion in Conflict . Cambridge University Press. p. 159.

ISBN 978-1-139-50330-3 .

The colonisation program, despite the emigration of tens of thousands, failed to significantly change the ethnic imbalance in Kosovo. The idea, however, persisted. Vaso Čubrilović, a respected historian, wrote in a 7 March 1937, government memorandum entitled "The Expulsion of the Albanians", "It is impossible to repel the Albanians just by gradual colonization...The only possibility and method is the brutal power of a well-organized state... We have already stressed that for us the only efficient way is the mass deportation of the Albanians out of their triangle".

[ dubious – discuss ] ^ United States Department of State (1943).

Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States . U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 115 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ International Commission to Inquire into the Causes and Conduct of the Balkan Wars; Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Division of Intercourse and Education (1 January 1914).

"Report of the International Commission to Inquire into the Causes and Conduct of the Balkan War" . Washington, D.C.: The Endowment . Retrieved 6 September 2016 – via Internet Archive.

^ a b c Leo Freundlich: Albania's Golgotha Archived 31 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Otpor okupaciji i modernizaciji" . 9 March 2007 . Retrieved 6 September 2016 .

^ a b Hudson, Kimberly A. (5 March 2009).

Justice, Intervention, and Force in International Relations: Reassessing Just War Theory in the 21st Century . Taylor & Francis. p. 128.

ISBN 9780203879351 . Retrieved 6 September 2016 – via Google Books.

^ Archbishop Lazër Mjeda: Report on the Serb Invasion of Kosova and Macedonia Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Rama, Shinasi (2019).

Nation Failure, Ethnic Elites, and Balance of Power: The International Administration of Kosova . Springer. pp.

72– 73.

ISBN 978-3030051921 . Retrieved 27 March 2020 .

^ Bessel, Richard (2006).

No Man's Land of Violence: Extreme Wars in the 20th Century . Wallstein Verlag. p. 226.

ISBN 978-3-89244-825-9 . Retrieved 24 December 2019 .

^ Tatum, Dale C. (2010).

Genocide at the Dawn of the Twenty-First Century: Rwanda, Bosnia, Kosovo, and Darfur . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 113.

ISBN 978-0-230-62189-3 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ Evergeti, Venetia; Hatziprokopiou, Panos and Nicolas Prevelakis Cesari, Jocelyne (30 October 2014).

The Oxford Handbook of European Islam . OUP Oxford. p. 352.

ISBN 978-0-19-102641-6 .

Oxford University Press.

^ Tsoutsoumpis 2015 , p. 137.

^ a b By Russell King, Nicola Mai, Out of Albania: from crisis migration to social inclusion in Italy , pp 114 ^ The South Slav journal, Volume 8 page 21, Arshi Pipa (1982).

^ By Anna Triandafyllidou, Racism and Cultural Diversity In the Mass Media Archived 27 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Robert Schuman Centre, European University Institute, pp. 149 ^ By Ivo Banac , The national question in Yugoslavia - origins, history, politics , page 293 ^ a b Stefanović, Djordje (2005). "Seeing the Albanians through Serbian eyes: The Inventors of the Tradition of Intolerance and their Critics, 1804-1939." European History Quarterly .

35 . (3): 472. "Officials of the Serbian Ministry of Foreign affairs described Albanians as a 'wild tribe' with 'cruel instincts'... A number of Serbian intellectuals and journalists added to the angry hate propaganda that seemed to culminate during the preparations for the Balkan Wars. Cvijić argued that 'there is a general consensus that the Albanians are the most barbarous tribes of Europe'. Another intellectual described the Albanians as 'European Indians' and 'lazy savages'", ^ Gay, Peter (1993).

The Cultivation of Hatred: The Bourgeois Experience: Victoria to Freud (The Bourgeois Experience: Victoria to Freud ). WW Norton & Company. p. 82. "In 1913, Dr. Vladan Djordjević, a Serbian politician and expert in public health, characterized Albanians as bloodthirsty, stunted, animal-like, so invincibly ignorant that they could not tell sugar from snow. These "modern Troglodytes" reminded him of "prehumans, who slept in the trees, to which they were fastened by their tails." True, through the millennia, the human rail had withered away, but "among the Albanians there seem to have been humans with tails as late as the nineteenth century."" ^ a b c Dragović-Soso, Jasna (2002).

Saviours of the nation: Serbia's intellectual opposition and the revival of nationalism . Hurst & co. p. 128.

ISBN 9780773570924 .

^ Ćubrilović, Vaso, The Expulsion of the Albanians: Memorandum Archived 29 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine 1937 ^ a b Petersen, Roger D. (2011).

Western intervention in the Balkans: The strategic use of emotion in conflict . Cambridge University Press. p. 142.

ISBN 9781139503303 .

^ Mertus, Julie (1999).

Kosovo: How myths and truths started a war . University of California Press. pp.

98 .

ISBN 9780520218659 .

anti-Albanian Rankovic.

^ Milosavljević, Olivera (2002).

"Ogledi broj 1: U tradiciji nacionalizma ili stereotipi srpskih intelektualaca XX veka o "nama" i "drugima" " [Experiment Number One: In the Tradition of Nationalism or Stereotypes of Serbian Intellectuals of the 20th century about "Us" and "Others"] (PDF) (in Serbo-Croatian). Helsinki Committee for Human Rights in Serbia. pp.

218– 219.

^ Milosavljević, Olivera (13 October 2015).

"Skanderbeg was a Serb" .

pescanik.net .

^ By Nebojša Popov, Drinka Gojković, The road to war in Serbia: trauma and catharsis , pp. 222 ^ International Centre Against Censorship. "Forging War: The Media in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina".

International Centre Against Censorship, Article 19 . Avon, United Kingdom: Bath Press, May 1994. P55 ^ American Public Media.

"Justice for Kosovo" . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Raste etnička distanca među građanima Srbije" .

politika.rs . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Barlovac, Bojana (19 December 2012). " Jeremic Likens Kosovars to 'Hobbit's' Evil Orcs ".

Balkan Insight . Retrieved 16 May 2015.

^ "Vulin: Kosovski Albanci pokušavaju da otmu srpsku istoriju" .

rts.rs . 28 June 2016.

^ Rujevic, Nemanja (21 October 2014).

"Rising Nationalism" .

Deutsche Welle .

^ Rudic, Filip (16 May 2017).

"Rabid Anti-Albanian Sentiment Grips Serbian Media" . Retrieved 25 October 2019 .

^ "Serbia: l'Alta corte emette sentenza storica. "Šiptar", un termine offensivo" . 22 October 2018. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 December 2020 .

^ "Serbian court deems 'siptar' as offensive" . 22 October 2018.

^ "Belgrade Court Decides in Favor of Vulin Using Pejorative Word for Albanians" . 9 February 2021. Archived from the original on 9 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 June 2021 .

^ "DOKAZI DA ALBANCI LAŽU O ISTORIJI NA 4.000 STRANA: Do druge polovine 19. veka nema nijednog autentičnog albanskog dokumenta" .

novosti.rs . 4 July 2021.

^ "Albanci kradu našu istoriju jer nemaju svoju! Istina o svim srpskim teritorijama isplivala na videlo" .

informer.rs . 5 April 2024.

^ Georgios Karyotis, Irregular Migration in Greece , pp. 9 ^ By Russell King, Nicola Mai, Out of Albania: from crisis migration to social inclusion in Italy , pp 21 ^ a b c d United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (2003).

"Refworld - Greece: Treatment of ethnic Albanians" .

Refworld . Archived from the original on 16 April 2013 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ a b (EUMC Nov. 2001, 25, 38 n. 85) ^ Triandafyllidou, Anna (1 March 2007).

"Mediterranean Migrations: Problems and Prospects for Greece and Italy in the Twenty-first Century" .

Mediterranean Politics .

12 (1): 77– 84.

doi : 10.1080/13629390601136855 .

ISSN 1362-9395 .

S2CID 154311926 .

^ Millas, Iraklis (2006). "Tourkokratia: History and the image of Turks in Greek literature." South European Society & Politics.

11 . (1):  50. "The 'timeless' existence of the Other (and the interrelation of the Self with this Other) is secured by the name used to define him or her. Greeks often name as 'Turks' various states and groups—such as the Seljuks, the Ottomans, even the Albanians ( Turkalvanoi )".

^ Megalommatis, M. Cosmas (1994).

Turkish-Greek Relations and the Balkans: A Historian's Evaluation of Today's Problems . Cyprus Foundation. p. 28. "Muslim Albanians have been called " Turkalvanoi " in Greek, and this is pejorative." ^ Nitsiakos, Vassilis (2010).

On the border: Transborder mobility, ethnic groups and boundaries along the Albanian-Greek frontier . LIT Verlag. p. 65. "The few exchanges also bear the imprint of the above structural asymmetry and reflect the level of development of the two countries. While mainly agricultural and dairy products (drugs and weapons are a separate chapter) flow in from Albania, mostly uncontrollably, from Greece to Albania we have, in addition to money, a flow of a great gamut of material goods and products, from simple items of everyday use and consumption to electrical equipment and cars. One may say that, whereas Albanian products represent "nature", Greek ones represent "civilization", a dichotomy that characterizes the differences between the two groups from the point of view of the Greeks: Albanians are classified as "savage", while Greeks as "civilized", a fact that expresses, of course, the general racist attitude of the Greeks." ^ Diversity and equality for Europe Annual Report 2000 Archived 1 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine . European Monitoring Centre of Racism and Xenophobia, p. 38 ^ Genov, Nikolai (2006).

Ethnicity and Mass Media in South Eastern Europe . Münster: Lit. p. 36.

ISBN 978-3-8258-9348-4 .

^ Gogonas, Nikos (16 April 2010).

Bilingualism and Multiculturalism in Greek Education: Investigating Ethnic Language Maintenance among Pupils of Albanian and Egyptian Origin in Athens . Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4438-2214-5 .

^ "Greek soldiers chant anti-Turkish-Albanian slogans at military parade - Balkans - Worldbulletin News" .

World Bulletin . Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Lazaridis, Gabriella, and Maria Koumandraki. "Albanian migration to Greece: patterns and processes of inclusion and exclusion in the labour market." European Societies 9, no. 1 (2007): 91-111.

^ Lazaridis, Gabriella, and Iordanis Psimmenos. "Migrant flows from Albania to Greece: economic, social and spatial exclusion." In Eldorado or Fortress? Migration in Southern Europe, pp. 170-185. Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2000.

^ King, Russell; Mai, Nicola (2009).

"Italophilia meets Albanophobia: Paradoxes of asymmetric assimilation and identity processes among Albanian immigrants in Italy" .

Ethnic and Racial Studies (Submitted manuscript).

32 : 117– 138.

doi : 10.1080/01419870802245034 .

S2CID 55552400 .

^ "Breaking the Albanian stereotype" . Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 March 2010 .

^ King, Russell; Mai, Nicola (2008).

Out of Albania . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 9781845455446 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Perlmutter, Ted (1998).

"The Politics of Proximity: The Italian Response to the Albanian Crisis" .

International Migration Review .

32 (1): 203– 222.

doi : 10.1177/019791839803200109 .

ISSN 0197-9183 .

S2CID 145184372 .

^ Stanley, Flavia (17 March 2015).

On Belonging, Difference and Whiteness: Italy's Problem with Immigration .

Doctoral Dissertations (Thesis). pp.

66– 67.

doi : 10.7275/6466436.0 – via University of Massachusetts Amherst .

^ "Oltre 30 mila, le imprese di immigrati albanesi in Italia" . 22 July 2014.

^ "La crescita dei giovani imprenditori albanesi" . 13 December 2023.

^ "Imprese albanesi in Italia a quota 32mila: Domina il settore edile" . 2 March 2018.

^ "Die Albaner werden dereinst so integriert sein, wie die Italiener" . 27 May 2011. Archived from the original on 9 December 2021 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ "SVP mit Ausländerpolitik auf dem Vormarsch" . 8 December 2009 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ "Stellungnahme zur Minarett-Initiative" . 2 November 2013 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ "Zentralrat will Minarettverbot kippen" . 29 November 2010 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ "SVP-Plakat: Freispruch" . 7 December 2001 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ "Misioni i albinfo.ch" . 21 August 2009 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ Jones, Ian (24 November 2022).

"Albanians make up just over a third of small boat arrivals in 2022 so far" .

The Independent .

^ Cela, Lindita (19 June 2019).

"UK Drug Gangs Recruit in Albania's Remote North" .

Balkan Insight . Retrieved 7 December 2024 .

^ "The vilification of Albanian migrants: is there more than meets the eye?" .

openaccessgovernment.org . 23 November 2022.

^ Malaj, Alexia (2024).

"Navigating the UK's asylum landscape amidst the surge of Albanian migration" .

unipd-centrodirittiumani.it .

^ O'Callaghan, Laura (7 December 2022).

"Albanians in UK hit by 'wave of discrimination' amid migrant crisis blame game" .

The National .

^ Ypi, Lea (4 November 2022).

"We Albanians are just the latest scapegoats for Britain's failing ideological project" .

The Guardian .

^ Ford, Richard.

"Albanians become largest foreign group in prisons" .

The Times . Retrieved 1 September 2021 .

^ "Not all migrants are good for Britain. We should only let in the ones who are" .

The Telegraph . 26 November 2023.

^ Hymas, Charles (29 May 2023).

"Scale of Albanian Channel migrants crime wave in the UK revealed" .

The Telegraph .

^ a b c d e f "Željko Milović-DRUGI SVJETSKI RAT" . Montenengrina Digitalna Biblioteka.

^ Miranda Vickers (28 January 2011).

The Albanians: A Modern History . I.B.Tauris.

ISBN 9780857736550 .

^ "Massive Grave of Albanian Victims of Tivari Massacre uncovered" . Albanian Telegraphic Agency. 19 September 1996 . Retrieved 31 August 2012 .

^ Ljubica Štefan (1999).

Mitovi i zatajena povijest . K. Krešimir.

ISBN 978-953-6264-85-8 .

^ a b Bytyci, Enver (2015).

Coercive Diplomacy of NATO in Kosovo . Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 12.

ISBN 9781443872720 .

^ Fevziu, Blendi (1 February 2016).

Enver Hoxha: The Iron Fist of Albania . London: I.B.Tauris.

ISBN 9780857729088 .

^ Pearson, Owen (2004).

Albania in the Twentieth Century, A History: Volume III: Albania as Dictatorship and Democracy, 1945-99 . London: I.B.Tauris. p. 343.

ISBN 1845111052 .

^ "B92 - News - Macedonian encyclopedia pulled from shelves" .

B92 . Archived from the original on 13 December 2013 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ Rashidi, Nazim.

"Dënohet Enciklopedia maqedonase" . BBC . Retrieved 28 November 2012 .

^ "Macedonian Encyclopedia Sparks Balkan Ethnic Row" .

RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty . 24 September 2009 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ BRIN (22 February 2021).

"Murder Trial" . BI . Retrieved 22 February 2021 .

^ Përleshje mes policisë dhe protestuesve në Shkup .

YouTube . 16 April 2012.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2015 .

^ "Приведени неколкумина учесници во инцидентот пред Влада" . Puls 24. Archived from the original on 2 March 2013 . Retrieved 2 March 2013 .

^ "ХУЛИГАНИ ГО ДЕМОЛИРАА МУЗЕЈОТ НА АЛБАНСКАТА АЗБУКА" . 21TV. 18 March 2016. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 22 November 2016 .

^ "KËRCËNIM NË FESTËN E FLAMURIT 'VDEKJE SHQIPTARËVE' " . TV-21. Archived from the original on 28 November 2016 . Retrieved 28 November 2016 .

^ "Albanians - Minority Rights Group" . 19 June 2015.

^ "Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Macedonia" . Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. Archived from the original on 21 May 2018 . Retrieved 26 April 2013 .

^ Aarbakke, Vemund.

"The Muslim Minority of Greek Thrace: Volume 1" . University of Bergen. p. 48.

^ Chidiroglou, Paulos (1990).

Symvolē stēn Hellēnikē Tourkologia (in German). Athēna: Hērodotos. p. 127.

ISBN 9789607290182 .

Hiermit nicht zu verwechseln sind die zusammengesetzen Volksnamen, die sich auf Herkunft oder Religion beziehen, wie z.B. Τουρκαλβανός (Turkalbaner), Τουρκοκρήτες (Turkkreter), Τουρκοκύπριοι (Turkzyprioten). [Hereby does not to be confused the composite national name, they were referred to by origin or religion, such as Τουρκαλβανός (Turco-Albanian) Τουρκοκρήτες (Turco-Cretans), Τουρκοκύπριοι (Turko-Cypriots).]" ^ "šȉptar" .

Hrvatski jezični portal (in Croatian).

^ Guzina, Dejan (2003). "Kosovo or Kosova – Could it be both? The Case of Interlocking Serbian and Albanian Nationalisms". In Florian Bieber and Židas Daskalovski (eds.).

Understanding the war in Kosovo . Psychology Press. p.30.

^ "Šćìpetār (arh. jez. knjiž/archaic form)" .

Hrvatski jezični portal .

Sources [ edit ] Promitzer, Christian (2015). "Austria and the Balkans: Exploring the role of travelogues in the construction of an area". In Kaser, Karl (ed.).

Southeast European Studies in a Globalizing World . Münster: Lit Verlag. pp.

189– 206.

ISBN 9781443842839 .

Tsoutsoumpis, Spyros (December 2015).

"Violence, resistance and collaboration in a Greek borderland: the case of the Muslim Chams of Epirus" .

Qualestoria (2): 119– 138 . Retrieved 14 June 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Treatment of ethnic Albanians in Greece Archived 9 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine (UNHCR) Stephanie Schwandner-Sievers: Albanians, Albanianism and the strategic subversion of stereotypes Italy's Conflicted Responses to Albanian Immigration and Lamerica's Transitive Historical Consciousness Italophilia Meets Albanophobia USA Today - Anti-racism rally held after deadly soccer game Olivera Milosavljević: Stereotipi srpskih intelektualaca XX veka o Albancima (Serbian) The Expulsion of the Albanians: Memorandum Archived 29 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Albanian_sentiment&oldid=1306240769 " Categories : Anti-Albanian sentiment Discrimination in Italy Discrimination in Greece Anti-national sentiment Hidden categories: All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from October 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Serbo-Croatian-language sources (sh) CS1: unfit URL CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles containing Albanian-language text This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 18:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Albanian sentiment 8 languages Add topic

