Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organization 2 Reception 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Hegemony and Socialist Strategy 3 languages Español Italiano Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1985 book by Chantal Mouffe and Ernesto Laclau Hegemony and Socialist Strategy Cover to the 2nd Edition Authors Chantal Mouffe and Ernesto Laclau Language English Subject Political theory Publisher Verso (New Left) Publication date 1985 Publication place United Kingdom Media type Print ( hardcover and paperback ) Pages 197 ( first edition ) ISBN 0860910679 (Verso) OCLC 67440480 Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics is a 1985 work of political theory in the post-Marxist tradition by Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe . Developing several sharp divergences from the tenets of canonical Marxist thought, the authors begin by tracing historically varied discursive constitutions of class , political identity, and social self-understanding, and then tie these to the contemporary importance of hegemony as a destabilized analytic which avoids the traps of various procedures Mouffe and Laclau feel constitute a foundational flaw in Marxist thought: essentializations of class identity, the use of a priori interpretative paradigms with respect to history and contextualization, the privileging of the base/superstructure binary above other explicative models.

Organization [ edit ] The book is divided into four chapters (~50 pages each). The first two chapters deal with conceptual developments in the manner of an intellectual history , albeit with much more of an eye to disputation and intervention than traditional intellectual history employs. Specifically, Chapter 1 discusses the work of Rosa Luxemburg , Karl Kautsky , Eduard Bernstein , and Georges Sorel (among other texts by major thinkers in the Marxist tradition). Chapter 2's discussion of Gramsci 's conception of cultural hegemony is followed by Chapter 3's more politicized development of Laclau and Mouffe's own arguments regarding hegemony's character and constitution. Finally, the fourth chapter argues for the relevance of hegemony as an analytic for the understanding and governance of contemporary politics, political engagement, and self-understanding on the Left .

Reception [ edit ] Hegemony and Socialist Strategy was greeted with positive reviews and has become a reference point in its field; for example, Marxist philosopher Slavoj Žižek cited Hegemony and Socialist Strategy as a work having influenced his book, The Sublime Object of Ideology .

[ 1 ] Furthermore, its resolutely "post-Marxist" self-definition marks it as one of the first major texts associated with this disciplinary development. A new edition was published in 2001, which included a preface by the authors in which they reaffirmed their commitment to the arguments made in 1985.

The concept had a great influence on the theory of social movements and post-colonial research [ 2 ] and marked the emergence of post-Marxism in the social sciences.

[ 3 ] The work also inspired the political movements Podemos and La France insoumise .

[ 4 ] Norman Geras , in a New Left Review article titled "Post-Marxism?", lambasted Laclau and Mouffe for what he regarded as shallow obscurantism grounded on basic misunderstandings of both Marx and Marxism. After Laclau's and Mouffe's response to Geras' paper (in "Post-Marxism without apologies"), Geras doubled down with "Ex-Marxism Without Substance: Being A Real Reply to Laclau and Mouffe" in which he further criticised the post-Marxist turn.

References [ edit ] ^ Butler, Rex.

"Slavoj Zizek: What is a Master-Signifier" . lacan.com.

Archived from the original on 26 November 2010 . Retrieved 30 June 2010 .

^ International encyclopedia of the social sciences. Vol. 6 / William A. Darity, Jr., editor in chief. — Detroit: Macmillan Reference, USA, 2008. — P. 396 ^ The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology / (Ed.) George Ritzer. — Oxford, etc: Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2009.

ISBN 978-1-4051-2433-1 ^ "Chantal Mouffe, the philosopher who inspires Jean-Luc Mélenchon" .

Versobooks.com .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2017 . Retrieved 14 April 2017 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Smith, Anna Marie.

Laclau and Mouffe: The Radical Democratic Imaginary. — London: Routledge, 1998.

Howarth, David.

Discourse. — Milton Keynes: Open University Press, 2000.

Philips, Louise, Jorgensen, Marianne.

Discourse Analysis as Theory and Method. — London: Sage, 2002.

Howarth, David, Aletta Norval and Yannis Stavrakakis (eds).

Discourse Theory and Political Analysis. — Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002.

Critchley, Simon and Oliver Marchart (eds).

Laclau: A Critical Reader. — London: Routledge, 2004.

Breckman, Warren.

Adventures of the Symbolic: Postmarxism and Radical Democracy. — New York: Columbia University Press, 2013.

Howarth, David and Jacob Torfing (eds).

Discourse Theory in European Politics. — Houndmills: Palgrave, 2005.

Torfing, Jacob.

New Theories of Discourse: Laclau, Mouffe, Žižek. — Oxford: Blackwell, 1999.

Jacobs, Thomas.

The Dislocated Universe of Laclau and Mouffe: An Introduction to Post-Structuralist Discourse Theory — Critical Review 30(3-4), 2018.

v t e Chantal Mouffe Books Hegemony and Socialist Strategy (1985) The Democratic Paradox (2000) On the Political (2005) For a Left Populism (2018) Miscellaneous Agonism Essex School of discourse analysis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hegemony_and_Socialist_Strategy&oldid=1245193964 " Categories : 1985 non-fiction books Books about socialism Books about cultural hegemony Books by Ernesto Laclau Books by Chantal Mouffe Collaborative non-fiction books Works about Marxism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2023 This page was last edited on 11 September 2024, at 15:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hegemony and Socialist Strategy 3 languages Add topic

