Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of financial markets 2 Raising capital Toggle Raising capital subsection 2.1 Lenders 2.1.1 Individuals and doubles 2.1.2 Companies 2.1.3 Banks 2.2 Borrowers 3 Derivative products 4 Analysis of financial markets 5 Financial market slang 6 Functions of financial markets 7 Components of financial market Toggle Components of financial market subsection 7.1 Based on market levels 7.2 Based on security types 8 See also 9 Sources 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Financial market 56 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Македонски Minangkabau Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Generic term for all markets in which trading takes place with capital This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Financial market" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Financial markets Public market Exchange · Securities Bond market Bond valuation Corporate bond Fixed income Government bond High-yield debt Municipal bond Securitization Stock market Common stock Growth stock Preferred stock Registered share Shareholder Stock Stockbroker Stock certificate Stock exchange Watered stock Other markets Derivatives ( Credit derivative Futures exchange Hybrid security ) Foreign exchange ( Currency Exchange rate ) Commodity ETF Money Mutual fund Option Real estate Reinsurance Structured product Swap (finance) Alternative investment Private equity Private credit Leveraged buyout Venture Growth Secondaries SPAC Carried Interest Leveraged finance Over-the-counter (off-exchange) Forwards Options Spot market Swaps Trading Participants Regulation Clearing Related areas Asset management Banks and banking Bulls and Bears Diversification ESG Climate finance Eco-investing Impact investing Sustainable finance Greenwashing Financial technology Investment management Market risk Market trend Speculative attack v t e Part of a series on financial services Banking Types of banks Advising Banq Bulge bracket Central Commercial Community development Cooperative Credit union Custodian Depository Development Direct Export credit agency Investment Industrial Merchant Middle market Money center Mutual savings Neobank Offshore Participation Payments Postal savings Private Public Retail Savings Savings and loan Universal Wholesale Bank holding company Lists of banks Accounts · Cards Accounts Christmas club Deposit Interest rate Money-market Savings Time deposit (Bond) Transaction (checking / current) Cards ATM Credit Debit Prepaid Funds transfer Cheque Card Electronic Bill payment Instant payment Mobile Wire RTGS NS Direct debit ACH Giro SWIFT Correspondent account CLS CIPS SPFS BRICS PAY Terms Asset allocation management Automated teller machine Bad debt Bank rate List Bank regulation Bank secrecy Asset growth Capital asset Cash Climate finance Corporate finance Disinvestment Diversification (finance) Eco-investing Economic bubble Economic expansion Enterprise value Enterprise risk management Environmental finance ESG Ethical banking Financial analysis analyst asset economics engineering forecast plan planner services Fractional-reserve banking Full-reserve banking Fundamental analysis Growth investing Hedge (finance) Impact investing Investment advisory Investment management Islamic banking Loan Mathematical finance Mobile banking Money creation Pension fund Private banking Sustainability Sustainable finance Speculation Statistical finance Strategic financial management Stress test (financial) Structured finance Structured product Toxic asset Related topics Asset pricing Bond (finance) Capital structure Corporate finance Cost of capital Equity (finance) Ethical banking Exchange-traded fund Financial law market participants regulation risk system History of banking List of banks Market risk Personal finance Public finance Security (finance) Shares Sustainable Development Goals Systematic risk Systemic risk Time value of money Too big to fail Too connected to fail Watered stock Category Commons Portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e A financial market is a market in which people trade financial securities and derivatives at low transaction costs . Some of the securities include stocks and bonds , raw materials and precious metals , which are known in the financial markets as commodities .

The term "market" is sometimes used for what are more strictly exchanges , that is, organizations that facilitate the trade in financial securities, e.g., a stock exchange or commodity exchange . This may be a physical location (such as the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), London Stock Exchange (LSE), Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE), or Johannesburg Stock Exchange ( JSE Limited )), or an electronic system such as NASDAQ . Much trading of stocks takes place on an exchange; still, corporate actions (mergers, spinoffs) are outside an exchange, while any two companies or people, for whatever reason, may agree to sell the stock from the one to the other without using an exchange.

Trading of currencies and bonds is largely on a bilateral basis, although some bonds trade on a stock exchange, and people are building electronic systems for these as well.

Types of financial markets [ edit ] Within the financial sector, the term "financial markets" is often used to refer just to the markets that are used to raise finances. For long term finance, they are usually called the capital markets ; for short term finance, they are usually called money markets . The money market deals in short-term loans, generally for a period of a year or less. Another common use of the term is as a catchall for all the markets in the financial sector, as per examples in the breakdown below.

Capital markets , which consist of: Stock markets , which provide financing through the issuance of shares or common stock , and enable the subsequent trading thereof.

Bond markets , which provide financing through the issuance of bonds , and enable the subsequent trading thereof.

Commodity markets , which facilitate trading in the primary economic sector rather than manufactured products.

Soft commodities is a term generally referring to commodities that are grown rather than mined, such as crops (corn, wheat, soybean, fruit and vegetable), livestock, cocoa, coffee and sugar. Hard commodities is a term generally referring to commodities that are mined such as gold, gemstones and other metals and generally drilled such as oil and gas.

Money markets , which provide short term debt financing and investment.

Derivatives markets , which provide instruments for the management of financial risk.

[ 1 ] Futures markets , which provide standardized forward contracts for trading products at some future date; see also forward market .

Foreign exchange markets , which facilitate the trading of foreign exchange .

Cryptocurrency markets, which facilitate the trading of digital assets and financial technologies.

Spot market Interbank lending market The capital markets may also be divided into primary markets and secondary markets . Newly formed (issued) securities are bought or sold in primary markets, such as during initial public offerings . Secondary markets allow investors to buy and sell existing securities. The transactions in primary markets exist between issuers and investors, while secondary market transactions exist among investors.

Liquidity is a crucial aspect of securities that are traded in secondary markets. Liquidity refers to the ease with which a security can be sold without a loss of value. Securities with an active secondary market mean that there are many buyers and sellers at a given point in time. Investors benefit from liquid securities because they can sell their assets whenever they want; an illiquid security may force the seller to get rid of their asset at a large discount.

Raising capital [ edit ] Financial markets attract funds from investors and channels them to corporations—they thus allow corporations to finance their operations and achieve growth. Money markets allow firms to borrow funds on a short-term basis, while capital markets allow corporations to gain long-term funding to support expansion (known as maturity transformation) [ 2 ] .

Without financial markets, borrowers would have difficulty finding lenders themselves. Intermediaries such as banks , Investment Banks , and Boutique Investment Banks can help in this process. Banks take deposits from those who have money to save on the form of savings a/c. They can then lend money from this pool of deposited money to those who seek to borrow. Banks popularly lend money in the form of loans and mortgages .

More complex transactions than a simple bank deposit require markets where lenders and their agents can meet borrowers and their agents, and where existing borrowing or lending commitments can be sold on to other parties. A good example of a financial market is a stock exchange . A company can raise money by selling shares to investors and its existing shares can be bought or sold.

The following table illustrates where financial markets fit in the relationship between lenders and borrowers: Relationship between lenders and borrowers Lenders Financial Intermediaries Financial Markets Borrowers Individuals Companies Banks Banks Insurance Companies Pension Funds Mutual Funds Interbank Stock Exchange Money Market Bond Market Foreign Exchange Individuals Companies Central Government Municipalities Public Corporations Lenders [ edit ] The lender temporarily gives money to somebody else, on the condition of getting back the principal amount together with some interest or profit or charge.

Individuals and doubles [ edit ] Many individuals are not aware that they are lenders, but almost everybody does lend money in many ways. A person lends money when he or she: Puts money in a savings account at a bank Contributes to a pension plan Pays premiums to an insurance company Invests in government bonds Companies [ edit ] Companies tend to be lenders of capital. When companies have surplus cash that is not needed for a short period of time, they may seek to make money from their cash surplus by lending it via short term markets called money markets . Alternatively, such companies may decide to return the cash surplus to their shareholders (e.g. via a share repurchase or dividend payment).

Banks [ edit ] Banks can be lenders themselves as they are able to create new debt money in the form of deposits.

Borrowers [ edit ] Individuals borrow money via bankers' loans for short term needs or longer term mortgages to help finance a house purchase.

Companies borrow money to aid short term or long term cash flows . They also borrow to fund modernization or future business expansion. It is common for companies to use mixed packages of different types of funding for different purposes – especially where large complex projects such as company management buyouts are concerned.

[ 3 ] Governments often find their spending requirements exceed their tax revenues . To make up this difference, they need to borrow. Governments also borrow on behalf of nationalized industries, municipalities, local authorities and other public sector bodies. In the UK, the total borrowing requirement is often referred to as the Public sector net cash requirement (PSNCR).

Governments borrow by issuing bonds . In the UK, the government also borrows from individuals by offering bank accounts and Premium Bonds . Government debt seems to be permanent. Indeed, the debt seemingly expands rather than being paid off. One strategy used by governments to reduce the value of the debt is to influence inflation .

Municipalities and local authorities may borrow in their own name as well as receiving funding from national governments. In the UK, this would cover an authority like Hampshire County Council.

Public Corporations typically include nationalized industries. These may include the postal services, railway companies and utility companies.

Many borrowers have difficulty raising money locally. They need to borrow internationally with the aid of Foreign exchange markets .

Borrowers having similar needs can form into a group of borrowers. They can also take an organizational form like Mutual Funds. They can provide mortgage on weight basis. The main advantage is that this lowers the cost of their borrowings.

Derivative products [ edit ] During the 1980s and 1990s, a major growth sector in financial markets was the trade in so called derivatives .

In the financial markets, stock prices, share prices, bond prices, currency rates, interest rates and dividends go up and down, creating risk . Derivative products are financial products that are used to control risk or paradoxically exploit risk.

[ 4 ] It is also called financial economics.

Derivative products or instruments help the issuers to gain an unusual profit from issuing the instruments. For using the help of these products a contract has to be made. Derivative contracts are mainly four types: [ 5 ] Future Forward Option Swap Over the past few decades, the derivatives market has increased and become essential to the financial industry. As the market expands, establishing and improving the regulatory framework becomes particularly critical. In response to the systemic risks exposed by the global economic crisis in 2008, essential regulations such as the Dodd-Frank Act (US) [ 6 ] and the EU Market Fundamentals Regulation (MiFID II) [ 7 ] were enacted.

The Dodd-Frank Act focuses on increasing transparency and regulating the derivatives market, particularly over-the-counter derivatives transactions, requiring clearing through central counterparties.

[ 6 ] MiFID II enhances the market's efficiency, transparency, and fairness, improving transaction transparency and strengthening investor protection.

[ 7 ] These regulations have significantly changed the market structure and strengthened supervision and risk management of the derivatives market. Although regulatory measures have enhanced market stability, they have also had a broad impact on market participants' operating models and strategies.

Seemingly, the most obvious buyers and sellers of currency are importers and exporters of goods. While this may have been true in the distant past, [ when?

] when international trade created the demand for currency markets, importers and exporters now represent only 1/32 of foreign exchange dealing, according to the Bank for International Settlements .

[ 8 ] The picture of foreign currency transactions today shows: Banks/Institutions Speculators Government spending (for example, military bases abroad) Importers/Exporters Tourists Analysis of financial markets [ edit ] See Statistical analysis of financial markets , statistical finance Much effort has gone into the study of financial markets and how prices vary with time.

Charles Dow , one of the founders of Dow Jones & Company and The Wall Street Journal , enunciated a set of ideas on the subject which are now called Dow theory . This is the basis of the so-called technical analysis method of attempting to predict future changes. One of the tenets of "technical analysis" is that market trends give an indication of the future, at least in the short term. The claims of the technical analysts are disputed by many academics, who claim that the evidence points rather to the random walk hypothesis , which states that the next change is not correlated to the last change. The role of human psychology in price variations also plays a significant factor. Large amounts of volatility often indicate the presence of strong emotional factors playing into the price. Fear can cause excessive drops in price and greed can create bubbles. In recent years the rise of algorithmic and high-frequency program trading has seen the adoption of momentum, ultra-short term moving average and other similar strategies which are based on technical as opposed to fundamental or theoretical concepts of market behaviour. For instance, according to a study published by the European Central Bank, [ 9 ] high frequency trading has a substantial correlation with news announcements and other relevant public information that are able to create wide price movements (e.g., interest rates decisions, trade of balances etc.) The scale of changes in price over some unit of time is called the volatility .
It was discovered by Benoit Mandelbrot that changes in prices do not follow a normal distribution , but are rather modeled better by Lévy stable distributions . The scale of change, or volatility, depends on the length of the time unit to a power a bit more than 1/2. Large changes up or down are more likely than what one would calculate using a normal distribution with an estimated standard deviation .

Financial market slang [ edit ] Poison pill , when a company issues more shares to prevent being bought out by another company, thereby increasing the number of outstanding shares to be bought by the hostile company making the bid to establish majority.

Bips , meaning "bps" or basis points . A basis point is a financial unit of measurement used to describe the magnitude of percent change in a variable. One basis point is the equivalent of one hundredth of a percent. For example, if a stock price were to rise 100bit/s, it means it would increase 1%.

Quant , a quantitative analyst with advanced training in mathematics and statistical methods.

Rocket scientist , a financial consultant at the zenith of mathematical and computer programming skill. They are able to invent derivatives of high complexity and construct sophisticated pricing models. They generally handle the most advanced computing techniques adopted by the financial markets since the early 1980s. Typically, they are physicists and engineers by training.

IPO , stands for initial public offering, which is the process a new private company goes through to "go public" or become a publicly traded company on some index.

White Knight , a friendly party in a takeover bid. Used to describe a party that buys the shares of one organization to help prevent against a hostile takeover of that organization by another party.

Round-tripping Smurfing , a deliberate structuring of payments or transactions to conceal it from regulators or other parties, a type of money laundering that is often illegal.

Bid–ask spread , the difference between the highest bid and the lowest offer.

Pip , smallest price move that a given exchange rate makes based on market convention.

[ 10 ] Pegging , when a country wants to obtain price stability, it can use pegging to fix their exchange rate relative to another currency.

[ 11 ] Bearish , this phrase is used to refer to the fact that the market has a downward trend.

Bullish , this term is used to refer to the fact that the market has an upward trend.

Functions of financial markets [ edit ] Intermediary functions : The intermediary functions of financial markets include the following: Transfer of resources : Financial markets facilitate the transfer of real economic resources from lenders to ultimate borrowers.

Enhancing income : Financial markets allow lenders to earn interest or dividend on their surplus invisible funds, thus contributing to the enhancement of the individual and the national income.

Productive usage : Financial markets allow for the productive use of the funds borrowed. The enhancing the income and the gross national production.

Capital formation : Financial markets provide a channel through which new savings flow to aid capital formation of a country.

Price determination : Financial markets allow for the determination of price of the traded financial assets through the interaction of buyers and sellers. They provide a sign for the allocation of funds in the economy based on the demand and to the supply through the mechanism called price discovery process.

Sale mechanism : Financial markets provide a mechanism for selling of a financial asset by an investor so as to offer the benefit of marketability and liquidity of such assets.

Information : The activities of the participants in the financial market result in the generation and the consequent dissemination of information to the various segments of the market. So as to reduce the cost of transaction of financial assets.

Financial Functions Providing the borrower with funds so as to enable them to carry out their investment plans.

Providing the lenders with earning assets so as to enable them to earn wealth by deploying the assets in production debentures.

Providing liquidity in the market so as to facilitate trading of funds.

Providing liquidity to commercial bank Facilitating credit creation Promoting savings Promoting investment Facilitating balanced economic growth Improving trading floors Components of financial market [ edit ] Based on market levels [ edit ] Primary market : A primary market is a market for new issues or new financial claims. Therefore, it is also called new issue market. The primary market deals with those securities which are issued to the public for the first time.

Secondary market : A market for secondary sale of securities. In other words, securities which have already passed through the new issue market are traded in this market. Generally, such securities are quoted in the stock exchange and it provides a continuous and regular market for buying and selling of securities.

Simply put, primary market is the market where the newly started company issued shares to the public for the first time through IPO (initial public offering). Secondary market is the market where the second hand securities are sold (security Commodity Markets).

Based on security types [ edit ] Money market : Money market is a market for dealing with the financial assets and securities which have a maturity period of up to one year. In other words, it is a market for purely short-term funds.

Capital market : A capital market is a market for financial assets that have a long or indefinite maturity. Generally, it deals with long-term securities that have a maturity period of above one year. The capital market may be further divided into (a) industrial securities market (b) Govt. securities market and (c) long-term loans market.

Equity markets : A market where ownership of securities are issued and subscribed is known as equity market. An example of a secondary equity market for shares is the New York (NYSE) stock exchange.

Debt market : The market where funds are borrowed and lent is known as debt market. Arrangements are made in such a way that the borrowers agree to pay the lender the original amount of the loan plus some specified amount of interest.

Derivative markets : A market where financial instruments are derived and traded based on an underlying asset such as commodities or stocks.

Financial service market : A market that comprises participants such as commercial banks that provide various financial services like ATM. Credit cards. Credit rating, stock broking etc. is known as financial service market. Individuals and firms use financial services markets, to purchase services that enhance the workings of debt and equity markets.

Depository markets : A depository market consists of depository institutions (such as banks) that accept deposits from individuals and firms and uses these funds to participate in the debt market, by giving loans or purchasing other debt instruments such as treasury bills.

Non-depository market : Non-depository market carry out various functions in financial markets ranging from financial intermediary to selling, insurance etc. The various constituencies in non-depositary markets are mutual funds, insurance companies, pension funds, brokerage firms etc.

Relation between Bonds and Commodity Prices : With the increase in commodity prices, the cost of goods for companies increases. This increase in commodity prices level causes a rise in inflation.

Relation between Commodities and Equities : Due to the production cost remaining same, and revenues rising (due to high commodity prices), the operating profit (revenue minus cost) increases, which in turn drives up equity prices.

See also [ edit ] Asset allocation Diversification (finance) Common ordinary equity Cooperative banking Financial economics § Financial markets Financial risk management Finance capitalism Financial instrument Financial market efficiency Financial market theory of development Financial services Financial technology Investment theory Market liquidity Market design Market profile Mathematical finance Quantitative behavioral finance Stock investor Stock market crash Stock market bubble Standard deviation Risk management Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0. Text taken from The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2024​ , FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, FAO.

References [ edit ] ^ "Understanding Derivatives: Markets and Infrastructure - Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago" .

chicagofed.org . Retrieved 2017-12-12 .

^ "Financial Markets - Overview, Types, and Functions" ^ The Business Finance Market: A Survey ISR/Google Books, 2013.

^ Robert E. Wright and Vincenzo Quadrini. Money and Banking: "Chapter 2, Section 4: Financial Markets." pp. 3 [1] Accessed June 20, 2012 ^ Khader Shaik (23 September 2014).

Managing Derivatives Contracts: A Guide to Derivatives Market Structure, Contract Life Cycle, Operations, and Systems . Apress. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1-4302-6275-6 .

^ a b "Dodd-Frank Act | CFTC" .

www.cftc.gov . Retrieved 2024-04-24 .

^ a b "MiFID II" .

EUROSIF . Retrieved 2024-04-24 .

^ Steven Valdez, An Introduction To Global Financial Markets ^ "High Frequency Trading and Price Discovery, Working Paper Series NO 1602 / november 2013" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ Momoh, Osi (2003-11-25).

"Pip" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2017-12-12 .

^ Law, Johnathan (2016). "Pegging".

A dictionary of business and management . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199684984 .

OCLC 950964886 .

Further reading [ edit ] Graham, Benjamin ; Jason Zweig (2003-07-08) [1949].

The Intelligent Investor . Warren E. Buffett (collaborator) (2003 ed.).

HarperCollins . front cover.

ISBN 0-06-055566-1 .

Graham, B.; Dodd, D.L.F.

(1934).

Security Analysis: The Classic 1934 Edition .

McGraw-Hill Education .

ISBN 978-0-070-24496-2 .

LCCN 34023635 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Rich Dad Poor Dad : What the Rich Teach Their Kids About Money That the Poor and Middle Class Do Not!

, by Robert Kiyosaki and Sharon Lechter .

Warner Business Books , 2000.

ISBN 0-446-67745-0 Clason, George (2015).

The Richest Man in Babylon: Original 1926 Edition .

CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform .

ISBN 978-1-508-52435-9 .

Bogle, John Bogle (2007).

The Little Book of Common Sense Investing: The Only Way to Guarantee Your Fair Share of Stock Market Returns . John Wiley and Sons. pp.

216 .

ISBN 9780470102107 .

Buffett, W.

; Cunningham, L.A. (2009).

The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Investors and Managers .

John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Limited .

ISBN 978-0-470-82441-2 .

Stanley, Thomas J.

; Danko, W.D. (1998).

The Millionaire Next Door .

Gallery Books .

ISBN 978-0-671-01520-6 .

LCCN 98046515 .

Soros, George (1988).

The Alchemy of Finance: Reading the Mind of the Market . A Touchstone book.

Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 978-0-671-66238-7 .

LCCN 87004745 .

Fisher, Philip Arthur (1996).

Common Stocks and Uncommon Profits and Other Writings . Wiley Investment Classics.

Wiley .

ISBN 978-0-471-11927-2 .

LCCN 95051449 .

Elton, E.J.

; Gruber, M.J.; Brown, S.J.; Goetzmann, W.N.

(2006).

Modern Portfolio Theory and Investment Analysis . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-470-05082-8 .

LCCN 2007276500 .

Fama, Eugene (1976).

Foundations Of Finance . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-02499-5 .

LCCN 75036771 .

Merton, Robert C.

(1992).

Continuous-Time Finance . Macroeconomics and Finance Series. Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-631-18508-6 .

LCCN gb92034883 .

Pilbeam, K. (2010).

Finance and Financial Markets .

Macmillan Education .

ISBN 978-0-230-23321-8 .

LCCN 2010455281 .

Mccarty, Nolan. "Trends in Financial Market Regulation." After the Crash: Financial Crises and Regulatory Responses, edited by Sharyn O’Halloran and Thomas Groll, Columbia University Press , 2019, pp. 121–24, JSTOR 10.7312/ohal19284.10 .

GROLL, THOMAS, et al. "TRENDS AND DELEGATION IN U. S. FINANCIAL MARKET REGULATION." After the Crash: Financial Crises and Regulatory Responses, edited by Thomas Groll and Sharyn O’Halloran, Columbia University Press , 2019, pp. 57–81, JSTOR 10.7312/ohal19284.7 .

Polillo, Simone. "COLLABORATIONS AND MARKET EFFICIENCY: The Network of Financial Economics." The Ascent of Market Efficiency: Finance That Cannot Be Proven, Cornell University Press , 2020, pp. 60–89, JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctvqc6k17.5 .

Abolafia, Mitchel Y. "A Learning Moment?: January 2008." Stewards of the Market: How the Federal Reserve Made Sense of the Financial Crisis, Harvard University Press , 2020, pp. 49–70, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvx8b796.6 .

MacKenzie, Donald. "Dealers, Clients, and the Politics of Market Structure." Trading at the Speed of Light: How Ultrafast Algorithms Are Transforming Financial Markets, Princeton University Press , 2021, pp. 105–34, doi : 10.2307/j.ctv191kx1k.8 .

Polillo, Simone. "HOW FINANCIAL ECONOMICS GOT ITS SCIENCE." The Ascent of Market Efficiency: Finance That Cannot Be Proven, Cornell University Press , 2020, pp. 119–42, JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctvqc6k17.7 .

Fenton-O'Creevy, M.; Nicholson, N.; Soane, E.; Willman, P. (2004).

Traders: Risks, Decisions, and Management in Financial Markets .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-191-51500-2 .

LCCN 2005295074 .

Baker, H.K.; Filbeck, G.; Ricciardi, V. (2017).

Financial Behavior: Players, Services, Products, and Markets . Financial Markets and Investments. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-190-27001-8 .

Keim, D.B.; Ziemba, W.T.; Moffatt, H.K. (2000).

Security Market Imperfections in Worldwide Equity Markets . Publications of the Newton Institute.

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-57138-8 .

LCCN 00698005 .

Williams, John C. "The Rediscovery of Financial Market Imperfections." Toward a Just Society: Joseph Stiglitz and Twenty-First Century Economics, edited by Martin Guzman, Columbia University Press , 2018, pp. 201–06, JSTOR 10.7312/guzm18672.14 .

QUIGGIN, JOHN. "Market Failure: Information, Uncertainty, and Financial Markets." Economics in Two Lessons: Why Markets Work So Well, and Why They Can Fail So Badly, Princeton University Press , 2019, pp. 214–36, doi : 10.2307/j.ctvc77fb7.18 .

BAKLANOVA, VIKTORIA, and JOSEPH TANEGA. "MONEY MARKET FUNDS AFTER THE ONSET OF THE CRISIS." After the Crash: Financial Crises and Regulatory Responses, edited by Sharyn O’Halloran and Thomas Groll, Columbia University Press, 2019, pp. 341–59, JSTOR 10.7312/ohal19284.25 .

CEBALLOS, FRANCISCO, et al. "Financial Globalization in Emerging Countries: Diversification versus Offshoring." New Paradigms for Financial Regulation: Emerging Market Perspectives, edited by MASAHIRO KAWAI and ESWAR S. PRASAD, Brookings Institution Press , 2013, pp. 110–36, JSTOR 10.7864/j.ctt1261n4.8 .

LiPuma, Edward. "Social Theory and the Market for the Production of Financial Knowledge." The Social Life of Financial Derivatives: Markets, Risk, and Time, Duke University Press , 2017, pp. 81–115, JSTOR j.ctv11cw1p0.6 .

Scott, Hal S. "Liability Connectedness: Money Market Funds and Tri-Party Repo Market." Connectedness and Contagion: Protecting the Financial System from Panics, The MIT Press , 2016, pp. 53–58, JSTOR j.ctt1c2crp5.9 .

Sornette, Didier. "MODELING FINANCIAL BUBBLES AND MARKET CRASHES." Why Stock Markets Crash: Critical Events in Complex Financial Systems, REV-Revised, Princeton University Press , 2017, pp. 134–70, JSTOR j.ctt1h1htkg.9 .

Morse, Julia C. "A PRIMER ON INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL STANDARDS ON ILLICIT FINANCING." The Bankers' Blacklist: Unofficial Market Enforcement and the Global Fight against Illicit Financing, Cornell University Press , 2021, pp. 19–29, JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctv1hw3x0d.7 .

Obstfeld, M.; Taylor, A.M. (2005).

Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth . Japan-US Center UFJ Bank Monographs on International Financial Markets.

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-67179-8 .

LCCN 2004051477 .

Bebczuk, R.N. (2003).

Asymmetric Information in Financial Markets: Introduction and Applications . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-79732-0 .

LCCN 2002045514 .

Avgouleas, E. (2012).

Governance of Global Financial Markets: The Law, the Economics, the Politics .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-76266-3 .

LCCN 2012406001 .

Houthakker, H.S.; Williamson, P.J. (1996).

The Economics of Financial Markets .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-199-31499-7 .

Spencer, P.D. (2000).

The Structure and Regulation of Financial Markets .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-191-58686-6 .

LCCN 2001270248 .

Atack, J.; Neal, L. (2009).

The Origins and Development of Financial Markets and Institutions: From the Seventeenth Century to the Present . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-47704-8 .

Ott, J.C. (2011).

When Wall Street Met Main Street: The Quest for an Investors' Democracy .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-06121-7 .

LCCN 2010047293 .

Prasad, E.S.

(2021).

The Future of Money: How the Digital Revolution Is Transforming Currencies and Finance . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-25844-0 .

LCCN 2021008025 .

Fligstein, N.

(2021).

The Banks Did It: An Anatomy of the Financial Crisis .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-25901-0 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Financial markets .

Financial Markets with Yale Professor Robert Shiller ( Archived 2010-11-03 at the Wayback Machine ) v t e Financial markets Types of markets Primary market Secondary market Third market Fourth market Types of stocks Common stock Golden share Preferred stock Restricted stock Tracking stock Share capital Authorised capital Issued shares Shares outstanding Treasury stock Participants Broker Floor broker Inter-dealer broker Broker-dealer Market maker Trader Floor trader Proprietary trader Quantitative analyst Investor Hedger Speculator Arbitrager Scalper Regulator Trading venues Exchange List of major stock exchanges Over-the-counter (off-exchange) Alternative trading system (ATS) Multilateral trading facility (MTF) Electronic communication network (ECN) Direct market access (DMA) Straight-through processing (STP) Dark pool (private exchange) Crossing network Liquidity aggregator Stock valuation Alpha Arbitrage pricing theory (APT) Beta Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP) Book value (BV) Capital asset pricing model (CAPM) Capital market line (CML) Dividend discount model (DDM) Dividend yield Earnings yield EV/EBITDA Fed model Net asset value (NAV) Security characteristic line Security market line (SML) T-model Trading theories and strategies Algorithmic trading Buy and hold Contrarian investing Dollar cost averaging Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) Fundamental analysis Growth stock Market timing Modern portfolio theory (MPT) Momentum investing Mosaic theory Pairs trade Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT) Random walk hypothesis (RMH) Sector rotation Style investing Swing trading Technical analysis Trend following Value averaging Value investing Related terms Bid–ask spread Block trade Cross listing Dividend Dual-listed company DuPont analysis Efficient frontier Financial law Flight-to-quality Government bond Greenspan put Haircut Initial public offering (IPO) Long Mandatory offer Margin Market anomaly Market capitalization Market depth Market manipulation Market trend Mean reversion Momentum Open outcry Order book Position Public float Public offering Rally Returns-based style analysis Reverse stock split Share repurchase Short selling Short squeeze Slippage Speculation Squeeze-out Stock dilution Stock exchange Stock market index Stock split Stock swap Trade Tender offer Uptick rule Volatility Voting interest Yield v t e General areas of finance Alternative investment Angel investor Super angel Asset (economics) Asset allocation Bad debt Bond (finance) Bull (stock market speculator) Asset growth Capital asset Capital management Capital structure Climate finance Computational finance Corporate finance Cost of capital Debt Disinvestment Diversification (finance) Divestment Eco-investing Enterprise risk management Environmental finance Equity (finance) ESG Exchange-traded fund Experimental finance Financial analysis analyst asset crime deepening economics engineering inclusion institutions management market plan planner regulation risk services social work system Financial technology Fundamental analysis Government bond Greater fool theory Growth investing Growth stock Hedge (finance) History of banking History of money Impact investing International finance Investment advisory Investment banking Investment management Investment performance Investor profile Market risk Mathematical finance Mutual fund Over-the-counter Pension fund Personal finance Position of trust Public finance Quantitative behavioral finance Quantum finance Risk–return spectrum Social finance Speculation Statistical finance Stock exchange Stockbroker Strategic financial management Statistical finance Stock Structured finance Structured product Sustainability Sustainable Development Goals Sustainable finance Swap (finance) Systematic risk Too big to fail Toxic asset Valuation using discounted cash flows Watered stock Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Financial_market&oldid=1305434219 " Categories : Financial markets Private sector Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from February 2022 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from February 2011 Free-content attribution Free content from FAO CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 01:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Financial market 56 languages Add topic

