Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 Topics Toggle Topics subsection 3.1 Scope 3.2 Analytical reasoning techniques 3.3 Data representations 3.4 Theories of visualization 3.5 Visual representations 4 Process 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Related subjects 5.2 Related scientists 5.3 Related software 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Visual analytics 4 languages Deutsch فارسی Bahasa Indonesia 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Multidisciplinary field of research Information mapping Topics and fields Business decision mapping Data visualization Graphic communication Infographics Information design Knowledge visualization Mental model Morphological analysis Ontology (information science) Schema (psychology) Visual analytics Visual language Node–link approaches Argument map Cladistics Cognitive map Concept lattice Concept map Conceptual graph Decision tree Dendrogram Graph drawing Hyperbolic tree Hypertext Issue map Issue tree Layered graph drawing Mind map Object-role modeling Organizational chart Pathfinder network Radial tree Semantic network Sociogram Timeline Topic map Tree structure ZigZag See also Design rationale Diagrammatic reasoning Entity–relationship model Geovisualization List of concept- and mind-mapping software Olog Ontology (philosophy) Problem structuring methods Semantic Web Treemapping Wicked problem v t e Visual analytics is a multidisciplinary science and technology field that emerged from information visualization and scientific visualization . It focuses on how analytical reasoning can be facilitated by interactive visual interfaces .

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] Visual analytics is "the science of analytical reasoning facilitated by interactive visual interfaces." [ 2 ] It can address problems whose size, complexity, and need for closely coupled human and machine analysis may make them otherwise intractable.

[ 3 ] Visual analytics advances scientific and technological development across multiple domains, including analytical reasoning, human–computer interaction, data transformations, visual representation for computation and analysis, analytic reporting, and the transition of new technologies into practice.

[ 4 ] As a research agenda, visual analytics brings together several scientific and technical communities from computer science, information visualization, cognitive and perceptual sciences, interactive design, graphic design, and social sciences.

Visual analytics integrates new computational and theory-based tools with innovative interactive techniques and visual representations to enable human-information discourse. The design of the tools and techniques is based on cognitive , design , and perceptual principles. This science of analytical reasoning provides the reasoning framework upon which one can build both strategic and tactical visual analytics technologies for threat analysis, prevention, and response. Analytical reasoning is central to the analyst's task of applying human judgments to reach conclusions from a combination of evidence and assumptions.

[ 2 ] Visual analytics has some overlapping goals and techniques with information visualization and scientific visualization . There is currently no clear consensus on the boundaries between these fields, but broadly speaking the three areas can be distinguished as follows: Scientific visualization deals with data that has a natural geometric structure (e.g., MRI data, wind flows).

Information visualization handles abstract data structures such as trees or graphs.

Visual analytics is especially concerned with coupling interactive visual representations with underlying analytical processes (e.g., statistical procedures, data mining techniques) such that high-level, complex activities can be effectively performed (e.g., sense making, reasoning, decision making).

Visual analytics seeks to marry techniques from information visualization with techniques from computational transformation and analysis of data. Information visualization forms part of the direct interface between user and machine, amplifying human cognitive capabilities in six basic ways: [ 2 ] [ 5 ] by increasing cognitive resources, such as by using a visual resource to expand human working memory, by reducing search, such as by representing a large amount of data in a small space, by enhancing the recognition of patterns, such as when information is organized in space by its time relationships, by supporting the easy perceptual inference of relationships that are otherwise more difficult to induce, by perceptual monitoring of a large number of potential events, and by providing a manipulable medium that, unlike static diagrams, enables the exploration of a space of parameter values These capabilities of information visualization, combined with computational data analysis, can be applied to analytic reasoning to support the sense-making process.

History [ edit ] As an interdisciplinary approach, visual analytics has its roots in information visualization, cognitive sciences, and computer science. The term and scope of the field was defined in the early 2000s trough researchers such as Jim Thomas , Kristin A. Cook , John Stasko , Pak Chung Wong , Daniel A. Keim and David S. Ebert . As a reaction to the September 11, 2001 attacks the United States Department of Homeland Security was established in late 2002, combining dozens of previously separated government agencies. Building upon earlier work on visual data mining by Daniel A. Keim starting in th elate 1990s, this simultaneously lead to the development of a research agenda for visual analytics.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] As part of these efforts the National Visualization and Analytics Center (NVAC) at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory was established in 2004, whose charter was to develop system to mitigate information overload after the September 11, 2001 attacks in the intelligence community. Their research work determined core challenges, posed open research questions, and positioned visual analytics as a new research domain, in particular through the 2005 research agenda Illuminating the Path .

[ 2 ] In 2006, the IEEE VIS community led by Pak Chung Wong and Daniel A. Keim launched the annual IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST) , providing a dedicated venue for research into visual analytics, which in 2020 merged to form the IEEE Visualization conference. In 2008, scope and challenges of visual analytics were conceptually defined by Daniel A. Keim and Jim Thomas in their influential book about visual data mining.

[ 8 ] The domain was further refined as part of the European Commissions FP7 VisMaster program in the late 2000s.

[ 9 ] Topics [ edit ] Scope [ edit ] Visual analytics is a multidisciplinary field that includes the following focus areas: [ 2 ] Analytical reasoning techniques that enable users to obtain deep insights that directly support assessment, planning, and decision making Data representations and transformations that convert all types of conflicting and dynamic data in ways that support visualization and analysis Techniques to support production, presentation, and dissemination of the results of an analysis to communicate information in the appropriate context to a variety of audiences.

Visual representations and interaction techniques [ 10 ] that take advantage of the human eye's broad bandwidth pathway into the mind to allow users to see, explore, and understand large amounts of information at once.

Analytical reasoning techniques [ edit ] Analytical reasoning techniques are the method by which users obtain deep insights that directly support situation assessment, planning, and decision making. Visual analytics must facilitate high-quality human judgment with a limited investment of the analysts’ time. Visual analytics tools must enable diverse analytical tasks such as: [ 2 ] Understanding past and present situations quickly, as well as the trends and events that have produced current conditions Identifying possible alternative futures and their warning signs Monitoring current events for emergence of warning signs as well as unexpected events Determining indicators of the intent of an action or an individual Supporting the decision maker in times of crisis.

These tasks will be conducted through a combination of individual and collaborative analysis, often under extreme time pressure. Visual analytics must enable hypothesis-based and scenario-based analytical techniques, providing support for the analyst to reason based on the available evidence.

[ 2 ] Data representations [ edit ] Data representations are structured forms suitable for computer-based transformations. These structures must exist in the original data or be derivable from the data themselves. They must retain the information and knowledge content and the related context within the original data to the greatest degree possible. The structures of underlying data representations are generally neither accessible nor intuitive to the user of the visual analytics tool. They are frequently more complex in nature than the original data and are not necessarily smaller in size than the original data. The structures of the data representations may contain hundreds or thousands of dimensions and be unintelligible to a person, but they must be transformable into lower-dimensional representations for visualization and analysis.

[ 2 ] Theories of visualization [ edit ] Theories of visualization include: [ 3 ] Jacques Bertin 's Semiology of Graphics (1967) Nelson Goodman 's Languages of Art (1977) Jock D. Mackinlay 's Automated design of optimal visualization (APT) (1986) Leland Wilkinson 's Grammar of Graphics (1998) Hadley Wickham 's Layered Grammar of Graphics (2010) Visual representations [ edit ] Visual representations translate data into a visible form that highlights important features, including commonalities and anomalies. These visual representations make it easy for users to perceive salient aspects of their data quickly. Augmenting the cognitive reasoning process with perceptual reasoning through visual representations permits the analytical reasoning process to become faster and more focused.

[ 2 ] Bar chart representing the relative distribution of job satisfaction Pie chart representing the relative distribution of job satisfaction according to the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1997 cohort, survey year 2008 Process [ edit ] The input for the data sets used in the visual analytics process are heterogeneous data sources (i.e., the internet, newspapers, books, scientific experiments, expert systems ). From these rich sources, the data sets S = S 1 , ..., S m are chosen, whereas each S i , i ∈ (1, ..., m) consists of attributes A i1 , ..., A ik . The goal or output of the process is insight I . Insight is either directly obtained from the set of created visualizations V or through confirmation of hypotheses H as the results of automated analysis methods. This formalization of the visual analytics process is illustrated in the following figure. Arrows represent the transitions from one set to another one.

More formally the visual analytics process is a transformation F: S → I , whereas F is a concatenation of functions f ∈ {D W , V X , H Y , U Z } defined as follows: D W describes the basic data pre-processing functionality with D W : S → S and W ∈ {T, C, SL, I} including data transformation functions D T , data cleaning functions D C , data selection functions D SL and data integration functions D I that are needed to make analysis functions applicable to the data set.

V W , W ∈ {S, H} symbolizes the visualization functions, which are either functions visualizing data V S : S → V or functions visualizing hypotheses V H : H → V .

H Y , Y ∈ {S, V} represents the hypotheses generation process. We distinguish between functions that generate hypotheses from data H S : S → H and functions that generate hypotheses from visualizations H V : V → H .

Moreover, user interactions U Z , Z ∈ {V, H, CV, CH} are an integral part of the visual analytics process. User interactions can either effect only visualizations U V : V → V (i.e., selecting or zooming), or can effect only hypotheses U H : H → H by generating a new hypotheses from given ones. Furthermore, insight can be concluded from visualizations U CV : V → I or from hypotheses U CH : H → I .

The typical data pre-processing applying data cleaning, data integration and data transformation functions is defined as D P = D T (D I (D C (S 1 , ..., S n ))) . After the pre-processing step either automated analysis methods H S = {f s1 , ..., f sq } (i.e., statistics, data mining, etc.) or visualization methods V S : S → V, V S = {f v1 , ..., f vs } are applied to the data, in order to reveal patterns as shown in the figure above.

[ 11 ] In general the following paradigm is used to process the data: Analyse First – Show the Important – Zoom, Filter and Analyse Further – Details on Demand [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Related subjects [ edit ] Cartography Computational visualistics Critical thinking Decision-making Google Analytics Interaction design Interactive visual analysis Interactivity Social network analysis software Software visualization Starlight Information Visualization System Text analytics Traffic analysis Visual reasoning Related scientists [ edit ] Cecilia R. Aragon Robert E. Horn Daniel A. Keim Theresa-Marie Rhyne Lawrence J. Rosenblum Ben Shneiderman John Stasko Jim Thomas Pak Chung Wong Related software [ edit ] imc FAMOS (1987), graphical data analysis References [ edit ] ^ Pak Chung Wong and J. Thomas (2004). "Visual Analytics". in: IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , Volume 24, Issue 5, Sept.-Oct. 2004 Page(s): 20–21.

^ a b c d e f g h i James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook (Ed.) (2005).

Illuminating the Path: The R&D Agenda for Visual Analytics National Visualization and Analytics Center.

^ a b Robert Kosara (2007).

Visual Analytics . ITCS 4122/5122, Fall 2007. Retrieved 28 June 2008.

^ Kielman, J. and Thomas, J. (Guest Eds.) (2009). "Special Issue: Foundations and Frontiers of Visual Analytics". in: Information Visualization , Volume 8, Number 4, Winter 2009 Page(s): 239-314.

^ Stuart Card, J.D. Mackinlay, and Ben Shneiderman (1999). "Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think". Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco.

^ Keim, Daniel A. (2001). "Visual exploration of large data sets". Communications of the ACM, 44(8), p. 38-44.

^ Perl, Raphael (2004). "The Department of Homeland Security: Background and Challenges", Terrorism—reducing Vulnerabilities and Improving Responses , Committee on Counterterrorism Challenges for Russia and the United States, Office for Central Europe and Eurasia Development, Security, and Cooperation Policy and Global Affairs, in Cooperation with the Russian Academy of Sciences, page 176. National Academies Press.

ISBN 0-309-08971-9 .

^ a b Keim D A, Mansmann F, Schneidewind J, Thomas J, Ziegler H: Visual analytics: Scope and challenges .

Visual Data Mining: 2008, S. 82.

^ EU Cordis: VisMaster - Visual Analytics - Mastering the Information Age (2008-2010) ^ A. Kerren and F. Schreiber. Toward the Role of Interaction in Visual Analytics. In Proceedings of the 2012 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC '12), pages 420:1-420:13, Berlin, Germany, 2012. IEEE Computer Society Press.

^ Daniel A. Keim, Florian Mansmann, Jörn Schneidewind, Jim Thomas, and Hartmut Ziegler (2008). "Visual Analytics: Scope and Challenges" Further reading [ edit ] Boris Kovalerchuk and James Schwing (2004).

Visual and Spatial Analysis: Advances in Data Mining, Reasoning, and Problem Soving Guoping Qiu (2007).

Advances in Visual Information Systems: 9th International Conference (VISUAL).

IEEE, Inc. Staff (2007).

Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), A Symposium of the IEEE 2007.

May Yuan, Kathleen and Stewart Hornsby (2007).

Computation and Visualization for Understanding Dynamics in Geographic Domains.

Daniel Keim, Gennady Andrienko, Jean-Daniel Fekete, Carsten Görg, Jörn Kohlhammer, and Guy Melançon (2008).

Visual Analytics: Definition, Process, and Challenges . In Andreas Kerren, John T. Stasko, Jean-Daniel Fekete, and Chris North (Eds.), Information Visualization - Human-Centered Issues and Perspectives, pages 154–175, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 4950, Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Mastering the Visualization Age: Solving Problems with Visual Analytics (2010) (pdf) Kawa Nazemi (2014). Adaptive Semantics Visualization. Eurographics Association [1] . TU Darmstadt Dissertation. Eurographics.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Visual analytics at Wikimedia Commons v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐nnhrm
Cached time: 20250812051710
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.302 seconds
Real time usage: 0.394 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 941/1000000
Revision size: 17627/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 38372/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 831/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31956/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.174/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3445305/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  311.015      1 -total
 26.53%   82.508      1 Template:InfoMaps
 25.78%   80.189      1 Template:Sidebar
 22.64%   70.426      1 Template:Reflist
 21.35%   66.405      1 Template:Short_description
 18.22%   56.672      1 Template:ISBN
 11.58%   36.013      2 Template:Pagetype
 11.47%   35.678      2 Template:Navbox
 11.35%   35.301      1 Template:Visualization
  6.55%   20.382      5 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18152904:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812051710 and revision id 1301204854. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Visual_analytics&oldid=1301204854 " Categories : Computational science Computer graphics Infographics Visualization (graphics) Scientific visualization Cartography Types of analytics Big data Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 16:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Visual analytics 4 languages Add topic

