Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Professional bodies 2 Disciplines of development studies 3 History 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Development studies 18 languages العربية বাংলা Български Deutsch فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa Italiano 日本語 ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Suomi தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interdisciplinary branch of social science Not to be confused with Developmental psychology .

Development studies is an interdisciplinary branch of social science . Development studies is offered as a specialized master's degree in a number of reputed universities around the world. It has grown in popularity as a subject of study since the early 1990s, and has been most widely taught and researched in developing countries and countries with a colonial history , such as the UK , where the discipline originated.

[ 1 ] Students of development studies often choose careers in international organisations such as the United Nations , World Bank , non-governmental organisations (NGOs), media and journalism houses, private sector development consultancy firms, corporate social responsibility (CSR) bodies and research centers.

Professional bodies [ edit ] Throughout the world, a number of professional bodies for development studies have been founded: [ 2 ] Europe : European Association of Development Research and Training Institutes (EADI) Latin America : Consejo Latinoamericano de Ciencias Sociales (CLACSO) Asia : Asian Political and International Studies Association (APISA) Africa : Council for the Development of Social Science Research in Africa (CODESRIA) and Organization for Social Science Research in Eastern and Southern Africa (OSSREA) Arabic world : Arab Institutes and Centers for Economic and Social Development Research (AICARDES) The common umbrella organisation of these association is the Inter-regional Coordinating Committee of Development Associations (ICCDA). In the UK and Ireland , the Development Studies Association is a major source of information for research on and studying in development studies. Its mission is to connect and promote those working on development research.

Disciplines of development studies [ edit ] Development issues include: Adult education Area studies Anthropology Community development Demography Development aid Development communication Development theory Development finance Diaspora studies Ecology Economic development Economic History Environmental studies Geography Gender studies Governance History of economic thought Human rights Human security Indigenous rights Industrial relations Industrialization International business International development International relations Journalism Media Studies Migration studies Partnership Peace and conflict studies Pedagogy Philosophy Political philosophy Population studies Postcolonialism Psychology Public administration Public health Rural development Queer studies Sociology Social policy Social development Social work Sustainable development Urban studies Women's studies History [ edit ] The emergence of development studies as an academic discipline in the second half of the twentieth century is in large part due to increasing concern about economic prospects for the third world after decolonisation . In the immediate post-war period, development economics , a branch of economics , arose out of previous studies in colonial economics. By the 1960s, an increasing number of development economists felt that economics alone could not fully address issues such as political effectiveness and educational provision.

[ 3 ] Development studies arose as a result of this, initially aiming to integrate ideas of politics and economics. Since then, it has become an increasingly inter- and multi-disciplinary subject, encompassing a variety of social scientific fields .

[ 4 ] In recent years the use of political economy analysis- the application of the analytical techniques of economics- to try and assess and explain political and social factors that either enhance or limit development has become increasingly widespread as a way of explaining the success or failure of reform processes. The era of modern development is commonly deemed to have commenced with the inauguration speech of Harry S. Truman in 1949.

[ 5 ] In Point Four of his speech, with reference to Latin America and other poor nations, he said: More than half the people of the world are living in conditions approaching misery. Their food is inadequate. They are victims of disease. Their economic life is primitive and stagnant. Their poverty is a handicap and a threat both to them and to more prosperous areas. For the first time in history, humanity possesses the knowledge and the skill to relieve the suffering of these people.

[ 6 ] But development studies has since also taken an interest in lessons of past development experiences of Western countries. More recently, the emergence of human security – a new, people-oriented approach to understanding and addressing global security threats – has led to a growing recognition of a relationship between security and development. Human security argues that inequalities and insecurity in one state or region have consequences for global security and that it is thus in the interest of all states to address underlying development issues. This relationship with studies of human security is but one example of the interdisciplinary nature of development studies.

Global Research cooperation between researchers from countries in the Global North and the Global South , so called North-south research partnerships , allow development studies to consider more diverse perspectives on development studies and other strongly value driven issues. Thus, it can contribute new findings to the field of research.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Global South Development Magazine Colonization Community development Development (disambiguation) Development Cooperation Issues Development Cooperation Stories Development Cooperation Testimonials Economic development Human rights Human security Industrialization International development North-South research partnerships Postdevelopment theory Right to development Social development Social work Sustainable development World-systems theory References [ edit ] ^ Kothari, U. (ed), A Radical History of Development Studies: Individuals, Institutions and Ideologies – but see The Journal of Peasant Studies 34/1 (2007) for an alternative view.

^ "About ICCDA" . Archived from the original on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2013-04-16 .

^ Kothari, U. (ed), A Radical History of Development Studies: Individuals, Institutions and Ideologies ^ Abbott, Lewis F. (2003) Theories of Industrial Modernization and Enterprise Development: A Review . ISR/Google Books, Second revised edition ISBN 978-0-906321-26-3 ^ Rist, G., The History of Development: From Western Origins to Global Faith ^ "Address by Harry S. Truman, 1949" .

Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies . Archived from the original on 2016-03-13.

^ Hofmänner, Alexandra (2021-02-02).

"A short history of the KFPE 1994-2019" .

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.4309902 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Breuer, Martin.

"Development" (2015). University Bielefeld: Center for InterAmerican Studies.

Pradella, Lucia and Marois, Thomas, eds. (2015) Polarizing Development: Alternatives to Neoliberalism and the Crisis. Pluto Press.

Sachs, Wolfgang, ed. (1992) The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledge as Power. Zed Books.

External links [ edit ] Global South Development Magazine Development Studies Internet Resources Studying Development – International Development Studies course directory v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lmhmj
Cached time: 20250812004105
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.224 seconds
Real time usage: 0.285 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 679/1000000
Revision size: 9463/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 22630/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 677/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23978/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.142/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4643615/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  233.571      1 -total
 28.44%   66.423      1 Template:Social_sciences
 27.83%   65.013      1 Template:Navbox
 27.20%   63.521      2 Template:Cite_web
 24.78%   57.887      1 Template:Short_description
 12.39%   28.933      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.95%   20.912      4 Template:Main_other
  8.77%   20.481      1 Template:Distinguish
  8.22%   19.196      1 Template:SDcat
  3.11%    7.270      2 Template:Div_col Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1105116:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812004105 and revision id 1291479284. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Development_studies&oldid=1291479284 " Categories : Development studies Development economics Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 14:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Development studies 18 languages Add topic

