Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Wildlife 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Hikurangi Marine Reserve Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°27′41″S 173°32′33″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.4612763°S 173.5424247°E ﻿ / -42.4612763; 173.5424247 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia New Zealand marine reserve Hikurangi Marine Reserve IUCN category Ia ( strict nature reserve ) Dusky dolphins near coast Location Canterbury , New Zealand Nearest city Kaikōura Coordinates 42°27′41″S 173°32′33″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.4612763°S 173.5424247°E ﻿ / -42.4612763; 173.5424247 Area 10,416 hectares (25,740 acres) Established 2014 Governing body Department of Conservation Hikurangi Marine Reserve is a marine reserve off the coast of the Kaikōura District , in the Canterbury Region of New Zealand's South Island .

[ 1 ] It is the largest and deepest marine reserve in New Zealand.

[ 2 ] The reserve is covers an area of  10,416 hectares south of the township of Kaikōura .

[ 3 ] It includes part of the Kaikōura Canyon , a 1000 metre deep side branch of the Hikurangi Trough . It includes a rocky coastline of greywacke boulder and bedrock reefs. Panau Island and two smaller islets are located offshore.

[ 1 ] The marine reserve is only available for limited passive recreation.

[ 1 ] No fishing, harvesting or mining is allowed.

[ 2 ] However, whales , dolphins and sea birds can be viewed in large numbers.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The park was established in 2014.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] In November 2016, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake caused submarine mudslides and sediment flows that devastated the deep-sea life in the canyon.

[ 5 ] Road access to the coast was also affected.

[ 6 ] In September 2017, a National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research expedition found species were recovering faster than expected.

[ 7 ] A subsidiary of Talley's Group was convicted and fined for trawling in the marine reserve in March 2019.

[ 8 ] The company denied the charge, [ 9 ] and Talley's denied responsibility.

[ 10 ] In October 2023, two divers were caught with 486 pāua collected illegally from the reserve.

[ 11 ] Wildlife [ edit ] The depth of the canyon makes it a food basket for whale , dolphin and sea bird species. Several small rivers and streams provide nutrients from nearby mountains. Cold water from the Southland Current from the Southern Ocean and warm water from the East Cape Current from the subtropics also converge to create a nutrient-rich environment.

[ 1 ] The Kaikōura Canyon is the only place where the sperm whale can be viewed closed to the New Zealand mainland. There are significant colonies of New Zealand fur seals , large pods of dusky dolphins and small groups of Hector's dolphins .

[ 1 ] Orca regularly visit the area and humpback whales pass through during their northern winter migration. Many other species of whales , albatross , petrel , shearwater and prion also gather in the area regularly.

[ 1 ] The coast is the only breeding ground in the world for Hutton's shearwater .

[ 1 ] Encrusting and mobile invertebrates like molluscs, crustaceans, echinoderms, anemones and sponges are common on the reefs. Macro-invertebrates like pāua , kina and rock lobster also live around the reefs. Seaweed is common close to shore.

[ 1 ] Fish species along the coast include butterfish , blue cod , tarakihi , marblefish , blue moki , red moki , sea perch , wrasse and triplefin . Fish in the deeper waters include rattails , hapuku , tarakihi , ling , hoki , lantern fish , sharks , rays , skates and squid .

[ 1 ] The depth of the reserve makes it difficult to survey for wildlife, [ 2 ] and very little is known about the deepest areas of the canyon.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Marine reserves of New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j "Hikurangi Marine Reserve" .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ a b c d Graney, Brigid (15 July 2016).

"Counting what lies beneath the waves at Kaikoura's Hikurangi Marine Reserve" .

stuff.co.nz .

^ a b "New marine protected areas for Kaikoura" .

New Zealand Government . 17 March 2014.

^ "The Department of Conservation's ultimate South Island road trip" .

stuff.co.nz . Stuff Travel. 12 January 2018.

^ "Massive mudslides in Kaikōura Canyon destroy seabed life" .

National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research . 27 February 2017.

^ "Finding Out The Facts" (PDF) .

nzta.govt.nz .

New Zealand Transport Agency .

^ "Kaikōura Canyon shows early signs of ecosystem recovery" .

National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research . 19 September 2017.

^ "Fishing company fined $27,600 for fishing in a protected marine reserve" .

Ministry for Primary Industries . 9 March 2021.

^ "Amaltal denies fishing in Hikurangi Marine Reserve" .

Radio New Zealand . RNZ News. 8 March 2020.

^ Neal, Tracey (10 August 2020).

"Talley's skipper fined for marine reserve fishing, company denies responsibility" .

Radio New Zealand . RNZ News.

^ Wardle, Penny (5 October 2023).

"Divers caught with 486 pāua in large sacks near Kaikōura - Fisheries NZ" .

Stuff . Retrieved 14 November 2023 .

v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area v t e Kaikōura District , New Zealand Seat : Kaikōura Populated places Clarence Kaikōura Kekerengu Oaro Geographic features Landforms Kaikōura Canyon Kaikōura Peninsula Haumuri Bluff Hundalee Hills Kaikōura Ranges Mount Fyffe Mount Manakau Rivers Conway River Hāpuku River Kowhai River Oaro River Waiau Toa / Clarence River Facilities and attractions Hikurangi Marine Reserve Kaikoura Airport Kaikōura Dark Sky Sanctuary Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Conservation Park Whale Trail Government District Council Mayor Regional Council History 1886 SS Taiaroa grounding 1978 Kaikoura lights 2016 Kaikōura earthquake Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hikurangi_Marine_Reserve&oldid=1251288603 " Categories : Marine reserves of New Zealand Protected areas of the Canterbury Region Kaikōura District Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 15 October 2024, at 11:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hikurangi Marine Reserve Add languages Add topic

