Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Works 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Anders Celsius 92 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu अवधी Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swedish astronomer and physicist (1701–1744) Anders Celsius Portrait by Olof Arenius Born ( 1701-11-27 ) 27 November 1701 Uppsala , Sweden Died 25 April 1744 (1744-04-25) (aged 42) Uppsala, Sweden Alma mater Uppsala University Known for Celsius Scientific career Fields Astronomy , physics , mathematics , geology Signature Anders Celsius ( Swedish: [ˈânːdɛʂ ˈsɛ̌lːsɪɵs] ; 27 November 1701 – 25 April 1744) [ 1 ] was a Swedish astronomer , physicist and mathematician. He was professor of astronomy at Uppsala University from 1730 to 1744, but traveled from 1732 to 1735 visiting notable observatories in Germany, Italy and France. He founded the Uppsala Astronomical Observatory in 1741, and in 1742 proposed (an inverted form of) the centigrade temperature scale, which was later renamed Celsius in his honour.

Early life and education Anders Celsius was born in Uppsala , Sweden, on 27 November 1701.

[ 1 ] His family originated from Ovanåker in the province of Hälsingland .

[ 2 ] Their family estate was at Doma , also known as Höjen or Högen (locally as Högen 2 ). The name Celsius is a latinization of the estate's name (Latin celsus 'mound').

As the son of an astronomy professor, Nils Celsius, nephew of botanist Olof Celsius and the grandson of the mathematician Magnus Celsius and the astronomer Anders Spole , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ page needed ] Celsius chose a career in science. He was a talented mathematician from an early age. Anders Celsius studied at Uppsala University, where his father was a teacher, and in 1730 he, too, became a professor of astronomy there. Noted Swedish dramatic poet and actor Johan Celsius was also his uncle.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Career In 1730, Celsius published the Nova Methodus distantiam solis a terra determinandi ( New Method for Determining the Distance from the Earth to the Sun ). His research also involved the study of auroral phenomena, which he conducted with his assistant Olof Hiorter , and he was the first to suggest a connection between the aurora borealis and changes in the magnetic field of the Earth. He observed the variations of a compass needle and found that larger deflections correlated with stronger auroral activity. At Nuremberg in 1733, he published a collection of 316 observations of the aurora borealis made by himself and others over the period 1716–1732.

[ 1 ] Celsius traveled frequently in the early 1730s, including to Germany, Italy and France, when he visited most of the major European observatories. In Paris he advocated the measurement of an arc of the meridian in Lapland . In 1736, he participated in the expedition organized for that purpose by the French Academy of Sciences , led by the French mathematician Pierre Louis Maupertuis (1698–1759) to measure a degree of latitude .

[ 1 ] The aim of the expedition was to measure the length of a degree along a meridian, close to the pole, and compare the result with a similar expedition to Peru , today in Ecuador , near the equator . The expeditions confirmed Isaac Newton 's belief that the shape of the Earth is an ellipsoid flattened at the poles.

[ 4 ] [ page needed ] Anders Celsius c. 1730s In 1738, he published the De observationibus pro figura telluris determinanda ( Observations on Determining the Shape of the Earth ). Celsius's participation in the Lapland expedition won him much respect in Sweden with the government and his peers, and played a key role in generating interest from the Swedish authorities in donating the resources required to construct a new modern observatory in Uppsala.

[ 2 ] He was successful in the request, and Celsius founded the Uppsala Astronomical Observatory in 1741.

[ 7 ] The observatory was equipped with instruments purchased during his long voyage abroad, comprising the most modern instrumental technology of the period.

[ 3 ] He made observations of eclipses and various astronomical objects and published catalogues of carefully determined magnitudes for some 300 stars using his own photometric system (mean error=0.4 mag).

[ 4 ] [ page needed ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] In 1742 he proposed the Celsius temperature scale in a paper to the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala , the oldest Swedish scientific society, founded in 1710. His thermometer was calibrated with a value of 0 for the boiling point of water and 100 for the freezing point. In 1745, a year after Celsius's death, the scale was reversed by Carl Linnaeus to facilitate more practical measurement.

[ 10 ] The observatory of Anders Celsius, from a contemporary engraving Celsius conducted many geographical measurements for the Swedish General map, and was one of earliest to note that much of Scandinavia is slowly rising above sea level, a continuous process which has been occurring since the melting of the ice from the latest ice age . However, he wrongly posed the notion that the water was evaporating .

[ 4 ] [ page needed ] In 1725 he became secretary of the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, and served at this post until his death from tuberculosis in 1744. He supported the formation of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm in 1739 by Linnaeus and five others, and was elected a member at the first meeting of this academy. It was in fact Celsius who proposed the new academy's name.

[ 11 ] Works De novo in fluviis norlandiarum piscandi modo , 1738 De novo in fluviis norlandiarum piscandi modo (in Latin). Uppsala: Johan Höjer, änka. 1738.

"Observationer om twänne beständiga grader på en thermometer" [Observations about two stable degrees on a thermometer].

Kungliga Svenska Vetenskapsakademiens Handlingar (Proceedings of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences) (in Swedish).

3 : 171– 180. 1742.

See also Celsius family Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit References Citations ^ a b c d Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Celsius, Anders" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 609.

^ a b "Anders Celsius (1701-1744)" .

Uppasala Astronomical Observatory . Retrieved 23 April 2022 .

^ a b O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Anders Celsius" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ a b c d Collinder 1970 .

^ "Johan Celsius - Svenskt Biografiskt Lexikon" .

sok.riksarkivet.se . Retrieved 23 August 2022 .

^ "My Heritage: Johan Celsius" .

www.myheritage.com . Retrieved 23 August 2022 .

^ "History of Astronomy in Uppsala" .

Uppsala Astronomical Observatory . Retrieved 23 April 2022 .

^ Celsius 1742 , pp. 171–180, Fig. 1.

.

^ "History of the Celsius temperature scale" .

www.astro.uu.se .

^ "Linnaeus' thermometer" . Uppsala University.

^ "109-110 (Nordisk familjebok / Uggleupplagan. 32. Werth - Väderkvarn)" .

runeberg.org . 29 August 1921.

Sources Collinder, P. (1970).

Swedish astronomers, 1477-1900 . Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis: Skrifter Rörande Uppsala Universitet. Almqvist & Wiksells.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anders Celsius .

Johan Celsius - Historical records and family trees at MyHeritage Celsius is buried at Uppsala Church in Gamla Uppsala next to his grandfather v t e Scientists whose names are used as units SI base units André-Marie Ampère ( ampere ) Lord Kelvin ( kelvin ) SI derived units Henri Becquerel ( becquerel ) Anders Celsius (degree Celsius ) Charles-Augustin de Coulomb ( coulomb ) Michael Faraday ( farad ) Louis Harold Gray ( gray ) Joseph Henry ( henry ) Heinrich Hertz ( hertz ) James Prescott Joule ( joule ) Isaac Newton ( newton ) Georg Ohm ( ohm ) Blaise Pascal ( pascal ) Werner von Siemens ( siemens ) Rolf Maximilian Sievert ( sievert ) Nikola Tesla ( tesla ) Alessandro Volta ( volt ) James Watt ( watt ) Wilhelm Eduard Weber ( weber ) Non-SI metric ( cgs ) units Anders Jonas Ångström ( angstrom ) Peter Debye ( debye ) Loránd Eötvös ( eotvos ) Galileo Galilei ( gal ) Carl Friedrich Gauss ( gauss ) William Gilbert ( gilbert ) Heinrich Kayser ( kayser ) Johann Heinrich Lambert ( lambert ) Samuel Langley ( langley ) James Clerk Maxwell ( maxwell ) Hans Christian Ørsted ( oersted ) Jean Léonard Marie Poiseuille ( poise ) Sir George Stokes, 1st Baronet ( stokes ) John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh ( rayl ) Imperial and US customary units Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (degree Fahrenheit ) Johann Heinrich Lambert ( foot-lambert ) William John Macquorn Rankine ( degree Rankine ) Non-systematic units Alexander Graham Bell ( bel/decibel ) Marie Curie & Pierre Curie ( curie ) John Dalton ( dalton ) Michael Faraday ( faraday ) Heinrich Mache ( mache ) John Napier ( neper ) René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur ( degree Réaumur ) Wilhelm Röntgen ( roentgen ) J. J. Thomson ( thomson ) Evangelista Torricelli ( torr ) List of scientists whose names are used as units · Scientists whose names are used in physical constants · People whose names are used in chemical element names Portals : Biography Sweden Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Science Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Vatican Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Leopoldina Artists KulturNav People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anders_Celsius&oldid=1298790990 " Categories : 1701 births 1744 deaths 18th-century Swedish astronomers 18th-century deaths from tuberculosis Scientists from Uppsala Uppsala University alumni Academic staff of Uppsala University Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Tuberculosis deaths in Sweden 18th-century Swedish mathematicians Fellows of the Royal Society Creators of temperature scales Age of Liberty people 18th-century Swedish inventors Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with Swedish IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2022 CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Commons category link from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2019 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 18:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anders Celsius 92 languages Add topic

