Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Legal structure 2 Human rights 3 Legislative procedure 4 Study of constitutional law 5 The rule of law 6 The separation of powers 7 Election law 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Constitutional law 67 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Law dealing with structure of a state For other uses, see Constitutional law (disambiguation) .

The principles from the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen still have constitutional importance.

Constitutional law is a body of law which defines the role, powers, and structure of different entities within a state , namely, the executive , the parliament or legislature , and the judiciary ; as well as the basic rights of citizens and their relationship with their governments, and in federal countries such as the United States and Canada , the relationship between the central government and state, provincial, or territorial governments.

Not all nation states have codified constitutions , though all such states have a jus commune , or law of the land, that may consist of a variety of imperative and consensual rules. These may include customary law , conventions , statutory law , judge-made law , or international law . Constitutional law deals with the fundamental principles by which the government exercises its authority. In some instances, these principles grant specific powers to the government, such as the power to tax and spend for the welfare of the population. Other times, constitutional principles act to place limits on what the government can do, such as prohibiting the arrest of an individual without sufficient cause.

In most nations, such as the United States , India , and Singapore , constitutional law is based on the text of a document ratified at the time the nation came into being. Other constitutions, notably that of the United Kingdom , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] rely heavily on uncodified rules, as several legislative statutes and constitutional conventions , their status within constitutional law varies, and the terms of conventions are in some cases strongly contested.

[ 3 ] Legal structure [ edit ] Constitutional laws can be considered second order rule making [ clarification needed ] or rules about making rules to exercise power. It governs the relationships between the judiciary, the legislature and the executive with the bodies under its authority. One of the key tasks of constitutions within this context is to indicate hierarchies and relationships of power. For example, in a unitary state , the constitution will vest ultimate authority in one central administration and legislature , and judiciary , though there is often a delegation of power or authority to local or municipal authorities. When a constitution establishes a federal state for instance as seen in India, it will identify multiple levels of government coexisting with exclusive or shared areas of jurisdiction over lawmaking, application and enforcement. Some federal states, most notably the United States, have separate and parallel federal and state judiciaries, with each having its own hierarchy of courts with a supreme court for each state.

India , on the other hand, has one judiciary divided into district courts, high courts, and the Supreme Court of India .

Human rights [ edit ] Main articles: Human rights and International human rights law Human rights or civil liberties form a crucial part of a country's constitution and uphold the rights of the individual against the state. Most jurisdictions, like the United States and France , have a codified constitution, with a bill of rights .

Canada is an example where the constitution is not codified, but includes the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms to protect human rights for Canadian citizens and residents.

[ 4 ] Some countries like the United Kingdom have no entrenched document setting out fundamental rights; in those jurisdictions the constitution is composed of statute , case law and convention . A case named Entick v. Carrington [ 5 ] is a constitutional principle deriving from the common law.

John Entick 's house was searched and ransacked by Sheriff Carrington. Carrington argued that a warrant from a Government minister, the Earl of Halifax was valid authority, even though there was no statutory provision or court order for it. The court, led by Lord Camden stated that, "The great end, for which men entered into society, was to secure their property. That right is preserved sacred and incommunicable in all instances, where it has not been taken away or abridged by some public law for the good of the whole. By the laws of England, every invasion of private property, be it ever so minute, is a trespass... If no excuse can be found or produced, the silence of the books is an authority against the defendant, and the plaintiff must have judgment." [ 6 ] The common law and the civil law jurisdictions do not share the same constitutional law underpinnings.

Common law nations, such as those in the Commonwealth as well as the United States, derive their legal systems from that of the United Kingdom, and as such place emphasis on judicial precedent, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] whereby consequential court rulings (especially those by higher courts) are a source of law . Civil law jurisdictions, on the other hand, place less emphasis on judicial review and only the parliament or legislature has the power to effect law. As a result, the structure of the judiciary differs significantly between the two, with common law judiciaries being adversarial and civil law judiciaries being inquisitorial . Common law judicatures consequently separate the judiciary from the prosecution, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] thereby establishing the courts as completely independent from both the legislature and law enforcement. Human rights law in these countries is as a result, largely built on legal precedent in the courts' interpretation of constitutional law, whereas that of civil law countries is almost exclusively composed of codified law, constitutional or otherwise.

There are also international enactments to protect human rights. One example is the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union which was intended included in the Treaty of Lisbon . Perhaps the most important international example is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights under the UN Charter . These are intended to ensure basic political, social and economic standards that a nation state, or intergovernmental body is obliged to provide to its citizens but many do include its governments.

Legislative procedure [ edit ] Main article: Parliamentary procedure Another main function of constitutions may be to describe the procedure by which parliaments may legislate. For instance, special majorities may be required to alter the constitution. In bicameral legislatures, there may be a process laid out for second or third readings of bills before a new law can enter into force. Alternatively, there may further be requirements for maximum terms that a government can keep power before holding an election .

Study of constitutional law [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Constitutional law is a major focus of legal studies and research. For example, most law students in the United States are required to take a class in Constitutional Law during their first year, and several law journals are devoted to the discussion of constitutional issues.

The rule of law [ edit ] The doctrine of the rule of law dictates that government must be conducted according to law. This was first established by British legal theorist A. V. Dicey .

Dicey identified three essential elements of the British Constitution which were indicative of the rule of law: Absolute supremacy of regular law as opposed to the influence of arbitrary power ; [ 13 ] Equality before the law ; The Constitution is a result of the ordinary law of the land.

Dicey's rule of law formula consists of three classic tenets. The first is that the regular law is supreme over arbitrary and discretionary powers. "[N]o man is punishable ... except for a distinct breach of the law established in the ordinary legal manner before the ordinary courts of the land." [ 14 ] The second is that all men are to stand equal in the eyes of the law. "...no man is above the law...every man, whatever be his rank or condition, is subject to the ordinary law of the realm and amenable to the jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals" [ 15 ] The third is that the general ideas and principles that the constitution supports arise directly from the judgements and precedents issued by the judiciary. "We may say that the constitution is pervaded by the rule of law on the ground that the general principles of the constitution... are with us the result of judicial decisions determining the rights of private persons in particular cases brought before the courts" [ 16 ] The separation of powers [ edit ] Separation of powers is often regarded as a second limb functioning alongside the rule of law to curb the powers of the government. In many modern nation states, power is divided and vested into three branches of government: The legislature , the executive , and the judiciary are known as the horizontal separation of powers. The first and the second are harmonized in traditional Westminster system .

[ 17 ] Vertical separation of powers is decentralization.

Election law [ edit ] Election law is a subfield of constitutional law. It includes the rules governing the process of elections. These rules enable the translation of the will of the people into functioning democracies . Election law addresses issues who is entitled to vote , voter registration , ballot access , campaign finance and party funding , redistricting , apportionment , electronic voting and voting machines , accessibility of elections, election systems and formulas, vote counting , election disputes, referendums , and issues such as electoral fraud and electoral silence .

See also [ edit ] Constitution Constitutional economics Constitutional review Constitutional rights Constitutionalism Monism and dualism in international law Philosophy of law Public law Rechtsstaat Rule of law Rule according to higher law References [ edit ] Library resources about Constitutional law Resources in your library Resources in other libraries ^ Blick, Andrew; Blackburn, Robert (2012), Mapping the Path to Codifying - or not Codifying - the UK's Constitution , Series paper 2. Centre for Political and Constitutional Studies, King's College London, Parliament UK , retrieved 19 November 2016 ^ H Barnett, Constitutional and Administrative Law (5th edn Cavendish 2005) 9, "A written constitution is one contained within a single document or a [finite] series of documents, with or without amendments" ^ Markwell, Donald (2016).

Constitutional Conventions and the Headship of State: Australian Experience . Connor Court.

ISBN 9781925501155 .

^ "Guide to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" .

Canadian Heritage . 2017-10-23 . Retrieved 2022-01-20 .

^ Entick v. Carrington (1765) 19 Howell's State Trials 1030 ^ "Entick v. Carrington" .

19 Howell's State Trials 1029 (1765) .

United States : Constitution Society . Retrieved 2008-11-13 .

^ Garner, Bryan A. (2001).

A Dictionary of Modern Legal Usage (2nd, revised ed.). New York: Oxford University Press . p.

177 .

ISBN 978-0-19-507769-8 .

In modern usage, common law is contrasted with a number of other terms. First, in denoting the body of judge-made law based on that developed in England... [P]erhaps most commonly within Anglo-American jurisdictions, common law is contrasted with statutory law ...

^ Black's Law Dictionary - Common law (10th ed.). 2014. p. 334.

1. The body of law derived from judicial decisions, rather than from statutes or constitutions; CASE LAW [contrast to] STATUTORY LAW.

^ Macpherson, Heidi S.; Kaufman, Will (2005).

Britain and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History . Manchester, NH: Ezekial Books, LLC. p. 259.

ISBN 9791851094317 .

^ Hale, Sandra Beatriz (July 2004).

The Discourse of Court Interpreting: Discourse Practices of the Law, the Witness and the Interpreter . John Benjamins. p. 31.

ISBN 978-1-58811-517-1 .

^ Richards, Edward P.; Katharine C. Rathbun (1999-08-15).

Medical Care Law . Jones & Bartlett. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0-8342-1603-7 .

^ Care, Jennifer Corrin (2004-01-12).

Civil Procedure and Courts in the South Pacific . Routledge Cavendish. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-85941-719-5 .

^ A. V. Dicey, Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (Macmillan, 10th ed, 1959) p.202 ^ A. V. Dicey, Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (10th ed, 1959) p.188 ^ A. V. Dicey, Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (9th ed, 1945) p.193 ^ A. V. Dicey, Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (9th ed, 1945) p.195 ^ W B Gwyn, The Meaning of the Separation of Powers: An Analysis of the Doctrine From Its Origin to the Adoption of the United States Constitution, Tulane University (1965).

External links [ edit ] "Constitutional Law" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

"Constitutional law" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐gzf5j
Cached time: 20250814223347
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.467 seconds
Real time usage: 0.574 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1795/1000000
Revision size: 15362/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 67161/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2083/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60804/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.311/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16807970/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  483.787      1 -total
 25.21%  121.951      1 Template:Reflist
 16.99%   82.208      1 Template:Law
 16.71%   80.828      1 Template:Navbox
 14.90%   72.107      1 Template:Lang
 14.08%   68.132      1 Template:Citation
 10.18%   49.257      1 Template:Short_description
  6.38%   30.883      7 Template:Cite_book
  6.19%   29.958      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.81%   28.130      1 Template:Clarify Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5919:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814223347 and revision id 1302656353. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Constitutional_law&oldid=1302656353 " Category : Constitutional law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2025 Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2010 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 20:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Constitutional law 67 languages Add topic

