Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Questions studied 2 Data 3 Travel behavior and activity analysis 4 History of travel behavior analysis 5 Gender difference in travel patterns 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Travel behavior 3 languages العربية Русский Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Behaviors of people over geography This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Travel behavior" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Trips modal share within the UK , 1952-2014 Travel behavior is the study of what people do over geography , and how people use transport .

Questions studied [ edit ] The questions studied in travel behavior are broad, and are probed through activity and time-use research studies, and surveys of travelers designed to reveal attitudes, behaviors and the gaps between them in relation to the sociological and environmental impacts of travel.

How many trips do people make?

Where do they go? (What is the destination ?) What mode do they take?

Who accompanies whom?

When is the trip made? What is the schedule?

What is the sequence or pattern of trips?

What route choices do people make?

Why do people travel? (Why can't people stay at home and remote work or teleshop?) To what degree are people aware of the environmental and climate impacts of their travel choices?

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] To what degree and how do people rationalize the environmental and climate impacts causes by their travel?

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Where changes in travel behavior would be beneficial to society, how might those changes be promoted?

[ 5 ] Other behavioral aspects of traveling, such as letting people get off before entering a vehicle, queueing behavior, etc. (See for example Passenger behavior in Shanghai ) Data [ edit ] These questions can be answered descriptively using a travel diary , often part of a travel survey or travel behavior inventory.  Large metropolitan areas typically only do such surveys once every decade, though some cities are conducting panel surveys, which track the same people year after year. Such repeated surveys are useful because they yield different answers than surveys at a single point in time.

[ 6 ] That data is generally used to estimate transportation planning models , so that transport analysts can make predictions about people who haven't been surveyed. This is important in forecasting traffic , which depends on future changes to road networks, land use patterns, and policies.

Some years ago it was recognized that behavioral research was limited by data, and a special data set was developed to aid research:  The Baltimore Disaggregate Data Set which is the result an in depth survey,  ca. 1977.  Its title indicates today’s emphasis on disaggregated rather than aggregated data. This particular data set is believed lost.  A small program to preserve and make available on the web these travel behavior surveys, the Metropolitan Travel Survey Archive , is now under way at the University of Minnesota. There is also the National Personal Transportation Survey (later National Household Travel Survey), conducted every five years or so, but with much less spatial detail.

Today, the best source of information about travel behavior is a Household Travel Survey.  In this type of data collection the sampling unit is the household and all its members because people interact the most with other people with whom they share a residence. Data on household characteristics, person characteristics, and a daily diary constitute the Household Travel Survey.  The diary can be a trip diary (in which a person records every trip made in a day), or a place-based diary (in which a person record every location visited, the trips made to reach these location and the activities completed), or a time use diary (in which a person everything he/she does in day). Examples include the National Household Travel Survey, the California Household Travel Survey, The Puget Sound Travel Survey.  Data from these surveys can be found at https://www.nrel.gov/transportation/secure-transportation-data/ .

Travel behavior and activity analysis [ edit ] Analysis of travel behavior from the home can answer the question: How does the family participate in modern society. Consider two non-observable extremes.  At one extreme we have the non-specialized household.  It does everything for itself, and no travel is required.  Ultimate specialization is the other extreme; travel is required for all things.  Observed households are somewhere in between.  The “in between” position of households might be thought of as the consequence of two matters.

There is social and economic structure – the organization of society.  To participate in this society, the household specializes its occupations, education, social activities, etc.

The extent to which members of the household specialize turns on their attributes and resources.

Moore (1964) has observed that increasing specialization in all things is the chief feature of social change. Considering social changes, one might observe that 100 years ago things were less specialized compared to today.  So we would expect lots of change in household travel over the time period.  Data are not very good, but the travel time aspect of what’s available seems contrary to the expectation, travel hasn’t changed much.  For instance, the time spent on the journey to work may have been stable for centuries (the travel budget hypothesis).  Here are some travel time comparisons from John Robinson (1986).

Table: Minutes per day spent in travel Men Women Activity 1975 1985 1975 1985 Work Travel 25 31 9 17 Family Travel 33 31 33 33 Leisure Travel 27 33 21 23 Total 85 94 63 73 Most travel behavior analysis concerns demand issues and do not touch very much on supply issues.  Yet when we observe travel from a home, we are certainly observing some sort of market clearing process – demand and supply are matched.

History of travel behavior analysis [ edit ] Analytic work on travel behavior can be dated from Liepmann (1945). Liepmann obtained and analyzed 1930s data on worker travel in England .  Many of the insights current today were found by Liepmann:  time spent, ride sharing, etc. Most academics date modern work from advances in mode choice analysis made in the 1970s.  This created much excitement, and after some years an International Association for Travel Behaviour Research emerged.  There are about 150 members of the Association; it holds a conference every three years.  The proceedings of those conferences yield a nice record of advances in the field. The proceedings also provide a record of topics of lasting interest and of changing priorities.  Mode choice received priority early on, but in the main today’s work is not so much on theory as it is on practice.

Hagerstrand (1970) developed a time and space path analysis, often called the time-space prism.

Gender difference in travel patterns [ edit ] On November 18–20, 2004, Transportation Research Board (TRB) held its third conference in Chicago, Illinois, with an interest in advancing the understanding of women’s issues in transportation. One of the presented studies, conducted by Nobis et al., [ 7 ] revealed that the gender difference in travel patterns is linked to employment status, household structure, child care, and maintenance tasks. They found that travel patterns of men and women are much similar when considering single families; the differences are greater once males and females are compared in multi-person households without children; and are the highest once they live in households with children. Over the past two decades numerous studies have been conducted on travel behavior showing gender as an influential factor in travel decision making.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Hypermobility Metropolitan Travel Survey Archive Prof. Stefan Gössling, sustainable travel expert Travel survey Willingness to pay References [ edit ] ^ Hanna P., Scarles C., Cohen S.A., Adams M. (2016).

Everyday climate discourses and sustainable tourism . Jrnl.  Sust. Tourism.

^ Hares A. (2009).

The role of climate change in the travel decisions of UK tourists . CSTT 2009 conf: Transport and Tourism: Challenges, Issues and Conflicts.  pp.141-154.

[1] .

^ Higham J.E.S., Cohen S.A., Cavaliere C.T. (2014).

Climate Change, Discretionary Air Travel, and the "Flyers' Dilemma" . Jrnl Trav. Res.  53:4:pp.462-475.

^ Davison L., Littleford C., Ryley T. (2014).

Air travel attitudes and behaviours: The development of environment-based segments . Jrnl of Air Transp. Mngmt. 36:pp.13-22.

[2] ^ Truong D., Hall C.M. (2015).

Promoting voluntary behaviour change for sustainable tourism . The Routledge handbook of tourism and sustainability. pp.266-280.

[3] ^ Michael Branion-Calles (2019). "Impacts of study design on sample size, participation bias, and outcome measurement: A case study from bicycling research".

Journal of Transport & Health .

15 : 100651.

doi : 10.1016/j.jth.2019.100651 .

hdl : 10044/1/80109 .

S2CID 204387948 .

^ Nobis, C.; B. Lenz. (2004).

Gender Differences in Travel Patterns: Role of Employment Status and Household Structure .

ISBN 9780309093941 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Fatemeh Baratian-Ghorghi; Huaguo Zhou (2015).

"Investigating Women's and Men's Propensity to Use Traffic Information in a Developing Country" .

Transportation in Developing Economies .

1 : 11– 19.

doi : 10.1007/s40890-015-0002-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Respect .

https://web.archive.org/web/20110530124709/http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/scienceresearch/social/climatechangetransportchoices/ http://www.dft.gov.uk/data/release/10036 v t e Tourism Types Accessible Adventure Agritourism Alternative Astrotourism Atomic Backpacking Beachgoing Bicycle touring Birth Business Crime Culinary Enotourism Cultural Archaeological Film Literary Bookstore Tolkien Music Pop-culture Dark Disaster Holocaust War Domestic Ecotourism Shark Experiential Extreme Fashion Garden Genealogy Heritage Identity Geotourism Industrial Instagram tourism International Volunteering Jungle Justice LGBT Medical MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) Nautical Orphanage Recreational drug Red Religious Christian Halal Kosher Pilgrimage Rural Science Sensory Sleep Slum Smart Space Lunar Sports Sustainable Urban Virtual Visiting friends and relatives Wellness Wildlife Safari Scuba Yoga Hospitality industry Bed and breakfast Boutique hotel Convention center Cruise ship Destination spa Front desk Guest house Guest ranch Heuhotel Homestay Hospitality management studies Hostel Hotel Manager Inn Motel Pension Referral chain Resort Hotel Island Seaside Ski Town Restaurant Terminology College tour Convention (meeting) Destination marketing organization Escorted tour Excursion Factory tour Gift shop Grand Tour Holiday Honeymoon Hypermobility Journey planner Package tour Passport Perpetual traveler Road trip Roadside attraction Souvenir Staycation Tour bus service Tour guide Tour operator Tourism geography Tourism minister Tourism region Tourist attraction Tourist gateway Tourist trap Touron Transport Travel Travel agency Travel behavior Travel document Travel insurance Travel medicine Travel survey Travel technology Travel visa Travel warning Vacation Visitor center Travel literature Guide book Outdoor literature Tourism journals Travel magazines Wikivoyage Trade associations American Bus Association American Hotel and Lodging Association American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute BEST Education Network Caribbean Tourism Organization European Travel Commission Historical Archive on Tourism Life Beyond Tourism Musement Pacific Asia Travel Association South-East Asian Tourism Organisation Tourism Radio Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report World Federation of Travel Journalists and Writers World Tourism Organization World Tourism rankings World Travel and Tourism Council World Travel Monitor Trade fairs and events Akwaaba African Travel Market Arabian Travel Market Cruise of the Kings Festival del Viaggio FITUR ITB Berlin World Tourism Day Issues Heritage commodification Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism Impacts of tourism Leakage effect Overtourism Tourism improvement district Tourist tax Lists Adjectival tourisms Attractions Bibliography Casino hotels Casinos Cities by international visitors Convention and exhibition centers Cruise lines Hotels Largest Motels Passenger airlines UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists World Heritage Sites by country Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Travel_behavior&oldid=1305501081 " Categories : Consumer behaviour Human geography Transportation planning Travel Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 12:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Travel behavior 3 languages Add topic

