Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prevalence Toggle Prevalence subsection 1.1 Ireland 1.2 United Kingdom 1.3 United States 2 Discrimination in media and culture 3 Physical health-related research 4 Immigration 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Discrimination against autistic people 6 languages العربية Euskara Français Հայերեն Nederlands Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( April 2025 ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(April 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,148 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Exclusion des personnes autistes]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Exclusion des personnes autistes}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Discrimination against autistic people involves any form of discrimination , persecution , or oppression against people who are autistic .

[ 1 ] Autistic people face discrimination of various kinds, both directly and indirectly, extending into a variety of settings such as the professional, educational and clinical.

[ 2 ] Such discrimination is often initiated after other people identify the autistic person as being different from themselves, which may occur very quickly.

[ 2 ] Discrimination oftentimes presents together with associated phenomena, such as violence , assault , and social exclusion .

[ 2 ] Prevalence [ edit ] Ireland [ edit ] Research published by charity AsIAm in 2022 showed that 6 in 10 Irish people associated autism with negatively perceived characteristics such as "not making eye contact", "difficulty making friends" and "no to little verbal communication".

[ 3 ] People were less likely to know the positive traits associated with autism, such as logical thinking, honesty and being detail-oriented.

[ 3 ] The survey found that ten percent of autistic people surveyed felt workplaces were inclusive.

[ 3 ] The Same Chance report was based on two surveys were conducted on behalf of AsIAm – the first, by Core Research assessed public attitudes to autistic people by surveying 1,000 members of the general public.

[ 3 ] The second survey was of 944 parents, carers and autistic people over the age of 18.

[ 3 ] The issues raised in the second survey included accessing healthcare, education, employment and housing.

[ 3 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Research published in 2019 used data from more than 8,000 children in the University of London 's Millennium Cohort Study , which tracks the lives of about 19,000 people born in the United Kingdom starting in 2000. Out of the children selected, 231 were autistic. The study from the Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders found that these autistic children were more likely to engage in "two-way sibling bullying", meaning being both a victim and perpetrator of bullying.

[ 4 ] Further research published in 2017, a meta-analysis of three studies, demonstrated that "first impressions of individuals with ASD made from thin slices of real-world social behavior by typically-developing observers are not only far less favorable across a range of trait judgments compared to controls, but also are associated with reduced intentions to pursue social interaction." [ 5 ] The meta-analysis continues, "These patterns are remarkably robust, occur within seconds, do not change with increased exposure, and persist across both child and adult age groups." [ 5 ] This may be why autistic people have "smaller social networks and fewer friendships, difficulty securing and retaining employment, high rates of loneliness, and an overall reduced quality of life." [ 5 ] Smaller social networks, fewer friendships, and loneliness correlate with severe negative health outcomes. According to a paper published in the Journal of Health and Social Behavior , "Health risks associated with social isolation have been compared in magnitude to the well-known dangers of smoking cigarettes and obesity." [ 6 ] Furthermore, according to the UK Office for National Statistics , the unemployment rate of autistic people may reach 85%, the highest rate among all disabled groups studied. It is noted that in many countries autism is not a disability protected by anti-discrimination employment laws, and this is due to many corporations lobbying against it.

[ 7 ] Autistic adults are also more likely to face healthcare disparities, such as being unvaccinated against common diseases like tetanus and being more likely to use emergency services.

[ 8 ] Autistic people are also less likely to graduate from secondary school , college, or other forms of higher education, further contributing to high rates of unemployment and lower quality of life.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] This failure to successfully complete education can be in part attributed to a lack of support from educational institutions. In the UK, only one quarter of autistic children in state-funded schools feel happy and are thus able to achieve their maximum potential.

[ 11 ] United States [ edit ] In the United States , people with disabilities are victims of violent crime three times as often as people without disabilities. The Bureau of Justice Statistics does not report separately on autistic victims, but it does note that the victimization rate is especially high among those whose disabilities are cognitive. A small-sample study of Americans and Canadians found that autistic adults face a greater risk of sexual victimization than their peers. Autistic respondents were more than twice as likely to say they had been the victim of rape and over three times as likely to report unwanted sexual contact.

[ 12 ] In 2018, a large scale study found that autistic girls were almost three times more likely to be a victim of sexual abuse compared to non-autistic girls.

[ 13 ] Discrimination in media and culture [ edit ] Representation of autistic people in media has perpetuated myths about autism, including characterizing autism as shameful and burdensome for family members, advertising fake cures for autism, and publicizing the long-disproven arguments surrounding vaccines and autism . These myths are perpetuated in mass media as well as news media and social media .

[ 14 ] Stigmatization of autism can also be perpetuated by advertising from autism conversion organizations, such as Autism Speaks ' advertising wherein a mother describes having considered murder-suicide in front of her autistic daughter or the NYU Child Study Center's advertisements where autism is personified as a kidnapper holding children for ransom.

[ 15 ] Moreover, the autistic behavior known as stimming is frequently referred to as "distracting" and the way autistic people naturally talk is often described as rude.

[ 16 ] Stimming specifically is often targeted in therapies such as applied behavior analysis , despite the fact that it is vital to self regulation.

[ 17 ] Physical health-related research [ edit ] In the United States, recently published research [ 18 ] shows that the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has not funded grants focused on the treatment of physical health disparity conditions, such as insomnia , cardiovascular disease , and other conditions, in autistic adults across four decades of research funding.  McDonald and Scudder (2023) explicitly distinguish health disparity conditions that affect the lives of autistic people from research grants focused on the cause , cure , and prevention of autism.  Although their research focused on autistic adults without an intellectual disability , the research did not exclude this population and found a lack of funded grants focused on the treatment of health disparity conditions for autistic adults with intellectual disabilities.  The research describes several systemic discriminatory "nodes" of practices and policies that may contribute to the apparent discrimination in research grant funding. These include the exclusion of disability populations from groups designated for physical health disparity research grants, the designation of autism as a "primary disease;" a designation used as a rationale for some National Institutes of Health (e.g., the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ) to exclude research focused on autistic populations from grant funding review, and the pressure on early career researchers by academic institutions (that receive NIH funding) to either change their research topic or their population for NIH grant applications and to avoid challenging NIH policies until they are at a more advanced stage in their career.

Immigration [ edit ] In the United States, the first Trump administration reportedly supported restrictive immigration policies that discriminated against autistic people. Under these policies, autistic immigrants faced deportation.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] In Canada , autistic immigrants have been denied citizenship or they have faced deportation due to the perception that they are a "burden" upon the Canadian medical system. In 2018, reforms in Canadian immigration law were announced – these reforms are supposed to make it easier for autistic and disabled immigrants to migrate to Canada.

[ 21 ] New Zealand effectively prohibits the application for permanent residency for people with autism "where significant support is required".

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Australia's health criteria have prompted criticism about its immigration policies. Australia forbids the immigration of people who would be exceptionally costly for the nation's health care or social services. Autistic people are subject to this policy.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Ableism Autism rights movement Autism-friendly Neurodiversity Violence and autism Suicide among autistic individuals References [ edit ] ^ Billawalla, Alshaba; Wolbring, Gregor (2014).

"Analyzing the discourse surrounding Autism in the New York Times using an ableism lens" .

Disability Studies Quarterly .

34 (1).

doi : 10.18061/dsq.v34i1.3348 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 .

^ a b c Cleary, Michelle; West, Sancia; Kornhaber, Rachel; Hungerford, Catherine (2023-09-02).

"Autism, Discrimination and Masking: Disrupting a Recipe for Trauma" .

Issues in Mental Health Nursing .

44 (9): 799– 808.

doi : 10.1080/01612840.2023.2239916 .

ISSN 0161-2840 .

PMID 37616302 .

^ a b c d e f Kenny, Áine (2022-03-31).

"Autistic people still facing barriers, new report finds" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 2024-10-10 .

^ Toseeb U, McChesney G, Oldfield J, Wolke D (May 2020).

"Sibling Bullying in Middle Childhood is Associated with Psychosocial Difficulties in Early Adolescence: The Case of Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

50 (5): 1457– 1469.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-019-04116-8 .

PMC 7211196 .

PMID 31332675 .

^ a b c Sasson, Noah J.; Faso, Daniel J.; Nugent, Jack; Lovell, Sarah; Kennedy, Daniel P.; Grossman, Ruth B. (1 February 2017).

"Neurotypical Peers are Less Willing to Interact with Those with Autism based on Thin Slice Judgments" .

Scientific Reports .

7 40700.

Bibcode : 2017NatSR...740700S .

doi : 10.1038/srep40700 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 5286449 .

PMID 28145411 .

^ CORNWELL, ERIN YORK; WAITE, LINDA J. (2009).

"Social Disconnectedness, Perceived Isolation, and Health among Older Adults" .

Journal of Health and Social Behavior .

50 (1): 31– 48.

doi : 10.1177/002214650905000103 .

ISSN 0022-1465 .

PMC 2756979 .

PMID 19413133 .

^ Putz, Catherine; Sparkes, Indiana; Foubert, Josephine (18 February 2021).

"Outcomes for disabled people in the UK – Office for National Statistics" .

www.ons.gov.uk . Retrieved 15 April 2021 .

^ Nicolaidis, Christina; Raymaker, Dora; McDonald, Katherine; Dern, Sebastian; Boisclair, W. Cody; Ashkenazy, Elesia; Baggs, Amanda (2012-11-21).

"Comparison of Healthcare Experiences in Autistic and Non-Autistic Adults: A Cross-Sectional Online Survey Facilitated by an Academic-Community Partnership" .

Journal of General Internal Medicine .

28 (6). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 761– 769.

doi : 10.1007/s11606-012-2262-7 .

ISSN 0884-8734 .

PMC 3663938 .

PMID 23179969 .

^ "Attrition Issue: Why Students with Autism Drop Out – the 61% Project" .

^ "Autism Statistics and Facts" .

^ "Education Report 2023". 30 May 2023.

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) ^ Pitney Jr JJ (2015).

The politics of autism : navigating the contested spectrum . Lanham.

ISBN 978-1-4422-4960-8 .

OCLC 907022313 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Ohlsson Gotby, Vide; Lichtenstein, Paul; Långström, Niklas; Pettersson, Erik (September 2018). "Childhood neurodevelopmental disorders and risk of coercive sexual victimization in childhood and adolescence – a population-based prospective twin study".

Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines .

59 (9): 957– 965.

doi : 10.1111/jcpp.12884 .

ISSN 1469-7610 .

PMID 29570782 .

S2CID 4238219 .

^ Holton, Avery; Farrell, Laura C.; Fudge, Julie L. (March 28, 2014).

"A Threatening Space?: Stigmatization and the Framing of Autism in the News" .

Communication Studies .

65 (2): 189– 207.

doi : 10.1080/10510974.2013.855642 .

S2CID 145668002 . Retrieved 23 December 2021 .

^ Waltz, Mitzi (February 16, 2012).

"Images and narratives of autism within charity discourses" .

Disability & Society .

27 (2): 219– 233.

doi : 10.1080/09687599.2012.631796 .

S2CID 143756605 . Retrieved 23 December 2021 .

^ "Asperger's Doesn't Mean They're Rude" .

Psych Central . 2021-08-09 . Retrieved 2023-02-21 .

^ Taylor, Elinor (2 October 2023).

"Beyond 'bad' behaviors: A call for occupational scientists to rethink autism" .

Journal of Occupational Science .

30 (4): 575– 590.

doi : 10.1080/14427591.2022.2136231 .

S2CID 253503104 .

^ McDonald, T. A. Meridian; Scudder, Audrey (2023-01-13).

"Mind the NIH-Funding Gap: Structural Discrimination in Physical Health–Related Research for Cognitively Able Autistic Adults" .

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

54 (4): 1411– 1424.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-022-05856-w .

ISSN 0162-3257 .

PMC 10762646 .

PMID 36635433 .

S2CID 255773930 .

^ "Immigrant families with severely ill or disabled children now face deportation by Trump administration" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . 13 September 2019 . Retrieved 2022-05-07 .

^ "Trump Administration Seeks To Bar Immigrants with Disabilities" . Disability Scoop. 30 April 2018 . Retrieved 2022-05-07 .

^ "Father of son with autism calls Canada's new immigration policy a 'blessing for all of us' " . Global News . Retrieved 2022-05-07 .

^ " "Burdens" and Borders: Disability Discrimination in New Zealand Immigration Law" .

Equal Justice Project . 4 May 2020 . Retrieved 2023-03-04 .

^ "A4.10 Acceptable standard of health (applicants for residence)" .

Operational Manual . Immigration New Zealand. 22 August 2016 . Retrieved 1 June 2025 .

^ Doherty, Ben; Knaus, Christopher (23 February 2017).

"Outcry after Sydney doctor faced with deportation over autistic child" .

Guardian . Retrieved 2024-03-15 .

v t e Autism Main Causes Diagnosis Epidemiology Epigenetics Heritability History Memory Pathophysiology Sex and gender Societal and cultural aspects Therapies Diagnoses Pervasive developmental disorder Autistic disorder Asperger syndrome Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder High-functioning autism Associated conditions and phenomena Alexithymia Anxiety LGBTQ identities Burnout Catatonia Masking Meltdowns Inertia Echolalia Echopraxia Emotional dysregulation Hyperlexia Infodumping Late talker Monotropism Nonspeaking Pathological demand avoidance Pronoun reversal Savant syndrome Special interests Stimming Sensory overload Comorbid conditions Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder Avoidant personality disorder Anxiety disorder obsessive–compulsive disorder Bipolar disorder Developmental coordination disorder Developmental verbal dyspraxia Epilepsy Gender dysphoria Global developmental delay Intellectual disability Major depressive disorder Schizoid personality disorder Sensory processing disorder Sleep disorder Suicide Tinnitus Associated syndromes 22q13 deletion syndrome Angelman syndrome CHARGE syndrome Cohen syndrome Cornelia de Lange syndrome DiGeorge syndrome Down syndrome Fetal valproate spectrum disorder Fragile X syndrome MECP2 duplication syndrome Neurofibromatosis type I Noonan syndrome Multiple hamartoma syndrome Rett syndrome Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome Timothy syndrome Tuberous sclerosis Williams syndrome Related issues Ableism Autistic rights movement Critical autism studies Discrimination Double empathy problem Employment Military service and conscription Multiple complex developmental disorder Neurodiversity Neuroqueer theory Peripheral neuropathy Reduced affect display Sanism Self-harm Suicidal ideation TEACCH program Twice exceptional Violence and autism Controversies Facilitated communication Lancet MMR autism fraud MMR vaccine Rapid prompting method Thiomersal Chelation Combating Autism Act Autistic supremacism Diagnostic scales Autism Diagnostic Interview Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule Childhood Autism Rating Scale Gilliam Asperger's disorder scale Screening scales Autism-spectrum quotient Childhood Autism Spectrum Test Ritvo Autism and Asperger Diagnostic Scale Lists Autism-related topics Fictional characters Schools Accommodations Autism-friendly Curb cut effect Inclusive design Neurodiversity and labor rights Neuroinclusive design Sensory friendly Supported employment Universal design Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discrimination_against_autistic_people&oldid=1305572829 " Categories : Sociological and cultural aspects of autism Discrimination by type Harassment and bullying Ableism Discrimination in the United States Discrimination in the United Kingdom Discrimination in Canada Discrimination in Australia Discrimination in New Zealand Hidden categories: CS1 errors: requires URL CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2023 United States-centric United Kingdom-centric Canada-centric Wikipedia introduction cleanup from April 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 21:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Discrimination against autistic people 6 languages Add topic

