Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Earlier environmental education initiatives 3 Methods 4 Programs and organizations 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Notes 5.2 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental adult education 1 language Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Education This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards .

No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this article if you can.

( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Environmental adult education is a "hybrid outgrowth of the environmental movement and adult education , combining an ecological orientation with a learning paradigm to provide a vigorous educational approach to environmental concerns." [ 1 ] It refers to efforts in teaching environmental issues and how individuals and businesses can manage or change their lifestyles and their ecosystems in order to achieve sustainable existence. The overarching goal of this field of study is to educate global citizens in order for them to gain sustainable lives within their respective societies. The content could also include ecological justice , integrating social concerns such as poverty, race, gender, and sexual orientation, among others.

[ 2 ] This relationship is demonstrated in the impact of the excesses of global capitalism and its insatiable need for resources on people such as the polarization of power and wealth.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Environmental adult education is a relatively new field of study and practice. Using a community-based method, educators listen and respect the input of learners and all participants are considered essential.

[ 4 ] Although for more than a century, environmental and conservation organizations taught adults environmental education with very little structure, it has actually evolved during the last thirty years.

The United States was one of the first countries to officially recognize environmental education. During a joint House–Senate session in 1968, Congress acknowledged the importance of environmental education, and in 1970 passed the Environmental Education Act , which established the Office of Environmental Education .

[ 5 ] In 1992, this framework began to emerge in Asia and Latin America, where it is considered a stream of adult education and sometimes referred to as environmental popular education.

[ 2 ] The United Nations, for its part, began integrating the concept of environmental sustainability to the Education for All initiative, which is a set of UN policies with a goal of meeting learning needs of all people, as well as the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) .

[ 6 ] Specifically, the UN-organized Earth Summit in 1992, prompted the International Council for Adult Education to develop the Learning for Environmental Action Programme (LEAP) which took the initiative of facilitating the dialogue that connect environmental issues and adult learning.

[ 2 ] Earlier environmental education initiatives [ edit ] According to UNESCO , [ citation needed ] in 1968 it organized the first intergovernmental conference aimed at reconciling the environment and development, now known as sustainable development . In the following years, UNESCO and the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) initiated three major declarations that defined environmental education. Those included: 1972: Stockholm Declaration . This document included seven proclamations and 26 principles "to inspire and guide the peoples of the world in the preservation and enhancement of the human environment." 1975: Belgrade Charter . The product of the International Workshop on Environmental Education, this charter built upon the Stockholm Declaration by adding goals, objectives and principles for environmental education programs.

[ citation needed ] 1977: Tbilisi Declaration . This document updated and clarified the Stockholm Declaration and the Belgrade Charter by including new goals, objectives, characteristics, and guiding principles of environmental education.

Methods [ edit ] Educators in this field of study consider environmental problems with a holistic approach that combines social, political and environmental concerns into community dilemmas.

[ 4 ] Participatory methods allow learners to make connections between social issues and environmental problems. This connection allows adult learners to understand the core causes of major environmental issues and the resulting social inequalities. This method also allows educators to stress the importance of instilling environmental awareness so that learners do not forget their relationship with the natural world.

To summarize the methods of adult environmental education training, environmental adult educators strive to instil learners with: 
a knowledge of environmental problems and their causes,
the skills to engage in social activism to combat those problems,
the attitude of respect and connection to the natural world, and
a desire to change current practices to protect the Earth.

Environmental adult education generally takes place in a nonformal education setting. This means that the organized learning can take place in many forms including vocational education, literacy education and on the job training.

[ 4 ] There are, however, examples of formal learning such as the degree programs and courses in higher education.

[ 7 ] It could also be a combination of these methods of environmental educational program delivery as demonstrated in the case of El Salvador 's National Environmental Education Strategy, which covered all aspect of education via a private-public partnership. The government - through its Ministry of Education - integrated environmental education in schools, including tertiary education institutions, while partners such as media outfits deliver meaningful environmental concepts to targeted audiences and the general public.

[ 8 ] Programs and organizations [ edit ] Programs and organizations that encourage adult environmental education include: Conservation education and governmental agencies such as the United States Forest Service and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) were established to educate adults in broad areas of the environment.

The Nature Conservancy , originally the Ecological Society of America, was formed in 1915 with the missions of supporting ecologists and preserving natural ecosystems.

The 4-H Organization was also established to reach adults by educating youth in areas of new agricultural technology and environmental awareness.

The Peace Corps , established in 1961, has worked to incorporate adult environmental education and conservation practices into its international programming. Volunteers assist in: Project WILD is a conservation and environmental education program for educators of students in kindergarten through high school. Project WILD addresses the need for human beings to develop as responsible citizens of the planet. It is based on the belief that young adults and educators have an interest in learning about the natural world.

[ 9 ] Project Learning Tree , a program of the American Forest Foundation, is a multi-disciplinary environmental education program for educators and students in PreK–Grade 12.

Gobar Times a monthly environmental education magazine for the young adult.

References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Sumner, J (2003). "Environmental adult education and community sustainability." New directions for adult and continuing education.

Fall (99), 39–45 ^ a b c English, Leona (2016).

International Encyclopedia of Adult Education . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

218– 219.

ISBN 9780230201712 .

^ Dentith, Audrey; Griswold, Wendy (2017).

Ecojustice Adult Education . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9781119383833 .

^ a b c Haugen 2006 ^ American Geological Institute 2000 ^ Kasworm, Carol; Rose, Amy; Ross-Gordon, Jovita (2010).

Handbook of Adult and Continuing Education . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. p. 104.

ISBN 9781412960502 .

^ Barlett, Peggy; Chase, Geoffrey (2013).

Sustainability in Higher Education: Stories and Strategies for Transformation . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. p. 1.

ISBN 9780262019491 .

^ Tilbury, Daniella; Stevenson, Robert; Fien, John; Schreuder, Danie (2002).

Education and Sustainability: Responding to the Global Challenge . Cambridge, UK: IUCN. p. 155.

ISBN 2831706238 .

^ Project WILD Bibliography [ edit ] American Geological Institute (2000). Update on the National Environmental Education Act of 1990. Retrieved September 27, 2008 from the American Geological Institute Web site: http://www.agiweb.org/gap/legis106/neea106.html Environmental Education (2008). The Modern Impetus for EE: The Tbilisi Declaration (1977). Retrieved September 27, 2008, from the Global Development Research Center Web site: http://www.gdrc.org/uem/ee/1-4.html Haugen, C.S. (2006). Environmental Adult education Theory and Adult Learning Principles: Implications for Training. M.A. thesis, American University, in Proquest Digital Dissertations Hill, L.H. & Johnston, J.D. (2003). Adult education and humanity's relationship with nature reflected in language, metaphor and spirituality: A call to action. New directions for adult and continuing education, Fall 2003 (99), 17–26 Parker, J & Towner, E. (1993). Editorial: Learning for the future. Adults learning, 4 (8) 208–209 Sumner, J (2003). Environmental adult education and community sustainability. New directions for adult and continuing education, Fall (99), 39–45.

United Nations Environment Programme (2008). Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment. Retrieved September 27, 2008, from United Nations Environment Programme Web site: http://webarchive.loc.gov/all/20150314024203/http%3A//www.unep.org/Documents.Multilingual/Default.asp?documentid%3D97%26articleid%3D1503 United Nations Environment Programme (2008). The Belgrade Charter adopted at the International Workshop on Environmental Education in 1975. Retrieved September 27, 2008, from United Nations Environment Programme Web site: https://web.archive.org/web/20090226013849/http://portal.unesco.org/education/en/ev.php-URL_ID%3D33037%26URL_DO%3DDO_TOPIC%26URL_SECTION%3D201.html External links [ edit ] United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization The Peace Corps The 4-H Organization: History U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: History U.S. Forestry Service: History Archived 2008-10-02 at the Wayback Machine The Nature Conservancy Project WILD Project Learning Tree Adult Learners and the Environment in Last Century: An Historical Analysis of Environmental Adult Education Challenges for Environmental Education: Issues and Ideas for the 21st Century Child-orientated environmental education influences adult knowledge and household behaviour v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_adult_education&oldid=1299000148 " Categories : Environmental education Alternative education Outdoor education Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing cleanup from February 2011 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles without a reason field from February 2011 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from February 2011 Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2011 Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from September 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 00:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental adult education 1 language Add topic

