Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Use 3 Operation 4 Flight Director Attitude Indicator 5 Attitude and Heading Reference Systems 6 Attitude Direction Indicator 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Attitude indicator 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano Қазақша Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flight instrument which displays the aircraft's orientation relative to Earth's horizon Not to be confused with altimeter .

"Artificial Horizon" redirects here. For the U2 album, see Artificial Horizon (album) .

AI with pitch and roll reference lines (left) and the AI relationship to aircraft orientation (right) The attitude indicator ( AI ), also known as the gyro horizon or artificial horizon , is a flight instrument that informs the pilot of the aircraft orientation relative to Earth's horizon , and gives an immediate indication of the smallest orientation change. The miniature aircraft and horizon bar mimic the relationship of the aircraft relative to the actual horizon.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is a primary instrument for flight in instrument meteorological conditions .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Attitude is always presented to users in the unit degrees (°). However, inner workings such as sensors, data and calculations may use a mix of degrees and radians , as scientists and engineers may prefer to work with radians.

History [ edit ] Before the advent of aviation, artificial horizons were used in celestial navigation . Proposals of such devices based on gyroscopes, or spinning tops, date back to the 1740s, [ 5 ] including the work of John Serson .

Another notable development came in 1785, when John Adams , an English mathematician and headmaster of Latymer’s Charity School , was awarded a Silver Medal by the Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce for his invention of an 'Artificial Horizon to be used on Land'.

[ 6 ] In his letter and historical account addressed to the Society, Adams detailed how he had acquired a siphon circular spirit level in 1764 and, by 1778, had proposed to the London instrument maker Peter Dollond , a method by which it could be adapted to calculate latitude and longitude .

[ 7 ] Later implementations, also known as bubble horizons , were based on bubble levels and attached to a sextant .

[ 8 ] In the 2010s, remnants of an artificial horizon using liquid mercury were recovered from the wreck of HMS Erebus .

[ 9 ] Use [ edit ] AI interior The essential components of the AI include a symbolic miniature aircraft mounted so that it appears to be flying relative to the horizon. An adjustment knob, to account for the pilot's line of vision, moves the aircraft up and down to align it against the horizon bar. The top half of the instrument is blue to represent the sky, while the bottom half is brown to represent the ground. The bank index at the top shows the aircraft angle of bank. Reference lines in the middle indicate the degree of pitch, up or down, relative to the horizon.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] Most Russian-built aircraft have a somewhat different design. The background display is colored as in a Western instrument, but moves up and down only to indicate pitch. A symbol representing the aircraft (which is fixed in a Western instrument) rolls left or right to indicate bank angle.

[ 10 ] A proposed hybrid version of the Western and Russian systems would be more intuitive, but has never caught on.

[ 11 ] Operation [ edit ] Vacuum system using a vacuum pump Vacuum system using a venturi The heart of the AI is a gyroscope (gyro) that spins at high speed, from either an electric motor, or through the action of a stream of air pushing on rotor vanes placed along its periphery. The stream of air is provided by a vacuum system, driven by a vacuum pump, or a venturi. Air passing through the narrowest portion of a venturi has lower air pressure through Bernoulli's principle . The gyro is mounted in a double gimbal, which allows the aircraft to pitch and roll as the gyro stays vertically upright. A self-erecting mechanism, actuated by gravity, counteracts any precession due to bearing friction . It may take a few minutes for the erecting mechanism to bring the gyros to a vertical upright position after the aircraft engine is first powered up.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] [ 12 ] Attitude indicators have mechanisms that keep the instrument level with respect to the direction of gravity.

[ 13 ] The instrument may develop small errors, in pitch or bank during extended periods of acceleration, deceleration, turns, or due to the earth curving underneath the plane on long trips. To start with, they often have slightly more weight in the bottom, so that when the aircraft is resting on the ground they will hang level and therefore they will be level when started. But once they are started, that pendulous weight in the bottom will not pull them level if they are out of level, but instead its pull will cause the gyro to precess . In order to let the gyro very slowly orient itself to the direction of gravity while in operation, the typical vacuum powered gyro has small pendulums on the rotor casing that partially cover air holes. When the gyro is out of level with respect to the direction of gravity, the pendulums will swing in the direction of gravity and either uncover or cover the holes, such that air is allowed or prevented from jetting out of the holes, and thereby applying a small force to orient the gyro towards the direction of gravity. Electric powered gyros may have different mechanisms to achieve a similar effect.

[ 14 ] Older AIs were limited in the amount of pitch or roll that they would tolerate. Exceeding these limits would cause the gyro to tumble as the gyro housing contacted the gimbals, causing a precession force. Preventing this required a caging mechanism to lock the gyro if the pitch exceed 60° and the roll exceeded 100°. Modern AIs do not have this limitation and therefore do not require a caging mechanism.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] Attitude indicators are free from most errors, but depending upon the speed with which the erection system functions, there may be a slight nose-up indication during a rapid acceleration and a nose-down indication during a rapid deceleration. There is also a possibility of a small bank angle and pitch error after a 180° turn. These inherent errors are small and correct themselves within a minute or so after returning to straight-and-level flight.

[ 1 ] Flight Director Attitude Indicator [ edit ] Apollo Flight Director Attitude Indicator (left) and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) (right) Attitude indicators are also used on crewed spacecraft and are called Flight Director Attitude Indicators (FDAI), where they indicate the craft's yaw angle (nose left or right), pitch (nose up or down), roll, and orbit relative to a fixed-space inertial reference frame from an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU).

[ 15 ] The FDAI can be configured to use known positions relative to Earth or the stars, so that the engineers, scientists and astronauts can communicate the relative position, attitude, and orbit of the craft.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Attitude and Heading Reference Systems [ edit ] Attitude and Heading Reference Systems (AHRS) are able to provide three-axis information based on ring laser gyroscopes , that can be shared with multiple devices in the aircraft, such as " glass cockpit " primary flight displays ( PFDs ). Rather than using a spinning gyroscope, modern AHRS use solid-state electronics , low-cost inertial sensors , rate gyros , and magnetometers .

[ 2 ] : 8–20 [ 1 ] : 5–22 With most AHRS systems, if an aircraft's AIs have failed there will be a standby AI located in the center of the instrument panel, where other standby basic instruments such as the airspeed indicator and altimeter are also available. These mostly mechanical standby instruments may remain available even if the electronic flight instruments fail, although the standby attitude indicator may be electrically driven and will, after a short time, fail if its electrical power fails.

[ 18 ] Attitude Direction Indicator [ edit ] ADI (left) with yellow V steering bars, and an AI integrated with ILS glide slope and localizer indicators (right) The Attitude Direction Indicator (ADI), or Flight Director Indicator (FDI), is an AI integrated with a Flight Director System (FDS). The ADI incorporates a computer that receives information from the navigation system, such as the AHRS, and processes this information to provide the pilot with a 3-D flight trajectory cue to maintain a desired path. The cue takes the form of V steering bars. The aircraft is represented by a delta symbol and the pilot flies the aircraft so that the delta symbol is placed within the V steering bars.

[ 1 ] : 5–23, 5–24 See also [ edit ] Acronyms and abbreviations in avionics Air India Flight 855 Korean Air Cargo Flight 8509 Peripheral vision horizon display (PVHD) Turn and slip indicator References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Instrument Flying Handbook, FAA-H-8083-15B (PDF) . U.S. Dept. of Transportation, FAA. 2012. p. 5-17,5-19.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b c d e Pilot's Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge, FAA-H-8083-25B (PDF) . U.S. Dept. of Transportation, FAA. 2016. p. 8-16,8-18,8-19.

^ Jeppesen, A Boeing Company (2007).

Guided Flight Discovery Private PilotJe . Jeppesen. pp.

2– 66.

ISBN 978-0-88487-429-4 .

^ https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aircraft/ AMT Handbook - Aircraft Instrument Systems page 10-56 ^ Jörg F. Wagner: From Bohnenberger's Machine to Integrated Navigation Systems. 200 Years of Inertial Navigation.

Photogrammetric Week 05.

"Photogrammetric Week 2005" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2007-07-06 . Retrieved 2022-12-04 .

^ Adams, John (1786).

"An Account of an Artificial Horizon, to be Used on Land" .

Transactions of the Society, Instituted at London, for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce .

4 . London: The Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce: 202– 205.

^ Morris, Joseph Acton (1975).

A History of the Latymer School at Edmonton . The Latymer Foundation at Edmonton. p. 78.

^ I.C.B. Dear, Peter Kemp (ed.): The Oxford Companion to Ships and the Sea , Oxford University Press, 2016, pp. 22, 77 ^ 2015 Artifacts , 2018 Artifacts , Wrecks of HMS Erebus and HMS Terror National Historic Site ^ Learmount, David (2009-02-09), "Which way is up for Eastern and Western artificial horizons?" , flightglobal.com , archived from the original on October 29, 2014 ^ Safety expert proposes low-cost loss of control fixes , FlightGlobal , 2011-03-04 ^ Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).

"AMT Handbook - Chapter 10. Aircraft Instrument Systems" .

^ murphy, alan.

"4-4" .

www.faatest.com . Retrieved 22 March 2018 .

^ murphy, alan.

"4-5" .

www.faatest.com . Retrieved 22 March 2018 .

^ "Flight-Director/Atitude [ sic ] Indicator" .

www.hq.nasa.gov . Retrieved 2016-12-01 .

^ "Apollo Flight Journal - Apollo Operations Handbook. Volume 1" .

history.nasa.gov . Archived from the original on 2015-12-24 . Retrieved 2016-12-01 .

^ Interbartolo, Michael (January 2009).

"Apollo Guidance, Navigation, and Control (GNC) Hardware Overview" (PDF) .

NASA Technical Reports Server . NASA . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

^ "NTSB Safety Recommendation" . 2010-11-08.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Artificial horizons .

v t e Flight instruments Pitot-static Altimeter Airspeed indicator Machmeter Variometer Gyroscopic Attitude indicator Heading indicator Horizontal situation indicator Turn and slip indicator Turn coordinator Turn indicator Navigational Aircraft periscope Course deviation indicator Horizontal situation indicator Inertial navigation system Magnetic compass Satellite navigation SIGI Related topics Air data inertial reference unit ECAM EFIS Glass cockpit Head-up display Integrated standby instrument system Primary flight display V speeds Yaw string v t e Aircraft components and systems Airframe structure Aft pressure bulkhead Cabane strut Canopy Crack arrestor Cruciform tail Dope Empennage Fabric covering Fairing Flying wires Former Fuselage Hardpoint Interplane strut Jury strut Leading edge Lift strut Longeron Nacelle Rib Spar Stabilizer Stressed skin Strut T-tail Tailplane Trailing edge Triple tail Twin tail V-tail Vertical stabilizer Wing root Wing tip Wingbox Flight controls Aileron Airbrake Artificial feel Autopilot Canard Centre stick Deceleron Dive brake Dual control Electro-hydraulic actuator Elevator Elevon Flaperon Flight control modes Fly-by-wire Gust lock HOTAS Rudder Rudder pedals Servo tab Side-stick Spoiler Spoileron Stabilator Stick pusher Stick shaker Trim tab Wing warping Yaw damper Yoke Aerodynamic and high-lift devices Active Aeroelastic Wing Adaptive compliant wing Anti-shock body Blown flap Channel wing Dog-tooth Drag-reducing aerospike Flap Gouge flap Gurney flap Krueger flap Leading-edge cuff Leading-edge droop flap LEX Slats Slot Stall strips Strake Variable-sweep wing Vortex generator Vortilon Wing fence Winglet Avionic and flight instrument systems ACAS Air data boom Air data computer Aircraft periscope Airspeed indicator Altimeter Annunciator panel Astrodome Attitude indicator Compass Course deviation indicator EFIS EICAS Flight management system Glass cockpit GPS Head-up display Heading indicator Horizontal situation indicator INS ISIS Multi-function display Pitot–static system Radar altimeter TCAS Transponder Turn and slip indicator Variometer Yaw string Propulsion controls, devices and fuel systems Autothrottle Drop tank FADEC Fuel tank Gascolator Inlet cone Intake ramp NACA cowling NACA duct Self-sealing fuel tank Splitter plate Throttle Thrust lever Thrust reversal Townend ring War emergency power Wet wing Landing and arresting gear Aircraft tire Arrestor hook Autobrake Conventional landing gear Drogue parachute Landing gear Landing gear extender Oleo strut Tricycle landing gear Tundra tire Escape systems Ejection seat Escape crew capsule Other systems Aircraft lavatory Auxiliary power unit Bleed air system Deicing boot Emergency oxygen system Environmental control system Flight recorder Hydraulic system Ice protection system In-flight entertainment system Landing lights Navigation light Passenger service unit Ram air turbine Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐q7nvb
Cached time: 20250812000645
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.419 seconds
Real time usage: 0.501 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2139/1000000
Revision size: 14438/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 64800/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1651/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81657/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.255/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6254000/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  422.230      1 -total
 37.24%  157.245      1 Template:Reflist
 19.33%   81.619      4 Template:Cite_book
 15.62%   65.948      2 Template:Navbox
 15.13%   63.897      1 Template:Flight_instruments
 12.89%   54.422      1 Template:Short_description
  8.46%   35.731      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.11%   34.255      1 Template:Sister_project
  7.72%   32.594      1 Template:Side_box
  7.61%   32.125      7 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:315968:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000645 and revision id 1304675698. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attitude_indicator&oldid=1304675698 " Categories : Avionics Navigational flight instruments Technology systems Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 13:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Attitude indicator 33 languages Add topic

