Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Regulation 3 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 3.1 Shooting 3.2 Varmint hunting 3.3 Fair chase 4 Exotic animals 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Hunting in the United States Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hunting in the United States" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hunting camp with dressed deer at Schoodic Lake, Maine , in 1905 Carrying a bear trophy head at the Kodiak Archipelago Hunting is a significant subsistence and recreational activity in the United States. Regulation of hunting began in the 19th century. Some modern hunters see themselves as conservationists. American hunting tradition values fair chase , which values the balance between the hunter and the animals. A 2006 poll showed that 78% of Americans support hunting. 6% of Americans have hunted. Hunting is most popular in the Midwest.

Nearly $200 million in hunters' federal excise taxes are distributed to support wildlife management program, hunter education, and safety classes. Many hunting groups participate in lobbying the federal and state governments. Regulations vary widely from state to state.

History [ edit ] North American hunting pre-dates the United States by thousands of years and was an important part of many pre-Columbian Native American cultures. Native Americans retain some hunting rights and are exempt from some laws as part of Indian treaties and otherwise under federal law [ 1 ] —examples include eagle feather laws and exemptions in the Marine Mammal Protection Act . This is considered particularly important in Alaskan native communities.

Regulation [ edit ] Regulation of hunting within the United States dates from the 19th century. Some modern hunters see themselves as conservationists and sportsmen in the mode of Theodore Roosevelt and the Boone and Crockett Club . Local hunting clubs and national organizations provide hunter education and help protect the future of the sport by buying land for future hunting use. Some groups represent a specific hunting interest, such as Ducks Unlimited , Pheasants Forever , or the Delta Waterfowl Foundation . Many hunting groups also participate in lobbying the federal government and state government.

Each year, nearly $200 million in hunters' federal excise taxes are distributed to state agencies to support wildlife management programs, the purchase of lands open to hunters, and hunter education and safety classes. Since 1934, the sale of Federal Duck Stamps , a required purchase for migratory waterfowl hunters over sixteen years old, has raised over $700 million to help purchase more than 5,200,000 acres (8,100 sq mi; 21,000 km 2 ) of habitat for the National Wildlife Refuge System lands that support waterfowl and many other wildlife species and are often open to hunting. States also collect money from hunting licenses to assist with management of game animals, as designated by law. A key task of federal and state park rangers and game wardens is to enforce laws and regulations related to hunting, including species protection, hunting seasons , and hunting bans.

Hunting is primarily regulated by state law ; additional regulations are imposed through United States environmental law in the case of migratory birds and endangered species . Regulations vary widely from state to state and govern the areas, time periods, techniques and methods by which specific game animals may be hunted. Some states make a distinction between protected species and unprotected species (often vermin or varmints for which there are no hunting regulations). Hunters of protected species require a hunting license in all states, for which completion of a hunting safety course is sometimes a prerequisite.

US President Benjamin Harrison with ducks he shot Typically, game animals are divided into several categories for regulatory purposes. Typical categories, along with example species, are as follows: Big Game : white-tailed deer , mule deer , moose , elk , caribou , bear, bighorn sheep , mountain goat , pronghorn , pigs (both wild and feral ), javelina , bison Non-Migratory Game Birds and Small game : grouse , partridge , pheasant , quail , rabbit , hare , tree squirrel , Furbearers and Predators : beaver , bobcat , cougar , coyote , mink , muskrat , opossum , otter , pine marten , raccoon , red fox , ring-tailed cat , skunk , wolf , Migratory Game Birds : ducks , geese , swan , woodcock , dove Other: armadillo , porcupine Hunting big game typically requires a "tag" for each animal harvested. Tags must be purchased in addition to the hunting license, and the number of tags issued to an individual is typically limited. In cases where there are more prospective hunters than the quota for that species, tags are usually assigned by lottery. Tags may be further restricted to a specific area, or wildlife management unit.

Hunting migratory waterfowl requires a duck stamp from the Fish and Wildlife Service in addition to the appropriate state hunting license.

Harvest of animals other than big game is typically restricted by a bag limit and a possession limit. A bag limit is the maximum number of a specific animal species that an individual can harvest in a single day. A possession limit is the maximum number of a specific animal species that can be in an individual's possession at any time.

Culture [ edit ] Shooting [ edit ] A man target practicing for the hunting seasons Gun usage in hunting is typically regulated by game category, area within the state, and time period. Regulations for big-game hunting often specify a minimum caliber or muzzle energy for firearms . The use of rifles is often banned for safety reasons in areas with high population densities or limited topographic relief . Regulations may also limit or ban the use of lead in ammunition because of environmental concerns. Specific seasons for bow hunting or muzzle-loading black-powder guns are often established to limit competition with hunters using more effective weapons .

Hunting in the United States is not associated with any particular class or culture; a 2006 poll showed seventy-eight percent of Americans supported legal hunting, [ 2 ] although relatively few Americans actually hunt. At the beginning of the 21st century, just six percent of Americans hunted.

Southerners in states along the eastern seaboard hunted at a rate of five percent, slightly below the national average, and while hunting was more common in other parts of the South at nine percent, these rates did not surpass those of the Plains states, where twelve percent of Midwesterners hunted. Hunting in other areas of the country fell below the national average.

[ 3 ] Overall, in the 1996–2006 period, the number of hunters over the age of sixteen declined by ten percent, a drop attributable to a number of factors including habitat loss and changes in recreation habits.

[ 4 ] Varmint hunting [ edit ] Main article: Varmint hunting The coypu is hunted as a pest in Louisiana Varmint hunting is an American phrase for the selective killing of non-game animals seen as pests. While not always an efficient form of pest control , varmint hunting achieves selective control of pests while providing recreation and is much less regulated. Varmint species are often responsible for detrimental effects on crops, livestock, landscaping , infrastructure, and pets. Some animals, such as wild rabbits or squirrels, may be used for fur or meat, but often no use is made of the carcass. Which species are varmints depends on the circumstance and area. Common varmints may include various rodents , coyotes , crows , foxes, feral cats , and feral hogs . Some animals once considered varmints are now protected, such as wolves. In the US state of Louisiana , a non-native rodent, the coypu , has become so destructive to the local ecosystem that the state has initiated a bounty program to help control the population.

Fair chase [ edit ] Main article: Fair chase The principles of the fair chase [ 5 ] have been a part of the American hunting tradition for over one hundred years. The role of the hunter-conservationist, popularised by Theodore Roosevelt, and perpetuated by Roosevelt's formation of the Boone and Crockett Club , has been central to the development of the modern fair chase tradition.

Beyond Fair Chase: The Ethic and Tradition of Hunting , a book by Jim Posewitz, describes fair chase: "Fundamental to ethical hunting is the idea of fair chase. This concept addresses the balance between the hunter and the hunted. It is a balance that allows hunters to occasionally succeed while animals generally avoid being taken." [ 6 ] When Internet hunting was introduced in 2005, allowing people to hunt over the Internet using remotely controlled guns, the practice was widely criticised by hunters as violating the principles of fair chase. As a representative of the National Rifle Association of America (NRA) explained, "The NRA has always maintained that fair chase, being in the field with your firearm or bow, is an important element of hunting tradition. Sitting at your desk in front of your computer, clicking at a mouse, has nothing to do with hunting." [ 7 ] Hunters with an American black bear in the Great Smoky Mountains The Pope and Young Club, a US-based organization promoting bowhunting, declares that a fair chase shall not involve the taking of animals under the following conditions: Helpless in a trap, deep snow or water, or on ice.

From any power vehicle or power boat.

By " jacklighting " or shining at night.

By the use of any tranquilizers or poisons.

While inside escape-proof fenced enclosures.

By the use of any power vehicle or power boat for herding or driving animals, including use of aircraft to land alongside or to communicate with or direct a hunter on the ground.

By the use of electronic devices for attracting, locating or pursuing game or guiding the hunter to such game, or by the use of a bow or arrow to which any electronic device is attached with the exception of lighted nocks and recording devices that cast no light towards the target and do not aid in rangefinding, sighting or shooting the bow.

[ 8 ] Exotic animals [ edit ] Animals such as blackbuck , nilgai , axis deer , fallow deer , zebras, barasingha , gazelle and many other exotic game species can now be found on game farm and ranches in Texas , where they were introduced for sport hunting. These hunters can be found paying high fees to take trophy animals on these controlled ranches.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Hunting and fishing in Alaska Guest ranch References [ edit ] ^ Coggins, George Cameron; Modrcin, William (1979).

"Native American Indians and Federal Wildlife Law" .

Stanford Law Review .

31 (3): 375– 423.

doi : 10.2307/1228367 .

ISSN 0038-9765 .

JSTOR 1228367 .

^ Results Archived June 15, 2007, at the Wayback Machine from a 2006 poll (813 people were polled) done by Responsive Management ^ National statistics from US Department of the Interior , Fish and Wildlife Service and US Department of Commerce , US Census Bureau , 2001 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting and Wildlife Associated Recreation, 27.

^ Jackson, Patrick.

Number of hunters is dwindling—Urbanization and cultural changes discourage newcomers to the sport Archived July 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Interpretations of the Fair Chase can be found on the web sites of various hunter's organizations, such as the Boone and Crockett Club and Hunt Fair Chase .

^ Posewitz, Jim (August 1, 1994).

Beyond Fair Chase: The Ethic and Tradition of Hunting .

Globe Pequot Press . p. 57.

ISBN 978-1-56044-283-7 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Humane Society Wildlife Abuse Campaign, Fact Sheet on Internet Hunting ^ "Fair Chase" .

Chatfield, Minnesota : Pope and Young Club . Retrieved September 19, 2023 .

^ Ferguson, Wes.

"How Texas Hunting Went Exotic" .

texasmonthly.com . Texas Monthly . Retrieved April 14, 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Birdsong, Max et al. "Socialization and motivational pathways among different groups of non-traditional hunters in Alabama reveal unique recruitment and retention opportunities," Human Dimensions of Wildlife (2022)  27:5, pages 407-421.

Bissell, Steven J., Mark Damian Duda, and Kira C. Young. "Recent studies on hunting and fishing participation in the United States." Human Dimensions of Wildlife, (1998) 3:1, 75-80, DOI: 10.1080/10871209809359118 Crow, Matthew S. et al. "Camouflage-Collar Crime: An Examination of Wildlife Crime and Characteristics of Offenders in Florida" Deviant Behavior (2013)  34:8, pages 635-652.

Lee, KangJae Jerry, et al. "Social Stratification in Fishing Participation in the United States" Journal of Leisure Research (2016)  48:3, pages 245-263.

online Peterson, M. Nils. "How wildlife management agencies and hunting organizations frame ethical hunting in the United States." Human Dimensions of Wildlife 19.6 (2014): 523-531.

online Poudel, Jagdish, James E. Henderson, and Ian A. Munn. "Economic contribution of hunting expenditure to the southern United States of America." International Journal of Environmental Studies 73.2 (2016): 236-254.

online Schuett, Michael A.  et al. "Sociodemographics, Motivations, and Behavior: The Case of Texas Anglers 1989–2004" Human Dimensions of Wildlife (2010)  15:4, pages 247-261.

v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐l45tm
Cached time: 20250818034336
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.419 seconds
Real time usage: 0.579 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1324/1000000
Revision size: 16604/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 69682/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9804/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34856/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.255/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6613847/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  463.153      1 -total
 29.46%  136.434      1 Template:Reflist
 18.58%   86.047      1 Template:Hunting_topics
 18.08%   83.726      1 Template:Navbox
 17.75%   82.197      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 16.98%   78.631      1 Template:Cite_journal
 15.17%   70.260      1 Template:Short_description
 11.83%   54.794      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.82%   54.751      2 Template:Ambox
  8.26%   38.269      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:73549063:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818034336 and revision id 1306510807. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hunting_in_the_United_States&oldid=1306510807 " Category : Hunting in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use mdy dates from April 2023 Articles needing additional references from April 2023 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia introduction cleanup from April 2023 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2023 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 03:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hunting in the United States Add languages Add topic

