Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Transcendental reasoning 2 The argument 3 Ash'ari 4 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 4.1 Presuppositional apologetics 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle External links subsection 7.1 Articles 7.2 Debates Toggle the table of contents Transcendental argument for the existence of God 2 languages العربية Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Argument for the existence of God The Transcendental Argument for the existence of God (TAG) is an argument that attempts to prove the existence of God by appealing to the necessary conditions for the possibility of experience and knowledge .

[ 1 ] A version was formulated by Immanuel Kant in his 1763 work The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God .

C. S. Lewis 's argument from reason is also a kind of transcendental argument.

Most contemporary formulations of a transcendental argument for God have been developed within the framework of Christian presuppositional apologetics and the likes of Cornelius Van Til and Greg Bahnsen .

[ 2 ] Transcendental reasoning [ edit ] See also: Transcendental arguments "Transcendental" in this case is used as an adjective specifying a specific kind of argument, and not a noun. Transcendental arguments should not be confused with arguments for the existence of something transcendent . Rather, transcendental arguments are arguments that make inferences from the ability to think and experience.

[ citation needed ] So-called progressive transcendental arguments begin with an apparently indubitable and universally accepted statement about people's experiences of the world. They use this to make substantive knowledge-claims about the world, e.g., that it is causally and spatiotemporally related. They start with what is left at the end of the skeptic's process of doubting.

Progressive transcendental arguments take the form of modus ponens with modal operators : If possibly P , then necessarily Q .

Actually P .

Therefore, necessarily Q .

Regressive transcendental arguments, on the other hand, begin at the same point as the skeptic, e.g., the fact that we have experience of a causal and spatiotemporal world, and show that certain notions are implicit in our conceptions of such experience. Regressive transcendental arguments are more conservative in that they do not purport to make substantive ontological claims about the world.

Regressive transcendental arguments take the form of modus tollens with modal operators : If possibly P , then necessarily Q .

Actually not Q .

Therefore, necessarily not P .

They are also sometimes said to be distinct from standard deductive and inductive forms of reasoning , although this has been disputed, for instance by Anthony Genova [ 3 ] and Graham Bird.

[ 4 ] The argument [ edit ] There are many versions of the transcendental argument for the existence of God (both progressive and regressive), but they generally proceed as follows: [ 5 ] If there is a transcendental unity of apperception, God exists.

There is a transcendental unity of apperception.

Therefore, God exists.

The transcendental unity of apperception refers to the combination of different impressions, experiences and categories into a single, intelligible consciousness held by a person . It is argued that the negation of the existence of God therefore entails the impossibility of knowledge , which is self-refuting .

The TAG differs from thomistic and evidentialist arguments, which presuppose the validity of human perception and judgement when proving the existence of God.

Ash'ari [ edit ] Medieval Ash'ari Islamic theologians formulated a type of transcendental argument based on the notion that morality, logic, etc. cannot be fully understood apart from revelation and thereby, belief in the Quran and the Islamic truth claims were necessary in order to interpret the external world. For al-Ashari and others, it does not make sense to argue against religion using a priori assumptions about morality or scientific probabilities when these can only be understood in light of divine revelation.

[ 6 ] Criticism [ edit ] Barry Stroud has criticized transcendental arguments, distinguishing between epistemic (what we must presuppose) and metaphysical (what actually exists) transcendental arguments. Stroud argues that transcendental arguments often only establish the former but assert the latter, [ 7 ] so TAG, as a metaphysical transcendental argument, can only establish that human thought presupposes logic, science, and morality, but attempting to ground them in something beyond human thought, such as God, ultimately fails.

Presuppositional apologetics [ edit ] Internet Infidels co-founder Jeffery Jay Lowder has argued that the presuppositional apologetics' version of TAG is fatally flawed for numerous reasons.

[ 8 ] First, Bahnsen fails to defend the necessity of Christianity instead of the mere sufficiency for the rational justification of the laws of logic , the laws of science , and the laws of morality . In other words, such reasoning affirms the consequent .
Second, Bahnsen conflates " atheism " with " materialism " and has really presented an argument against materialism, not an argument for Christianity. Third, Bahnsen believed that the laws of logic, laws of science, and laws of morality are abstract objects , but Christianity arguably underdetermines the relationship between God and abstract objects. Some Christian philosophers, such as Peter van Inwagen , affirm Platonism and the compatibility of God and abstract objects. But other Christian philosophers argue that Platonism is incompatible with divine aseity .

William Lane Craig urges Christian philosophers to consider anti-realist theories of abstract objects.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Transcendental arguments Christian apologetics Argument from morality References [ edit ] ^ Michael Martin (1997).

"Does Induction Presume the Existence of the Christian God?" . Infidels . Retrieved 21 April 2011 .

But what about The Transcendental Argument for the Existence of God (TAG)--the argument that logic, science, and objective ethical standards presuppose the existence of God?

^ Martin, Michael (1997). "Does Induction Presuppose the Existence of the Christian God?".

Skeptic .

5 (2): 71– 75.

^ Anthony C. Genova, "Transcendental Form," Southwestern Journal of Philosophy 11 (1980): 25-34.

^ Graham Bird, The Revolutionary Kant: A Commentary on the Critique of Pure Reason (2006).

^ Meister, Chad V.; Mittelberg, Mark; McDowell, Josh; Montgomery, John F. (2007).

Reasons for Faith: Making a Case for the Christian Faith . Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books.

ISBN 978-1-58134-787-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Roy Jackson (2014-02-05).

What is Islamic Philosophy?

. Routledge. pp.

32– 33.

ISBN 9781317814047 .

^ Stroud, Barry (1968).

"Transcendental Arguments" .

The Journal of Philosophy .

65 (9): 241– 256.

doi : 10.2307/2024395 .

JSTOR 2024395 .

^ The Verdict Is In: Assessment of the 1985 Bahnsen-Stein Debate, "Does God Exist?" , 22 May 2023 , retrieved 2023-05-23 ^ God Over All, by William Lane Craig Notes E. R. Geehan, ed., Jerusalem and Athens: Critical Discussions on the Philosophy and Apologetics of Cornelius Van Til (Phillipsburg: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1980).

Greg L. Bahnsen, Van Til's Apologetic: Readings and Analysis (Phillipsburg: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1998).

John M. Frame, Cornelius Van Til: An Analysis of His Thought (Phillipsburg: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1995).

Steven M. Schlissel, ed., The Standard Bearer: A Festschrift for Greg L. Bahnsen (Nacogdoches: Covenant Media Press, 2002).

Greg L. Bahnsen, Always Ready: Directions for Defending the Faith". Robert R. Booth, ed. (Nacogdoches: Covenant Media Press, 1996).

John M. Frame, Apologetics to the Glory of God: An Introduction (Phillipsburg: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1994).

John M. Frame, The Doctrine of the Knowledge of God (Phillipsburg: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1987).

External links [ edit ] Articles [ edit ] Derrida, Van Til and the Metaphysics of Postmodernism An appraisal of Postmodernism, specifically Deconstruction, in light of Van Til by Jacob Gabriel Hale.

Debates [ edit ] "The Great Debate: Does God Exist?" Audio (listen/download format) of a formal debate between Christian Greg Bahnsen and skeptic Gordon Stein from the University of California, Irvine .

" The Verdict Is In: Assessment of the 1985 Bahnsen-Stein Debate, 'Does God Exist?

'" Video (watch/download format) of the Bahnsen-Stein debate, beginning with a technical and rhetorical assessment of Bahnsen's opening statement in which he defends his transcendental argument for God's existence.

The Martin-Frame Debate A written debate between skeptic Michael Martin and Christian John Frame about the transcendental argument for the existence of God.

The Drange-Wilson Debate A written debate between skeptic Theodore Drange and Christian Douglas Wilson.

"Is Non-Christian Thought Futile?" A written debate between Christian Doug Jones and skeptics Keith Parsons and Michael Martin in Antithesis magazine (vol. 2, no. 4).

v t e Arguments for and against the existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Creator of God Evil Evil God Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hell Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's Razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transcendental_argument_for_the_existence_of_God&oldid=1292133516 " Categories : Christian apologetics Christian philosophy Arguments for the existence of God Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 10:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transcendental argument for the existence of God 2 languages Add topic

