Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Attempts to legalize segregated seating 3 Introduction of ghetto benches 4 Aftermath 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ghetto benches 7 languages Català Esperanto Français עברית Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of official segregation in the seating of students Ghetto benches The 1934 Index of a Polish-Jewish student at the Warsaw University Department of Medicine, with a stamp reading: Miejsce w ławkach nieparzystych (Seating in benches with an odd number) Location Warsaw University , Lwów Polytechnic , Wilno University Period 1935–1939 Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Ghetto benches (known in Polish as getto ławkowe ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] was a form of official segregation in the seating of university students, introduced in 1935 at the Lwów Polytechnic .

[ 3 ] Rectors at other higher education institutions in the Second Polish Republic had adopted this form of segregation when the practice became conditionally legalized by 1937.

[ 4 ] Under the ghetto ławkowe system, Jewish university students were required under threat of expulsion to sit in a left-hand side section of the lecture halls reserved exclusively for them. This official policy of enforced segregation was often accompanied by acts of violence directed against Jewish students by members of the ONR (outlawed after three months in 1934).

The seating in benches marked a peak of antisemitism in Poland between the world wars according to Jerzy Jan Lerski .

[ 5 ] It antagonized not only Jews, but also many Poles.

[ 5 ] Jewish students protested these policies, along with some Poles who supported them by standing instead of sitting.

[ 6 ] The segregation continued until the invasion of Poland in World War II .

Poland's occupation by Nazi Germany suppressed the entire Polish educational system. In the eastern half of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union , such discriminatory policies in education were lifted.

[ 7 ] Background [ edit ] Further information: History of the Jews in 20th-century Poland The percentage of Poland's Jewish population increased greatly during the Russian Civil War . Following Poland's return to independence, several hundred thousand Jews joined the already numerous Polish Jewish minority living predominantly in the cities.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The new arrivals were the least assimilated of all European Jewish communities of that period.

[ 10 ] Jews formed the second largest minority after Ukrainians , of about 10 percent of the total population of the Polish Second Republic . Jewish representation in the institutions of higher learning began to increase already during World War I . By the early 1920s, Jewish students constituted over one-third of all students attending Polish universities.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The difficult situation in the private sector, compounded by the Great Depression , [ 13 ] led to a massive enrollment in universities. In 1923, Jewish students constituted 63 percent of all students of stomatology , 34 percent of medical sciences, 29 of philosophy, 25 percent of chemistry and 22 percent of law (26 percent by 1929) at all Polish universities. Anger over their numbers, which remained out of proportion with that of the mostly gentile population of Poland during the Interbellum , contributed to a backlash.

[ 14 ] Proposals to reinstitute the numerus clausus , which would restrict Jewish enrollment to 10 percent of the student body (roughly the percentage of Jews living in Poland), were made as early as 1923. However, the proposals were rejected as they would have violated the Little Treaty of Versailles . In spite of these earlier objections, Poland later renounced the Treaty in 1934.

[ 15 ] Polish nationalism and hostility towards minorities, particularly Jews, increased.

[ 16 ] Discriminatory policies regarding Jews in education in Poland continued the practice of the Russian Empire 's numerus clausus policy, implemented by the Empire during Poland's partitions , which restricted, by means of quotas , the participation of Jews in public life.

[ 5 ] Issues that had earlier been resolved by the Russian Empire were now decided locally, uniting the Poles while dividing the nation as a whole.

[ 17 ] Various means of limiting the number of Jewish students were adopted, seeking to reduce the Jewish role in Poland's economic and social life.

[ 18 ] The situation of Jews improved under Józef Piłsudski , [ 15 ] [ 19 ] but after his death in 1935 the National Democrats regained much of their power and the status of Jewish students deteriorated. A student "Green Ribbon" League was organized in 1931; its members distributed anti-semitic material and called for the boycott of Jewish businesses and the enforcement of the numerus clausus .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In 1934 a group of rabbis petitioned the Archbishop of Warsaw, Aleksander Kakowski , to stop the "youthful outbursts"; Kakowski responded that the incidents were regrettable, but also claimed that Jewish newspapers were "infecting public culture with atheism." [ 15 ] Agitation against Jewish students intensified during the economic recession of the 1930s and afterwards, as unemployment began to affect the Polish intellectual strata.

[ 18 ] There were growing demands to decrease the number of Jews in science and business so that Christian Poles could fill their positions.

[ 16 ] In November 1931, violence accompanied demands to reduce the number of Jewish students at several Polish universities.

[ 18 ] The universities' autonomous status contributed to this, [ 11 ] [ 18 ] as university rectors tended not to call in police to protect Jewish students from attacks on the campuses, [ 18 ] and no action was taken against students involved in anti-Jewish violence.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Attempts to legalize segregated seating [ edit ] In 1935, students associated with National Democracy and the National Radical Camp , influenced by the Nazi Nuremberg Laws , [ 22 ] demanded segregation of Jews into separate sections in the classrooms, known as "ghetto benches." [ 22 ] The majority of Jewish students refused to accept this system of seating, considering it to be a violation of their civil rights .

[ 24 ] At some universities Polish students even attempted to forcibly move Jews to the ghetto benches.

[ 22 ] [ 24 ] Following Piłsudski 's death in 1935, anti-Jewish riots broke out at the University of Warsaw and the Warsaw Polytechnic . The violence spread from the campuses to the streets of Warsaw.

[ 22 ] Subsequently, violence broke out at other universities in Poland as well.

[ 22 ] The student riots and violence were however mutual. Especially Jewish students from Academic Zionist Association "Kadimah" (Akademicki Związek Syjonistyczny "Kadimah") were involved in violence against Polish students.

[ 25 ] An uninterrupted wave of anti-Jewish violence eventually led to the temporary closure of all of Warsaw's institutions of higher education in November 1935. The National Democracy press put the blame for the riots on Jews  refusing to comply with special seating arrangements set by Polish students.

[ 22 ] Introduction of ghetto benches [ edit ] Demonstration of Polish students demanding implementation of ghetto benches at Lwów Polytechnic in 1930s.

While the Polish government initially opposed the segregation policies, the universities enjoyed significant level of autonomy and were able to impose their local regulations. Ghetto benches were officially sanctioned for the first time in December 1935 at the Lwów Polytechnic .

[ 22 ] Following several violent attacks against the Jewish students, school officials ordered that they sit in separate sections, under threat of expulsion.

[ 11 ] Penalties were imposed on those who stayed away from classes in protest against segregated seating.

[ 23 ] The move to legalize ghetto benches was contested by the Jewish community, which saw it as a dangerous precedent. Ghetto benches were criticized by Jewish members of the Sejm . In January 1936, a delegation of representatives of the Jewish community of Lwów met with Poland's Education Minister , who promised to discuss the issue with school administrations, and in February 1936 the ghetto-bench order was cancelled by the Lwów Polytechnic's academic senate .

[ 23 ] This setback for the segregationist cause did not stop attempts to establish ghetto benches in other Polish universities. Demands for segregated seating were again raised by the OZON -led Union of Young Poland ( Związek Młodej Polski ), [ 26 ] the ND All-Polish Youth , and other nationalist youth organizations.

[ 24 ] The Ministry of Education in Warsaw was opposed to the ghetto benches, declaring numerus clausus a violation of the constitution, and Polish Minister of Education stated that: "Student ghettos would not be introduced at the Polish Universities." [ 11 ] However, in light of the continuing serious riots at the university, which the Ministry condemned as "zoological patriotism," the Ministry slowly gave in and decided to withdraw its opposition, hoping that the introduction of the ghettos would end the riots.

[ 11 ] The ethno-nationalists finally won their campaign for ghetto benches in 1937 when by Ministry decision universities were granted the right to regulate the seating of Polish and Jewish students.

[ 24 ] On October 5, 1937, the Rector of Warsaw Polytechnic ordered the establishment of the institution of ghetto benches in the lecture halls.

[ 11 ] Within a few days, similar orders were given in other universities of Poland.

[ 27 ] Over 50 notable Polish professors (including Marceli Handelsman , Stanisław Ossowski , Tadeusz Kotarbiński , and Manfred Kridl ) criticized the introduction of the ghetto benches, [ 11 ] and refused to enforce either a quota, or the ghetto bench system, but their voices were ignored together with those gentile students who objected to the policy; [ 28 ] they would protest by standing in class, and refusing to sit down.

[ 6 ] Rector Władysław Marian Jakowicki of the Stefan Batory University in Wilno (Vilnius) resigned from his position in protest of the introduction of the benches.

[ 29 ] Another rector who refused to establish ghetto benches in his university was Prof.

Stanisław Kulczyński of Lwów University . Facing the decision to sign the order introducing segregated seating, Prof. Kulczyński resigned from his position instead of signing it.

[ 11 ] [ 27 ] Nevertheless, the instruction ordering special "mandatory seats" for all Jewish students still was issued by the vice-rector of Lwów University the next morning.

[ 27 ] The only faculty in Poland that did not have ghetto benches introduced was that of the Children's Clinic in the Piłsudski University of Warsaw led by Professor Mieczysław Michałowicz , who refused to obey the Rector's order.

[ 11 ] Some fifty-six professors of universities in Warsaw, Poznań, and Wilno signed a protest against the Ghetto benches in December 1937. The list included the "elite of Polish scholarship," such as Tadeusz Kotarbiński ; sociologists Józef Chałasiński , Stanisław , Maria Ossowska and Jan Stanisław Bystroń ; biologists Stanisław Kulczyński and Jan Dembowski ; psychologist Władysław Witwicki ; physicist Konstanty Zakrzewski ; as well as historians Seweryn Wysłouch and Tadeusz Manteuffel .

[ 30 ] The introduction of ghetto benches was criticized internationally by the Anglophonic nations. Over 300 British professors signed an anti-ghetto bench manifesto. In New York, the League for Academic Freedom published an open letter signed by 202 professors condemning ghetto benches as "alien to the spirit of academic freedom." [ 11 ] Despite the arguments by Sanacja government that introduction of ghetto benches would stop the disturbances, the clashes between Jewish and gentile youth resulted in two fatalities among the Jewish students, [ 16 ] [ 24 ] and further assaults, or even an assassination attempt on Polish professor Konrad Górski critical of the segregation policies.

[ 30 ] [ 16 ] Aftermath [ edit ] The ghetto bench system and other anti-Semitic demonstrations of the segment of student youth inspired vengeance among some Jewish students of Lwów Polytechnic upon the arrival of the Soviet authorities, following the Soviet invasion of Poland .

[ 31 ] The practice of segregated seating for the Jewish students in Poland ended with the demise of the Polish state in the beginning of the Second World War . After which most Polish educational institutions were shut down (see Education in Poland during World War II ) although Lwów Polytechnic remained. Most Polish Jews ultimately perished during the German occupation of Poland and the Holocaust .

See also [ edit ] Disabilities (Jewish) Jewish quota Racism in Poland Universities and antisemitism References [ edit ] ^ Anti-Defamation League of Bnai b'rith.

Poland: Democracy and the Challenge of Extremism.

Archived 2008-10-01 at the Wayback Machine A special report by the Anti-Defamation League, 2006 ^ Litman Mor (Muravchick): The war for life.

Chapter 5: A BA. In Anti-Semitism (1935-1940) :"In Polish slang, we called it "Ghetto Lawkowe" (Ghetto of Benches).." ^ Robert Blobaum (2005).

Antisemitism and Its Opponents in Modern Poland .

Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8969-3 .

The first to submit to the segregationist demands of nationalist students were the Engineering and Mechanical Department faculty councils of the Lwow Polytechnical Institute, which on December 8, 1935, adopted the appropriate resolutions; these were quickly imitated elsewhere.

^ Analysis of Hans-Wilhelm Steinfeld’s remarks on Polish-Jewish relations in Lviv ^ a b c Jerzy Jan Lerski , Historical Dictionary of Poland, 966-1945 , Greenwood Press, 1996, ISBN 0-313-26007-9 , Google Print, p.22 ^ a b (in Polish) Getto ławkowe Archived 2007-03-11 at the Wayback Machine , based on Alina Cała , Hanna Węgrzynek and Gabriela Zalewska, Historia i kultura Żydów polskich. Słownik , WSiP ^ Tomasz Kamusella, Krzysztof Jaskułowski (2009).

Nationalisms Today . Peter Lang AG, International Academic Publishers. p. 203.

ISBN 9783039118830 .

^ Sharman Kadish, Bolsheviks and British Jews: The Anglo-Jewish Community, Britain, and the Russian Revolution. Published by Routledge, pg. 87 [1] ^ A History of the Jews by Paul Johnson, London, 1987, p.527, see also: History of the Jews in Russia ^ Celia Stopnicka Heller, On the Edge of Destruction...

, 1993, Wayne State University Press, 396 pages ISBN 0-8143-2494-0 ^ a b c d e f g h i j Rabinowicz, Harry (October 1964). "The Battle of the Ghetto Benches".

The Jewish Quarterly Review . New Series, vol. 55, no. 2 (2): 151– 59.

doi : 10.2307/1453795 .

JSTOR 1453795 .

^ Edward H. Flannery, The Anguish of the Jews: Twenty-Three Centuries of Antisemitism , Paulist Press, 2005, ISBN 0-8091-4324-0 , Google Print. p.200 ^ Snyder, Timothy (11 July 2004).

The Reconstruction of Nations: Poland, Ukraine, Lithuania, Belarus, 1569–1999 . Yale University Press. p. 144.

ISBN 0-300-10586-X .

^ Anna Jaskóła, University of Wrocław (2010).

"Sytuacja prawna mniejszosci żydowskiej w Drugiej Rzeczypospolitej" [The legal status of the Jewish minority in the Second Republic] (PDF) .

Chapter 3: Szkolnictwo żydowskie . Wrocław: Wydział Prawa, Administracji i Ekonomii. Instytut Historii Państwa i Prawa (Faculty of Law, Administration and Economy). pp. 65–66 (20/38 in PDF) – via direct download from BibliotekaCyfrowa.pl.

^ a b c Cieplinski, Feigue (2002-09-18).

"Poles and Jews: the Quest for Self-Determination, 1919–1934" .

Binghamton Journal of History (Fall 2002). Archived from the original on 2002-09-18 . Retrieved 2 June 2006 .

^ a b c d (in Polish) Antysemityzm lat 30-tych , Dia-pozytyw. Serwis informacyjny.

^ Stopnicka Heller, Celia (1993).

On the Edge of Destruction: Jews of Poland Between the Two World Wars .

Wayne State University Press. pp.

77– 78.

ISBN 978-0-8143-2494-3 .

^ a b c d e Melzer, Emmanuel (1997).

No Way Out: The Politics of Polish Jewry, 1935-1939 . Hebrew Union College Press. pp.

71– 73.

ISBN 978-0-87820-418-2 – via books.google.com, no preview.

^ Paulsson, Gunnar S., Secret City: The Hidden Jews of Warsaw, 1940-1945 , Yale University Press , 2003, ISBN 0-300-09546-5 , Internet Archive, p. 37 ^ Joanna B. Michlic.

Poland's Threatening Other: The Image of the Jew from 1880 to the Present.

University of Nebraska Press, 2006. Page 113 ^ Emanuel Melzer.

No Way Out: The Politics of Polish Jewry, 1935-1939.

Hebrew Union College Press, 1997. Page 6.

^ a b c d e f g h Melzer, p. 72 ^ a b c Melzer, p. 73 ^ a b c d e Joanna Beata Michlic Poland's Threatening Other: The Image of the Jew from 1880 to the Present , University of Nebraska Press , 2006 pp. 113–114 ^ Kulińska, Lucyna (2000).

Związek Akademicki "Młodzież Wszechpolska" i "Młodzież Wielkiej Polski" w latach 1922–47 . Kraków: Abrys. pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 83-85827-56-0 .

^ Melzer, p.74 ^ a b c Melzer, p.76 ^ Richard M. Watt, Bitter Glory: Poland and Its Fate, 1918–1939 , Hippocrene Books, 1998, ISBN 0-7818-0673-9 , p. 363 ^ Ludwik Hass (1999).

Wolnomularze polscy w kraju i na śwíecíe 1821–1999: słownik biograficzny . Rytm. p. 183.

ISBN 978-83-87893-52-1 . Retrieved 11 March 2011 .

^ a b Connelly, John (2000).

Captive University: The Sovietization of East German, Czech and Polish Higher Education . UNC Press. p. 82.

ISBN 0-8078-4865-4 .

^ (in Polish) "Politechnika Lwowska 1844-1945". Wydawnictwo Politechniki Wrocławskiej, 1993, ISBN 83-7085-058-8 . Editorial Committee: Jan Boberski, Stanisław Marian Brzozowski, Konrad Dyba, Zbysław Popławski, Jerzy Schroeder, Robert Szewalski (editor-in-chief), Jerzy Węgierski "Excerpt online" . Archived from the original on June 9, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-06-09 .

Further reading [ edit ] (in Polish) Monika Natkowska, "Numerus clausus," "ghetto ławkowe," "numerus nullus": Antisemityzm na uniwersytecie Warszawskim 1931–39 ("Numerus clauses," "ghetto benches," "numerus nullus": Antisemitism in Warsaw University" 1931–39), Warsaw, 1999.

(in Polish) Zbysław Popławski, "Dzieje Politechniki Lwowskiej 1844–1945," Wrocław 1992.

H. Rabinowicz. "The Battle of the Ghetto Benches." The Jewish Quarterly Review , New Series, Vol. 55, No. 2 (Oct., 1964), pp. 151–159.

(in Polish) A. Srebrakowski, Sprawa Wacławskiego, „Przegląd Wschodni” 2004, t. IX, z. 3(35), p. 575-601 External links [ edit ] "Ghetto Benches" entry in Encyclopedia of Antisemitism v t e Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap) Religious Partition of India Northern Ireland Israel Serbia Greece and Turkey Partition of Bengal Portugal Saudi Arabia Spain Bahrain Myanmar Ethnic and racial Canada Bahrain Brazil Bulgaria and Romania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia and Hungary Dominican Republic Fiji France Germany Israel Malaysia Portugal Rhodesia Apartheid in South Africa Spain United Kingdom United States Civil War Separate but equal School segregation Brown v. Board of Education Massive resistance Anti-miscegenation laws Gender Islam Afghanistan Iran Saudi Arabia Judaism Sex segregation in public restrooms Separatist feminism Dynamics Auto-segregation Balkanization Ethnic cleansing Ethnic federalism Bantustan Ethnopluralism Ethnocracy Exclusionary zoning Forced migration Internment labor camps Residential segregation in the United States Segregation academy (United States) Social exclusion Related topics Apartheid laws Anti-miscegenation laws Black Codes Corporative federalism Discrimination Ghetto benches Hafrada Jim Crow laws Majority minority Nativism Nuremberg Laws Racism Rankism Religious intolerance Reservation in India Second-class citizen Separate school (Canada) Shunning Social apartheid White Australia policy Xenophobia See also: Pillarisation Category caste gender racial Commons v t e Antisemitism See also: Massacres or pogroms against Jews Core topics Canards Economics Eliminationist antisemitism Geography History Religious antisemitism Persecution of Jews Antisemitism studies Nazism Adolf Hitler Americas Propaganda New antisemitism Three Ds Working definition Racial antisemitism Rootless cosmopolitan Secondary antisemitism Stereotypes of Jews Timeline 19th C.

20th 21st Antisemitism and Christianity New Testament Healthcare Islam Middle Ages Nation of Islam Olympic Games Soviet mathematics Social media Reddit Universities Columbia Related topics Anti-Indigenous sentiment Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-Polish sentiment Anti-Romani sentiment Anti-Zionism Christian Identity Cultural Marxism Double genocide theory International Jewish conspiracy The International Jew Jewish Bolshevism Żydokomuna Khazar theory Ku Klux Klan Mein Kampf in Arabic in English Normalization of antisemitism Persecution of Jews during the Black Death On the Jews and Their Lies Philosemitism The Protocols of the Elders of Zion Contemporary imprints Racism Rothschild conspiracy theories The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews Self-hating Jew George Soros conspiracy theories Xenophobia Weaponization White genocide conspiracy theory Zhyd Zionist antisemitism Religious antisemitism Anti-Judaism Jewish deicide Catholic Inquisition Portuguese Inquisition Roman Inquisition Spanish Inquisition Rhineland massacres Martin Luther Blood curse Blood libel Host desecration Judensau Pogrom Antisemitic laws, policies and government actions Ghetto benches Hep-Hep riots Pogroms in the Russian Empire May Laws 1968 Polish political crisis Jewish Anti-Zionist League Leo Frank trial (US) Expulsions of Poles and Jews by Germany (DE/PL) Prussian deportations Act of 5th November Generalplan Ost Dreyfus affair (FR) Beilis trial (Russian Empire) Farhud (Iraq) Anti-Zionist League (IQ) General Order No. 11 (US, 1862) Racial policy of Nazi Germany Madagascar Plan Final Solution The Holocaust Anti-cosmopolitan campaign Night of the Murdered Poets Slánský trial Doctors' plot Holocaust denial Yellow badge ZOG conspiracy Antisemitism on the internet Bible Believers The Daily Stormer Institute for Historical Review Jew Watch Metapedia Podblanc QAnon Radio Islam Redwatch The Right Stuff (blog) Stormfront Terrorgram Wikipedia and antisemitism Persecution Rhineland massacres Black Death persecutions Boycotts Expulsions Jewish quarter Ghettos in Europe Mellah The Holocaust Jewish hat Jewish quota Judensau Martyrdom in Judaism Nuremberg Laws Pale of Settlement Pogroms Refuseniks Segregation Spanish Inquisition Expulsion Yellow badge Organizations working against antisemitism Anti-Defamation League (ADL) Bay Area Holocaust Oral History Project (BAHOHP) Community Security Trust Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC) Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) Stephen Roth Institute Yad Vashem By region Arab world Saudi Arabia Argentina Australia Canada China Chile Costa Rica Europe Austria Belgium France 21st century Germany Greece Hungary Italy Norway Romania Russia Imperial Soviet Spain Sweden Ukraine United Kingdom Conservative Party Labour Party Japan Mexico New Zealand Palestinian Territories Pakistan South Africa Turkey United States History 21st century Venezuela v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ghetto_benches&oldid=1295392981 " Categories : Education policy Education in the Second Polish Republic History of the Jews in the Second Polish Republic Antisemitism in Poland Segregated schools Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Polish-language sources (pl) CS1: long volume value CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 13:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ghetto benches 7 languages Add topic

