Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Mental models and reasoning Toggle Mental models and reasoning subsection 2.1 Principles of mental models 2.2 Reasoning with mental models 2.3 Criticisms 3 Mental models of dynamics systems: mental models in system dynamics Toggle Mental models of dynamics systems: mental models in system dynamics subsection 3.1 Characteristics 3.2 Expression of mental models of dynamic systems 3.3 Mental model in relation to system dynamics and systemic thinking 3.4 Single and double-loop learning 3.4.1 Single-loop learning 3.4.2 Double-loop learning 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mental model 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mental representation of the external world For other uses, see Mental model (disambiguation) .

Information mapping Topics and fields Business decision mapping Data visualization Graphic communication Infographics Information design Knowledge visualization Mental model Morphological analysis Ontology (information science) Schema (psychology) Visual analytics Visual language Node–link approaches Argument map Cladistics Cognitive map Concept lattice Concept map Conceptual graph Decision tree Dendrogram Graph drawing Hyperbolic tree Hypertext Issue map Issue tree Layered graph drawing Mind map Object-role modeling Organizational chart Pathfinder network Radial tree Semantic network Sociogram Timeline Topic map Tree structure ZigZag See also Design rationale Diagrammatic reasoning Entity–relationship model Geovisualization List of concept- and mind-mapping software Olog Ontology (philosophy) Problem structuring methods Semantic Web Treemapping Wicked problem v t e A mental model is an internal representation of external reality : that is, a way of representing reality within one's mind . Such models are hypothesized to play a major role in cognition , reasoning and decision-making . The term for this concept was coined in 1943 by Kenneth Craik , who suggested that the mind constructs "small-scale models " of reality that it uses to anticipate events. Mental models can help shape behaviour , including approaches to solving problems and performing tasks.

In psychology , the term mental models is sometimes used to refer to mental representations or mental simulation generally. The concepts of schema and conceptual models are cognitively adjacent. Elsewhere, it is used to refer to the "mental model" theory of reasoning developed by Philip Johnson-Laird and Ruth M. J. Byrne .

History [ edit ] The term mental model is believed to have originated with Kenneth Craik in his 1943 book The Nature of Explanation .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Georges-Henri Luquet in Le dessin enfantin (Children's drawings), published in 1927 by Alcan, Paris, argued that children construct internal models, a view that influenced, among others, child psychologist Jean Piaget .

Jay Wright Forrester defined general mental models thus: The image of the world around us, which we carry in our head, is just a model. Nobody in his head imagines all the world, government or country. He has only selected concepts, and relationships between them, and uses those to represent the real system (Forrester, 1971).

Philip Johnson-Laird published Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of Language, Inference and Consciousness in 1983. In the same year, Dedre Gentner and Albert Stevens edited a collection of chapters in a book also titled Mental Models .

[ 3 ] The first line of their book explains the idea further: "One function of this chapter is to belabor the obvious; people's views of the world, of themselves, of their own capabilities, and of the tasks that they are asked to perform, or topics they are asked to learn, depend heavily on the conceptualizations that they bring to the task." (see the book: Mental Models ).

Since then, there has been much discussion and use of the idea in human-computer interaction and usability by researchers including Donald Norman and Steve Krug (in his book Don't Make Me Think ).

Walter Kintsch and Teun A. van Dijk , using the term situation model (in their book Strategies of Discourse Comprehension , 1983), showed the relevance of mental models for the production and comprehension of discourse .

Charlie Munger popularized the use of multi-disciplinary mental models for making business and investment decisions.

[ 4 ] Mental models and reasoning [ edit ] Main article: Mental model theory of reasoning One view of human reasoning is that it depends on mental models. In this view, mental models can be constructed from perception, imagination, or the comprehension of discourse (Johnson-Laird, 1983). Such mental models are similar to architects' models or to physicists' diagrams in that their structure is analogous to the structure of the situation that they represent, unlike, say, the structure of logical forms used in formal rule theories of reasoning. In this respect, they are a little like pictures in the picture theory of language described by philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein in 1922.

Philip Johnson-Laird and Ruth M.J. Byrne developed their mental model theory of reasoning which makes the assumption that reasoning depends, not on logical form, but on mental models (Johnson-Laird and Byrne, 1991).

Principles of mental models [ edit ] Mental models are based on a small set of fundamental assumptions ( axioms ), which distinguish them from other proposed representations in the psychology of reasoning (Byrne and Johnson-Laird, 2009). Each mental model represents a possibility. A mental model represents one possibility, capturing what is common to all the different ways in which the possibility may occur (Johnson-Laird and Byrne, 2002). Mental models are iconic, i.e., each part of a model corresponds to each part of what it represents (Johnson-Laird, 2006). Mental models are based on a principle of truth: they typically represent only those situations that are possible, and each model of a possibility represents only what is true in that possibility according to the proposition. However, mental models can represent what is false, temporarily assumed to be true, for example, in the case of counterfactual conditionals and counterfactual thinking (Byrne, 2005).

Reasoning with mental models [ edit ] People infer that a conclusion is valid if it holds in all the possibilities. Procedures for reasoning with mental models rely on counter-examples to refute invalid inferences; they establish validity by ensuring that a conclusion holds over all the models of the premises. Reasoners focus on a subset of the possible models of multiple-model problems, often just a single model. The ease with which reasoners can make deductions is affected by many factors, including age and working memory (Barrouillet, et al., 2000). They reject a conclusion if they find a counterexample, i.e., a possibility in which the premises hold, but the conclusion does not (Schroyens, et al. 2003; Verschueren, et al., 2005).

Criticisms [ edit ] Scientific debate continues about whether human reasoning is based on mental models, versus formal rules of inference (e.g., O'Brien, 2009), domain-specific rules of inference (e.g., Cheng & Holyoak, 2008; Cosmides, 2005), or probabilities (e.g., Oaksford and Chater, 2007). Many empirical comparisons of the different theories have been carried out (e.g., Oberauer, 2006).

Mental models of dynamics systems: mental models in system dynamics [ edit ] Characteristics [ edit ] A mental model is generally: founded on unquantifiable, impugnable, obscure, or incomplete facts; flexible – considerably variable in positive as well as in negative sense; an information filter that causes selective perception , perception of only selected parts of information ; very limited, compared with the complexities of the world, and even when a scientific model is extensive and in accordance with a certain reality in the derivation of logical consequences of it, it must take into account such restrictions as working memory ; i.e., rules on the maximum number of elements that people are able to remember, gestaltisms or failure of the principles of logic , etc.; dependent on sources of information, which one cannot find anywhere else, are available at any time and can be used.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Mental models are a fundamental way to understand organizational learning. Mental models, in popular science parlance, have been described as "deeply held images of thinking and acting".

[ 8 ] Mental models are so basic to understanding the world that people are hardly conscious of them.

Expression of mental models of dynamic systems [ edit ] S.N. Groesser and M. Schaffernicht (2012) describe three basic methods which are typically used: Causal loop diagrams – displaying tendency and a direction of information connections and the resulting causality and feedback loops System structure diagrams – another way to express the structure of a qualitative dynamic system Stock and flow diagrams - a way to quantify the structure of a dynamic system These methods allow showing a mental model of a dynamic system, as an explicit, written model about a certain system based on internal beliefs. Analyzing these graphical representations has been an increasing area of research across many social science fields.

[ 9 ] Additionally software tools that attempt to capture and analyze the structural and functional properties of individual mental models such as Mental Modeler, "a participatory modeling tool based in fuzzy-logic cognitive mapping", [ 10 ] have recently been developed and used to collect/compare/combine mental model representations collected from individuals for use in social science research, collaborative decision-making, and natural resource planning.

Mental model in relation to system dynamics and systemic thinking [ edit ] In the simplification of reality, creating a model can find a sense of reality, seeking to overcome systemic thinking and system dynamics .

These two disciplines can help to construct a better coordination with the reality of mental models and simulate it accurately. They increase the probability that the consequences of how to decide and act in accordance with how to plan.

[ 5 ] System dynamics – extending mental models through the creation of explicit models, which are clear, easily communicated and can be compared with each other.

Systemic thinking – seeking the means to improve the mental models and thereby improve the quality of dynamic decisions that are based on mental models.

Experimental studies carried out in weightlessness [ 11 ] and on Earth using neuroimaging [ 12 ] showed that humans are endowed with a mental model of the effects of gravity on object motion.

Single and double-loop learning [ edit ] After analyzing the basic characteristics, it is necessary to bring the process of changing the mental models, or the process of learning.

Learning is a back-loop process , and feedback loops can be illustrated as: single-loop learning or double-loop learning.

Single-loop learning [ edit ] Mental models affect the way that people work with information, and also how they determine the final decision. The decision itself changes, but the mental models remain the same. It is the predominant method of learning, because it is very convenient.

Double-loop learning [ edit ] Main article: Double-loop learning Double-loop learning ( see diagram below ) is used when it is necessary to change the mental model on which a decision depends. Unlike single loops, this model includes a shift in understanding, from simple and static to broader and more dynamic, such as taking into account the changes in the surroundings and the need for expression changes in mental models.

[ 6 ] Process of learning Feedback process Single-loop learning Double-loop learning See also [ edit ] All models are wrong Cognitive map Cognitive psychology Conceptual model Educational psychology Folk psychology Internal model (motor control) Knowledge representation Lovemap Macrocognition Map–territory relation Model-dependent realism Neuro-linguistic programming Neuroeconomics Neuroplasticity OODA loop Psyche (psychology) Self-stereotyping Social intuitionism Space mapping System dynamics Text and conversation theory Notes [ edit ] ^ Nersessian, Nancy J.

(1992).

"In the Theoretician's Laboratory: Thought Experimenting as Mental Modeling" (PDF) .

PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association .

1992 (2): 291– 301.

doi : 10.1086/psaprocbienmeetp.1992.2.192843 .

S2CID 141149408 . Retrieved 17 July 2014 .

The contemporary notion that mental modelling plays a significant role in human reasoning was formulated, initially, by Kenneth Craik in 1943.

^ Staggers, Nancy; Norcio, A.F. (1993).

"Mental models: concepts for human-computer interaction research" (PDF) .

International Journal of Man-Machine Studies .

38 (4): 587– 605.

doi : 10.1006/imms.1993.1028 . Retrieved 17 July 2014 .

Although Johnson-Laird (1989) is generally credited with coining the term mental model, the history of the concept may be traced to Craik's (1943) work entitled The Nature of Explanation .

^ "Mental models" Archived 2011-05-18 at the Wayback Machine , report at www.lauradove.info.

^ "The Psychology of Human Misjudgement" , speech by Charlie Munger ^ a b Šusta, Marek.

"Několik slov o systémové dynamice a systémovém myšlení" (PDF) (in Czech). Proverbs, a.s. pp.

3– 9 . Retrieved 2009-01-15 .

^ a b Mildeova, S., Vojtko V. (2003).

Systémová dynamika (in Czech). Prague: Oeconomica. pp.

19– 24.

ISBN 978-80-245-0626-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ford, David N., Sterman, John D.

"Expert Knowledge Elicitation to Improve Mental and Formal Models" (PDF) . Cambridge, Massachusetts, US - Massachusetts Institute of Technology. pp.

18– 23 . Retrieved 2009-01-11 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Leading for a Change", Ralph Jacobson, 2000, Chapter 5, Page102 ^ Jones, Natalie A.; Ross, Helen; Lynam, Timothy; Perez, Pascal; Leitch, Anne (2011).

"Mental Models: An Interdisciplinary Synthesis of Theory and Methods" (PDF) .

Ecology and Society .

16 (1).

doi : 10.5751/ES-03802-160146 .

^ "Mental Modeler: A Fuzzy-Logic Cognitive Mapping Modeling Tool for Adaptive Environmental Management" (PDF) .

mentalmodeler.com . Retrieved 28 May 2019 .

^ McIntyre J, Zago M, Berthoz A, Lacquaniti F (2001). "Does the brain model Newton's laws?".

Nature Neuroscience .

4 (7): 693– 694.

doi : 10.1038/89477 .

PMID 11426224 .

S2CID 30444364 .

^ Indovina I, et al. (2005). "Representation of visual gravitational motion in the human vestibular cortex".

Science .

308 (5720): 416– 419.

Bibcode : 2005Sci...308..416I .

doi : 10.1126/science.1107961 .

hdl : 2108/19501 .

PMID 15831760 .

S2CID 22179461 .

References [ edit ] Barrouillet, P. et al. (2000).

Conditional reasoning by mental models: chronometric and developmental evidence .

Cognit.

75, 237-266.

Byrne, R.M.J. (2005).

The Rational Imagination: How People Create Counterfactual Alternatives to Reality .

Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Byrne, R.M.J. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2009). 'If' and the problems of conditional reasoning.

Trends in Cognitive Sciences . 13, 282-287 Cheng, P.C. and Holyoak, K.J. (2008) Pragmatic reasoning schemas. In Reasoning: studies of human inference and its foundations (Adler, J.E. and Rips, L.J., eds), pp. 827–842, Cambridge University Press Cosmides, L. et al. (2005) Detecting cheaters.

Trends in Cognitive Sciences . 9,505–506 Forrester, J. W. (1971) Counterintuitive behavior of social systems .

Technology Review.

Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983).

Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of Language, Inference, and Consciousness.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006) How We Reason . Oxford University Press Johnson-Laird, P.N. and Byrne, R.M.J. (2002) Conditionals: a theory of meaning, inference, and pragmatics.

Psychol. Rev.

109, 646–678 Oaksford, M. and Chater, N. (2007) Bayesian Rationality . Oxford University Press Oberauer K. (2006) Reasoning with conditionals: A test of formal models of four theories .

Cognit. Psychol.

53:238–283.

O’Brien, D. (2009). Human reasoning includes a mental logic.

Behav. Brain Sci.

32, 96–97 Schroyens, W. et al. (2003).

In search of counterexamples: Deductive rationality in human reasoning .

Quart. J. Exp. Psychol.

56(A), 1129–1145.

Verschueren, N. et al. (2005).

Everyday conditional reasoning: A working memory-dependent tradeoff between counterexample and likelihood use .

Mem. Cognit . 33, 107-119.

Further reading [ edit ] Chater, N. et al. (2006) Probabilistic Models of Cognition: Conceptual Foundations. Trends Cogn Sci 10(7):287-91.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2006.05.007 .

Gentner, Dedre; Stevens, Albert L., eds. (1983).

Mental Models . Hillsdale: Erlbaum 1983.

Groesser, S.N. (2012).

Mental model of dynamic systems . In N.M. Seel (Ed.). The encyclopedia of the sciences of learning (Vol. 5, pp. 2195–2200). New York: Springer.

Groesser, S.N. & Schaffernicht, M. (2012).

Mental Models of Dynamic Systems: Taking Stock and Looking Ahead . System Dynamics Review, 28(1): 46-68, Wiley.

Johnson-Laird, P.N. 2005. The History of Mental Models Jones, N. A. et al. (2011). " Mental Models: an interdisciplinary synthesis of theory and methods " Ecology and Society.

16 (1): 46.

Jones, N. A. et al. (2014). " Eliciting mental models: a comparison of interview procedures in the context of natural resource management " Ecology and Society.

19 (1): 13.

Luquet, Georges-Henri (2001).

Children's Drawings .

Free Association Books .

ISBN 1-85343-516-3 Prediger, S. (2008). " Discontinuities for mental models - a source for difficulties with the multiplication of fractions " Proceedings of ICME-11, Topic Study Group 10, Research and Development of Number Systems and Arithmetic . (See also Prediger's references to Fischbein 1985 and Fischbein 1989, "Tacit models and mathematical reasoning".) Robles-De-La-Torre, G. & Sekuler, R. (2004). " Numerically Estimating Internal Models of Dynamic Virtual Objects Archived 2008-05-17 at the Wayback Machine ". In: ACM Transactions on Applied Perception 1(2) , pp. 102–117.

Sterman, John D. A Skeptic’s Guide to Computer Models, Massachusetts Institute of Technology External links [ edit ] Mental Models and Reasoning Laboratory Systems Analysis, Modelling and Prediction Group, University of Oxford System Dynamics Society v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cckd7
Cached time: 20250817222515
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.440 seconds
Real time usage: 0.601 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1244/1000000
Revision size: 20412/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 111500/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 680/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61029/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.244/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5907160/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  424.250      1 -total
 38.67%  164.057      1 Template:Reflist
 25.08%  106.383      5 Template:Cite_journal
 18.94%   80.335      1 Template:InfoMaps
 18.27%   77.524      1 Template:Sidebar
 17.50%   74.254      1 Template:Short_description
 10.95%   46.444      1 Template:World_view
 10.59%   44.916      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.30%   43.712      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.01%   25.486      1 Template:Other_uses Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:994704:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222515 and revision id 1277525983. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mental_model&oldid=1277525983 " Categories : Conceptual models Cognitive modeling Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Information Information science Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Czech-language sources (cs) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 February 2025, at 04:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mental model 17 languages Add topic

