Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Types and nomenclature 3 Function 4 Operation 5 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 5.1 Surface snorkelling 5.2 Finswimming 5.3 Freediving 5.4 Scuba diving 6 Separate snorkels Toggle Separate snorkels subsection 6.1 Dimensions 6.2 Orientation and shape 6.3 Independent snorkel construction 7 Integrated snorkels Toggle Integrated snorkels subsection 7.1 Integrated snorkel construction 7.2 Half-face snorkel masks 7.3 Full-face snorkel masks 8 Associated equipment 9 Safety and competition standards 10 References Toggle the table of contents Snorkel (swimming) 22 languages العربية Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tube for breathing face down at the surface of the water For swimming while using a snorkel, see Snorkeling .

Snorkel Snorkel, worn with diving half mask Uses Breathing while face down at the surface of the water Related items Diving mask , Swimming goggles A snorkel is a device used for breathing atmospheric air when the wearer's head is face downwards in the surface water with the mouth and the nose submerged. It may be either a separate unit, or integrated into a swimming or diving mask . The integrated version is only suitable for surface snorkeling, while the separate device may also be used for surface breathing during breathhold underwater activities such as spearfishing , freediving , finswimming , underwater hockey , underwater rugby and for surface breathing while wearing scuba equipment . A standard snorkel is a curved tube with a shape usually resembling the letter "L" or "J", fitted with a mouthpiece at the lower end and made from plastic , synthetic elastomers , rubber , or light metal.

[ 1 ] The snorkel may have a loop or a clip to attach it to the head strap of the diving mask or swimming goggles, or may be tucked between the mask-strap and the head, [ 2 ] or may be provided with its own head strap. Some snorkels are fitted with a float valve at the top to prevent flooding if the top opening is immersed, and some are fitted with a water trap and purge valve, intended for draining water from the tube.

The current European Standard specifies limits for length, bore and internal volume for separate snorkels. Some types of integrated mask-snorkel combinations and anti-flooding valves are banned from manufacture and sale in some countries as unsafe.

[ 3 ] Snorkels constitute respiratory dead space . When the user takes in a fresh breath, some of the previously exhaled air which remains in the snorkel is inhaled again, reducing the amount of fresh air in the inhaled volume, and increasing the risk of a buildup of carbon dioxide in the blood, which can result in hypercapnia . The greater the volume of the tube, and the smaller the tidal volume of breathing, the more this problem is exacerbated. Including the internal volume of the mask in the breathing circuit greatly increases the dead space unless a one-way circuit is used.

[ 4 ] Occasional exhalation through the nose while snorkeling with a separate snorkel will slightly reduce the buildup of carbon dioxide, and may help in keeping the mask clear of water, but in cold water it will increase fogging of the mask's viewport. To some extent the effect of dead space can be counteracted by breathing more deeply, as this reduces the dead space ratio.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] See also: History of underwater diving Side-mounted underwater swimmer's snorkel A range of 1970s snorkels made to British Standard BS 4532 Breathing surface air through a tube was mentioned by Aristotle in his Parts of Animals . He referred to divers using "instruments for respiration" resembling the elephant's trunk .

[ 6 ] Some evidence suggests that snorkeling may have originated in Crete some 5,000 years ago as sponge divers used hollowed out reeds to submerge and retrieve natural sponge for use in trade and commerce, [ citation needed ] though more recent breathhold sponge-diving practice used the skandalopetra diving weight system. In the fifteenth century, Leonardo da Vinci drew designs for an underwater breathing device consisting of cane tubes with a mask to cover the mouth at the diver end and a float to keep the tubes above water at the surface end.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The following timeline traces the history of the swimmers' snorkel during the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.

1927 First use of swimmer's breathing tube and mask. According to Gilbert Doukan's 1957 World Beneath the Waves [ 9 ] and cited elsewhere, [ 10 ] "In 1927, and during each summer from 1927 to 1930, on the beach of La Croix-Valmer , Jacques O'Marchal  [ sic ] ( "Jacques Aumaréchal" is the name of a 1932 French swim mask patentee [ 11 ] ) could be seen using the first face mask and the first breathing tube. He exhibited them, in fact, in 1931, at the International Nautical Show. On his feet, moreover, he wore the first 'flippers' designed by Louis de Corlieu , the use of which was to become universal." [ 9 ] 1929 First swimmers' breathing tube patent application filed. On 9 December 1929, Barney B. Girden filed a patent application for a "swimming device" enabling a swimmer under instruction to be supplied with air through a tube to the mouth "whereby the wearer may devote his entire time to the mechanics of the stroke being used." His invention was registered as US patent 1,845,263 on 16 February 1932.

[ 12 ] On 30 July 1932, Joseph L. Belcher filed a patent application for "breathing apparatus" delivering air to a submerged person by suction from the surface of the water through hoses connected to a float; US patent 1,901,219 was awarded on 14 March 1933.

[ 13 ] 1938 First swimmers' mask with integrated breathing tubes. In 1938, French naval officer Yves Le Prieur introduced his "Nautilus" full-face diving mask with hoses emerging from the sides and leading upwards to an air inlet with a ball valve which opens when it is above water and closes when it is submerged.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] In November 1940, American spearfisherman Charles H. Wilen filed his "swimmer's mask" invention, which was granted US patent 2,317,237 of 20 April 1943.

[ 17 ] The device resembles a full-face diving mask incorporating two breathing tubes topped with valves projecting above the surface for inhalation and exhalation purposes. On 11 July 1944, he obtained US design patent 138,286 for a simpler version of this mask with a flutter valve at the bottom and a single breathing tube with a ball float valve at the top.

[ 18 ] Throughout their heyday of the 1950s and early 1960s, masks with integrated tubes appear in the inventories of American, Australian, British, Danish, French, German, Greek, Hong Kong, Israeli, Italian, Japanese, Polish, Spanish, Taiwanese, Turkish and Yugoslav swimming and diving equipment manufacturers. Meanwhile, in 1957, the US monthly product-testing magazine Consumer Reports concludes that "snorkel-masks have some value for swimmers lying on the surface while watching the depths in water free of vegetation and other similar hazards, but they are not recommended for a dive 'into the blue'".

[ 19 ] According to an underwater swimming equipment review in the British national weekly newspaper The Sunday Times in December 1973, "the mask with inbuilt snorkel is doubly dangerous (...) A ban on the manufacture and import of these masks is long overdue in Britain".

[ 20 ] In a decree of 2 August 1989, [ 3 ] the French government suspended the manufacture, importation and marketing of ball-valve snorkel-masks. By the noughties , just two swim masks with attached breathing tubes remained in production worldwide: the Majorca sub 107S single-snorkel model, [ 21 ] and the Balco 558 twin-snorkel full-face model, [ 22 ] both manufactured in Greece. In May 2014, the French Decathlon company filed its new-generation full-face snorkel-mask design, which was granted US design patent 775,722.

[ 23 ] on 3 January 2017, entering production as the "Easybreath" mask designated for surface snorkeling only.

1938 First front-mounted swimmer's breathing tube patent was filed. In December 1938, French spearfisherman Maxime Forjot and his business partner Albert Méjean filed a patent application in France for a breathing tube worn on the front of the head over a single-lens diving mask enclosing the eyes and the nose and it was granted French patent 847848 on 10 July 1939.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] In July 1939, Popular Science magazine published an article containing illustrations of a spearfisherman using a curved length of hosepipe as a front-mounted breathing tube and wearing a set of swimming goggles over his eyes and a pair of swimming fins on his feet.

[ 28 ] In the first French monograph on spearfishing La Chasse aux Poissons (1940), medical researcher and amateur spearfisherman Raymond Pulvénis illustrates his "Tuba", a breathing tube he designed to be worn on the front of the head over a single-lens diving mask enclosing the eyes and the nose. Francophone swimmers and divers have called their breathing tube "un tuba" ever since. In 1943, Raymond Pulvénis and his brother Roger obtain a Spanish patent for their improved breathing tube mouthpiece design.

[ 29 ] In 1956, the UK diving equipment manufacturer E. T. Skinner (Typhoon) marketed a "frontal" breathing tube with a bracket attachable to the screw at the top of an oval diving mask.

[ 30 ] Although it eventually fell out of favour with underwater swimmers, the front-mounted snorkel remains the breathing tube of choice in competitive swimming and finswimming because it improves the swimmer's hydrodynamic profile.

[ clarification needed ] [ citation needed ] 1939 First side-mounted swimmers’ breathing tube patent filed. In December 1939, expatriate Russian spearfisherman Alexandre Kramarenko filed a patent in France for a breathing tube worn at the side of the head with a ball float valve at the top to exclude water and a flutter valve at the bottom. Kramarenko and his business partner Charles H. Wilen refiled the invention in March 1940 with the United States Patent Office , where their "underwater apparatus for swimmers" was granted US patent 2,317,236 on 20 April 1943; [ 31 ] after entering production in France, the device was called "Le Respirator".

[ 32 ] The co-founder of Scubapro Dick Bonin is credited with the introduction of the flexible-hose snorkel in the mid-1950s and the exhaust valve to ease snorkel clearing in 1980.

[ 33 ] In 1964, US Divers marketed an L-shaped snorkel intended to outperform J-shaped models by increasing breathing ease, cutting water drag and eliminating the "water trap".

[ 34 ] In the late 1960s, Dacor launched a "wraparound big-barrel" contoured snorkel, which closely follows the surface of the wearer's head and has a wider bore to improve airflow.

[ 35 ] The findings of the 1977 report "Allergic reactions to mask skirts, regulator mouthpieces and snorkel mouthpieces" [ 36 ] encouraged diving equipment manufacturers to fit snorkels with hypoallergenic gum rubber and medical-grade silicone mouthpieces. For underwater swimming and diving, the side-mounted snorkel has long been the norm, although new-generation full-face swim masks with integrated snorkels are beginning to grow in popularity for use while floating and swimming at the surface.

1950 First use of the word "snorkel" to denote a breathing device for swimmers. The German word Schnorchel and its English derivatives "snorkle" and "snorkel" originally referred to an air intake used to supply air to the diesel engines of U-boats , invented during World War II to enable them to operate just below the surface at periscope depth and recharge batteries while keeping a low profile. First recorded in 1940–45.

[ 37 ] In April 1950, a West-Coast American newspaper showcased the work of The Spearfisherman diving equipment company, listing "snorkles (rubber breathing tubes)" among the manufacturer's underwater hunting products.

[ 38 ] In November of the same year, the Honolulu Sporting Goods Co. introduced a "swim-pipe" resembling Kramarenko and Wilen's side-mounted ball-float- and flutter-valve breathing tube design, urging children and adults to "try the human version of the submarine snorkel and be like a fish".

[ 39 ] Every advertisement in the first issue of Skin Diver magazine in December 1951 [ 40 ] used the alternative spelling "snorkles" to denote swimmers' breathing tubes. In 1955, Albert VanderKogel classed stand-alone breathing tubes and swim masks with integrated breathing tubes as "pipe snorkels" and "mask snorkels" respectively.

[ 41 ] In 1957, the British Sub-Aqua Club journal features a lively debate about the standardisation of diving terms in general and the replacement of the existing British term "breathing tube" with the American term "snorkel" in particular.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] The following year saw the première of the 1958 British thriller film The Snorkel , whose title references a diving mask topped with two built-in breathing tubes. To date, every national and international standard on snorkels uses the term "snorkel" exclusively.

1969 First national standard on snorkels. In December 1969, the British Standards Institution published British standard BS 4532 entitled "Specification for snorkels and face masks" [ 44 ] [ 45 ] and prepared by a committee on which the British Rubber Manufacturers' Association, the British Sub-Aqua Club , the Department for Education and Science , the Federation of British Manufacturers of Sports and Games, the Ministry of Defence Navy Department and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents were represented. This British standard sets different maximum and minimum snorkel dimensions for adult and child users, specifies materials and design features for tubes and mouthpieces and requires a warning label and a set of instructions to be enclosed with each snorkel. In February 1980 and June 1991, the Deutsches Institut für Normung published the first [ 46 ] and second [ 47 ] editions of German standard DIN 7878 on snorkel safety and testing. This German standard sets safety and testing criteria comparable to British standard BS 4532 with an additional requirement that every snorkel must be topped with a fluorescent red or orange band to alert other water users of the snorkeller's presence. In November 1988, Austrian Standards International published Austrian standard ÖNORM S 4223 [ 48 ] entitled "Tauch-Zubehör; Schnorchel; Abmessungen, sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen, Prüfung, Normkennzeichnung" in German, subtitled "Diving accessories; snorkel; dimensions, safety requirements, testing, marking of conformity" in English and closely resembling German Standard DIN 7878 of February 1980 in specifications. The first [ 49 ] and second [ 50 ] editions of European standard EN 1972 on snorkel requirements and test methods appeared in July 1997 and December 2015. This European standard refines snorkel dimension, airflow and joint-strength testing and matches snorkel measurements to the user's height and lung capacity. The snorkels regulated by these British, German, Austrian and European standards exclude combined masks and snorkels in which the snorkel tubes open into the mask. With respect to the latter, the British Standards Institution published British standard BS 8647 entitled "Respiratory equipment – Full-face snorkel masks – Specification" [ 51 ] in October 2024.

Types and nomenclature [ edit ] The basic snorkel types are those which are completely separate from the mask, which are variously called "separate", "simple", "plain", "tube", "pipe", or "independent" snorkels, or just "snorkels", and which are curved tubes with a bite-grip mouthpiece, and "integrated" snorkels, which are part of a "snorkel mask", which can be a half mask covering the eyes and nose, or more often, a full-face mask covering the eyes, nose and mouth.

Function [ edit ] A snorkel is used to allow the user to breathe atmospheric air when their face is immersed in water while swimming or floating at the surface.

[ 1 ] To work effectively, the snorkel must allow the user to inhale and exhale comfortably over an extended period, and provide a sufficient volume of air with appropriate oxygen and carbon dioxide content to maintain a sufficient and comfortable respiratory gas exchange in the lungs. Atmospheric air has a very consistent composition, so variations of inhaled air quality are almost entirely a consequence of how much exhaled air is inhaled on the next breath.

[ 52 ] The volume of air exchanged during a breathing cycle is called the tidal volume , [ 53 ] and the volume of exhaled air that is inhaled on the next breath is called the dead space or dead volume.

[ 54 ] Dead space reduces the amount of fresh air which reaches the alveoli during each breath. This reduces the oxygen available for gas exchange, and the amount of carbon dioxide that can be removed. The buildup of carbon dioxide is usually the more noticeable effect. The body can compensate to some extent by increasing the volume of inspired gas, but this also increases work of breathing , and is only effective when the ratio of dead space to tidal volume is reduced sufficiently to compensate for the additional carbon dioxide produced due to the increased work of breathing. Continued buildup of carbon dioxide will lead to hypercapnia and respiratory distress .

[ 55 ] A longer tube would not allow breathing when snorkeling deeper, since it would place the lungs in deeper water where the surrounding water pressure is higher requiring significantly greater effort to inhale, and overtaxing the muscles that expand the lungs.

[ 56 ] The pressure difference across the tissues in the lungs, between the blood capillaries and air spaces during negative pressure breathing would increase the risk of pulmonary edema .

[ 57 ] Operation [ edit ] Main article: Snorkelling The simplest type of snorkel is a plain tube that is held in the mouth, and allowed to flood when underwater . The snorkeler expels water from the snorkel either with a sharp exhalation on return to the surface ( blast clearing ) or by tilting the head back shortly before reaching the surface and exhaling until reaching or breaking the surface ( displacement clearing ) and facing forward or down again before inhaling the next breath. The displacement method expels water by filling the snorkel with air; it is a technique that takes practice but clears the snorkel with less effort, but only works when surfacing. Clearing splash water while at the surface requires blast clearing.

[ 58 ] Experienced users tend to develop a breathing style which minimises work of breathing, carbon dioxide buildup and risk of water inspiration, while optimising water removal. This involves a sharp puff in the early stage of exhalation, which is effective for clearing the tube of remaining water, and a fairly large but comfortable exhaled volume, mostly fairly slowly for low work of breathing, followed by an immediate slow inhalation, which reduces entrainment of any residual water, to a comfortable but relatively large inhaled volume, repeated without delay. Elastic recoil of the lungs is used to assist with the initial puff, which can be made sharper by controlling the start of exhalation with the tongue. This technique is most applicable to relaxed cruising on the surface. Racing finswimmers may use a different technique as they need a far greater level of ventilation when working hard.

[ citation needed ] Single snorkels and two-way twin snorkels constitute respiratory dead space . Including the internal volume of the mask in the breathing circuit greatly increases the dead space. When the user inhales, some of the previously exhaled air which remains in the dead space is inhaled again, reducing the amount of fresh air in the inhaled volume, which increases the risk of hypercapnia , a buildup of carbon dioxide in the blood. The greater the volume of the dead space, and the smaller the tidal volume of breathing, the more this problem is exacerbated. A smaller diameter tube reduces the dead space, but also increases resistance to airflow and so increases the work of breathing. Occasional exhalation through the nose while snorkeling with a separate snorkel will slightly reduce the buildup of carbon dioxide, and may help in keeping the mask clear of water, but in cold water it will increase fogging of the inside of the mask. Twin integrated snorkels with one-way valves eliminate the dead-space of the snorkels themselves, but are usually used on a full-face mask, and even if it has an inner orinasal section, there will be some dead space, and the valves will impede airflow through the loop to some extent. Integrated two-way snorkels include the internal volume of the mask as dead space in addition to the volume of the snorkels unless there is a one way flow enforced by non-return valves and internal ducting. To some extent the effect of dead space can be counteracted by breathing more deeply, as this reduces the dead space ratio .

[ 5 ] Slower breathing will reduce the effort needed to move the air through the circuit. There is a danger that a snorkeler who can breathe comfortably in good conditions will be unable to ventilate adequately under stress or when working harder, leading to hypercapnia and possible panic , and could get into serious difficulties if they are unable to swim effectively if they have to remove the snorkel or mask to breathe without restriction.

[ 59 ] Some snorkels have a sump at the lowest point to prevent a small volume of water remaining in the snorkel from being inhaled when the snorkeler breathes. Most of these also have a non-return drain valve in the sump, to drain water from the tube when the diver exhales. The water is pushed out through the valve when the tube is blocked by water and the exhalation pressure exceeds the water pressure on the outside of the valve. This is similar to the mechanism of blast clearing which does not require the valve, but the pressure required is slightly less, and effective blast clearing may require a higher flow rate. When the water level in the snorkel drops sufficiently for exhaled air to bypass over the water, much of the effectiveness of the drain valve is lost, and the remaining water may not all be ejected. The full-face snorkel mask may have a double airflow passage with non-return valves to reduce dead space in the tubes, one tube providing inflow and the other for outflow, but the interior of the mask remains a large dead space unless an orinasal pocket is included. The full-face mask encloses the nose and mouth in the same volume which is connected to the snorkel tube or tubes, which allows breathing through the nose in addition to the mouth.

[ 60 ] A few "dry" models of separate snorkel have float-operated valves attached to the top end of the tube to keep water out when a wave passes, but these cause problems when diving as the snorkel must then be equalized during descent, using part of the diver's inhaled air supply. Some recent "semi-dry" designs come with a splash deflector on the top end to reduce entry of water that splashes over the top of the tube, thereby keeping it relatively free from water at the surface.

[ 61 ] A common problem with all mechanical clearing mechanisms is their tendency to fail if infrequently used, or if stored for long periods, or through environmental fouling, or owing to lack of maintenance. Many also either slightly increase the flow resistance of the snorkel, or provide a small water trap, which retains a little water in the tube after clearing, or both.

[ 62 ] Modern snorkels use silicone rubber in the mouthpiece and valves due to its resistance to degradation and its long service life.

Natural rubber was formerly used, but slowly oxidizes and breaks down due to ultraviolet light exposure from the sun. It eventually loses its flexibility, becomes brittle and cracks, which can cause clearing valves to stick in the open or closed position, and float valves to leak due to a failure of the valve seat to seal. Natural rubber can also cause an allergic reaction in some people.

[ 36 ] In older designs, some snorkels were made with small " ping pong " balls in a cage mounted to the upper open end of the tube to prevent water ingress. These are no longer sold or recommended because they are unreliable and considered hazardous, and are illegal to manufacture or sell in some countries.

[ 3 ] Diving masks with a built-in snorkel are not used for scuba diving. The snorkel is useless during the dive and increases the risk of dislodging and flooding the mask.

Applications [ edit ] Surface snorkelling [ edit ] Main article: Snorkelling Reef Snorkelling on the Great Barrier Reef Snorkelling is the practice of swimming face down on or through a body of water while breathing the ambient air through a snorkel, usually with swimming goggles or a diving mask , and swimfins . In cooler waters, a wetsuit may also be worn. The snorkel may be an independent item or integrated with the mask. The use of this equipment allows the snorkeler to observe the underwater environment for extended periods with relatively little effort, and to breathe while face-down at the surface.

[ 63 ] Snorkeling is a popular recreational activity, particularly at tropical resort locations. It provides the opportunity to observe underwater life [ broken anchor ] in a natural setting without the complicated equipment and training required for scuba diving . It appeals to all ages because of how little effort is involved.

Finswimming [ edit ] Main article: Finswimming Front-mounted competitive swimmer's snorkel Finswimmer using front-mounted snorkel Finswimming is competitive swimming using fins. The surface disciplines also use a snorkel.
Finswimmers generally use a front-mounted snorkel for lower drag and stability at speed. The rigid forehead bracket and central position minimise off-centre loads and keep the snorkel stable at relatively high speeds. They do not normally use snorkels with a sump valve, as they learn to blast clear the tube on most if not all exhalations, which keeps the water content in the tube to a minimum, and the tube can be shaped for lower work of breathing, and elimination of water traps, allowing greater speed and lowering the stress of eventual swallowing of small quantities of water, which would impede their competition performance.

[ 64 ] Freediving [ edit ] Main article: Freediving Freediving is a form of underwater diving that relies on breath-holding until resurfacing rather than the use of breathing apparatus. A snorkel is not generally used for competitive freediving , as the additional work of breathing and dead space reduce performance, but they are normally used for non-competitive snorkel-diving, spearfishing and breathhold underwater sports like underwater hockey where the ability to breathe while viewing the underwater scene from the surface is a big advantage for planning the next descent.

[ citation needed ] Scuba diving [ edit ] Main article: scuba diving Scuba diver snorkeling A snorkel can be useful when scuba diving as it is a convenient way to conserve the compressed breathing gas supply while swimming face down at the surface for extended periods, or for use in a contingency situation at the surface when there is a problem with either gas supply or diving regulator .

[ 65 ] Many dives do not require the use of a snorkel at all, and some scuba divers do not consider a snorkel a necessary or even useful piece of equipment, and it can be a snagging hazard in some environments, so the usefulness of a snorkel depends on the dive plan and the dive site. If there is no requirement to swim face down at the surface and see what is happening underwater, then a snorkel is not useful. If it is necessary to swim over heavy seaweed which can entangle the pillar valve and regulator if the diver swims face upward, to get to and from the dive site, then a snorkel is useful to conserve breathing gas.

[ 63 ] A scuba diver may carry a collapsible snorkel in a pocket to keep it safely out of the way when not in use during a dive.

[ 66 ] Separate snorkels [ edit ] A snorkel may be either separate from, or integrated into, a swim or dive mask . A separate snorkel, or tube snorkel, typically comprises a tube for breathing and a means of attaching the tube to the head of the wearer. The tube has an opening at the top and a mouthpiece at the bottom. Some tubes are topped with a valve to prevent water from entering the tube when it is submerged.

Although snorkels come in many forms, they are primarily classified by their dimensions and secondarily by their orientation and shape.

[ citation needed ] The length and the inner diameter (or inner volume ) of the tube are important ergonomic considerations when matching a snorkel to the requirements of its user. The orientation and shape of the tube must also be taken into account when matching a snorkel to its use while seeking to optimise ergonomic factors such as streamlining , airflow , water retention, interrupting the field of vision, and work of breathing .

Dimensions [ edit ] The total length, inner diameter and internal volume of a snorkel tube are important because they affect the user's ability to breathe normally and ventilate adequately through the tube. Internal volume represents the dead space of the snorkel, and inside diameter and length are used as proxies for the internal volume. These dimensions also have implications for the user's ability to blow residual water out of the tube when surfacing. A long or narrow snorkel tube, or a tube with abrupt changes in direction, or internal surface irregularities will have greater breathing resistance due to friction, while a wide tube will have a larger dead space for the same length and may be hard to clear of water. A short tube or a tube aligned at the wrong angle, will be more susceptible to swamping by waves.

To date, all national and international standards on snorkels specify two ranges of tube dimensions to meet the health and safety needs of their end-users, whether young or old, short or tall, with low or high lung capacity. These dimensions are the total length, the inner diameter and/or the inner volume of the tube. The specifications of the standardisation bodies are tabulated below.

Snorkel standards and rules Total length Inner diameter Total inner volume British Standard: BS 4532 (1969) 500 mm – 600 mm 15 mm – 18 mm British Standard: BS 4532 (1977) 300 mm – 600 mm 15 mm – 22.5 mm. An inner diameter exceeding 20 mm is child-inappropriate.

German Standard: DIN 7878 (1980) Form A (Children): 300 mm max. Form B (Adults): 350 mm max.

Form A (Children): 15 mm – 18 mm. Form B (Adults): 18 mm – 25 mm.

Form A (Children): 120 cc max. Form B (Adults): 150 cc max.

Austrian Standard: ÖNORM S 4223 (1988) Form A (Children): 300 mm max. Form B (Adults): 350 mm max.

Form A (Children): 15 mm – 18 mm. Form B (Adults): 18 mm – 25 mm.

Form A (Children): 120 cc max. Form B (Adults): 150 cc max.

German Standard: DIN 7878 (1991) Form A (Users over ten years of age): 350 mm max. Form C (Ten-year-olds and younger): 300 mm max.

Form A (Users over ten years of age): 18 mm min. Form C (Ten-year-olds and younger): 18 mm min.

Form A (Users over ten years of age): 180 cc max. Form C (Ten-year-olds and younger): 120 cc max.

European Standard: EN 1972 (1997) Type 1 (Users 150 cm or less in height): 350 mm max. Type 2 (Users exceeding 150 cm in height): 380 mm max. Competitive finswimming: 480 mm max.

Type 1 (Users 150 cm or less in height): 150 cc max. Type 2 (Users exceeding 150 cm in height): 230 cc max. Competitive finswimming: 230 cc max.

European Standard: EN 1972 (2015) Class A (Users with larger lung capacity): 380 mm max. Class B (Users with smaller lung capacity, e.g. children): 350 mm max.

Class A (Users with larger lung capacity): 230 cc max. Class B (Users with smaller lung capacity, e.g. children): 150 cc max.

World Underwater Federation (CMAS) Surface Finswimming Rules (2017) 430 mm – 480 mm.

15 mm – 23 mm. Tube cross-section to be circular.

The table above shows how snorkel dimension limits have changed over time in response to better understanding of the effects of dead space and breathing resistance on carbon dioxide retention.

Maximum tube length has almost halved (from 600 to 380 mm).

Maximum bore (inner diameter) has increased (from 18 to 25 mm).

Capacity (or inner volume) has partly replaced inner diameter when dimensioning snorkels.

Different snorkel dimension limits have evolved for different users (first specified as adults/children; then taller/shorter heights; then larger/smaller lung capacities, all of them used as proxies for expected tidal volume, as the ratio of tidal volume to dead space controls the amount of carbon dioxide in the inhaled air of each breath).

Orientation and shape [ edit ] Front mounted snorkel Basic side mounted snorkel shapes Snorkels are made for two orientations: Front-mounted and side-mounted. The first snorkel to be patented in 1938 was front-mounted, worn with the tube over the front of the face and secured with a bracket to the diving mask. Front-mounted snorkels were popular in European snorkeling until the late 1950s, when they were largely superseded by side-mounted snorkels for general use. Front-mounted snorkels experienced a comeback a decade later as competitive swimming equipment to be used in pool workouts and in finswimming races, where they outperform side-mounted snorkels in streamlining and load balance. Front-mounted snorkels are attached to the head with a forehead bracket fitted with adjustable straps to be buckled around the head.

Side-mounted snorkels are generally worn by scuba divers on the left-hand side of the head because the scuba regulator hose is routed over the right shoulder. They come in at least four basic shapes: J-shaped; L-shaped; flexible-hose; contour.

[ 67 ] Snorkel parts A.

J-shaped snorkels represent the original side-mounted snorkel design, cherished by some for their simplicity but eschewed by others because water accumulates in the U-bend at the bottom.

[ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] They project further away from the face, which causes more drag load on the jaw to hold them in place.

B.

L-shaped snorkels represent an improvement on the J-shaped style. They are claimed [ by whom?

] to reduce breathing resistance, to cut water drag and to remove the "water trap".

[ citation needed ] C.

Flexible-hose snorkels are preferred by some scuba divers because the flexible hose between the tube and the mouthpiece causes the lower part of the snorkel to drop out of the way of the demand valve when it is not in use. However, a freediver equipped with this snorkel design must have a hand free to replace the mouthpiece when it falls out of the mouth.

[ clarification needed ] D.

Contour snorkels represent the most recent design development. They have a "wraparound" shape with smooth curves closely following the outline of the wearer's head, which improves wearing comfort, because the lower hydrodynamic drag reduces the support loads.

Independent snorkel construction [ edit ] An independent snorkel consists essentially of a curved tube with a mouthpiece to be inserted between the lips and gripped by the teeth.

Snorkel attachment methods The barrel is the hollow tube leading from the supply end at the top of the snorkel to the demand end at the bottom where the mouthpiece is attached. The barrel is made of a relatively rigid material such as plastic, light metal or hard rubber. The bore is the interior chamber of the barrel; bore length, diameter and curvature all affect breathing resistance.

[ 1 ] The top of the barrel may be open to the elements or fitted with a valve designed to shut off the air supply from the atmosphere when the top is submerged. There may be a red or orange band around the top to alert other water users of the snorkeller's presence. The simplest way of attaching the snorkel to the head is to slip the top of the barrel between the mask strap and the head. This may cause the mask to leak if done carelessly, and alternative means of attachment of the barrel to the head can be seen in the illustration of connection methods.

A.

The mask strap is threaded through the loop moulded on to the barrel.

B.

The mask strap is threaded through the separable rubber loop or plastic clip slid over the barrel and held in place by friction.

C.

The rubber band knotted to this 1950s American snorkel barrel is stretched over the head above the mask.

D.

The mask strap is threaded through the rotatable plastic snorkel keeper positioned about halfway up the barrel.

Snorkel mouthpieces Attached to the demand end of the snorkel at the bottom of the barrel, the mouthpiece serves to keep the snorkel in the mouth. It is made of soft and flexible material, typically natural rubber and latterly silicone or PVC . The commonest of the multiple designs available [ 68 ] features a curved flange with two lugs to be gripped between the teeth: A.

Flanged mouthpiece with twin lugs at end of length of flexible corrugated hose designed for flexible-hose snorkel.

B.

Flanged mouthpiece with twin lugs at the end of short neck designed for J-shaped snorkel.

C.

Flanged mouthpiece with twin lugs positioned at a right angle and designed for an L-shaped snorkel.

D.

Flanged mouthpiece with twin lugs at the end of a flexible U-shaped elbow designed to be combined with a straight barrel to create a J-shaped snorkel.

E.

Flanged mouthpiece with twin bite lugs offset at an angle with a drain valve at the low point.

A disadvantage of mouthpieces with lugs is the presence of the teeth when breathing. The tighter the teeth grip the mouthpiece lugs, the smaller the air gap between the teeth and the harder it will be to breathe. The lugs are meant to hold the teeth apart allowing the passage of air through the gap.

Among recent innovations is the "collapsible snorkel", which can be folded up in a pocket for emergencies for scuba divers who may not need a snorkel on every dive.

[ 69 ] One for competitive swimmers is a lightweight training snorkel with twin inlet tubes, which exhausts through a valve underwater, similar to the exhaust valve of a diving demand valve, so the dead space is restricted to the mouthpiece volume; [ 70 ] another is a "restrictor cap" placed inside a snorkel barrel "restricting breathing by 40% to increase cardiovascular strength and build lung capacity".

[ 71 ] Some additional snorkel features such as shut-off and drain valves fell out of favour decades ago, only to return in the contemporary era as more reliable devices for incorporation into "dry" and "semi-dry" snorkels.

[ 61 ] Integrated snorkels [ edit ] Older swim masks with integrated snorkels Integrated snorkels are single or multiple tubular devices integrated with, and opening into, a swim or dive mask, and a snorkel-mask is a swim or dive mask with single or multiple integrated snorkels. The integrated snorkel mask may be a half-mask, which encloses the eyes and nose but excludes the mouth, or a full-face snorkel mask, which covers the eyes, nose, and mouth. Early designs of snorkel-mask typically comprised a tube for breathing with an immersion-activated shut-off valve at the top, and the bottom opening into the mask, which might cover the mouth as well as the nose and eyes. Such snorkels tended to be permanent fixtures, but a minority could be detached from their sockets and replaced with plugs allowing the masks to be used without their snorkels.

The 1950s were the heyday of older-generation snorkel-masks, first for the pioneers of underwater hunting and then for the general public who swam in their wake. One authority of the time declared that "the advantage of this kind of mask is mainly from the comfort point of view. It fits snugly to one's face, there is no mouthpiece to bite on, and one can breathe through either nose or mouth".

[ 72 ] Another concluded that "built-in snorkel masks are the best" and "a must for those who have sinus trouble." [ 73 ] Yet others, including a co-founder of the British Sub-Aqua Club, deemed masks with integrated snorkels to be complicated and unreliable: "Many have the breathing tube built in as an integral part of the mask. I have never seen the advantage of this, and this is the opinion shared by most experienced underwater swimmers I know".

[ 74 ] These designs tend to have a large dead space in the mask in addition to the dead space of the snorkels. Six decades on, a new generation of snorkel-masks has come to the marketplace.

Like separate snorkels, integrated snorkels come in a variety of forms. The assortment of older-generation masks with integrated snorkels highlights certain similarities and differences: A.

A model enclosing the eyes and the nose only. A permanent single snorkel emerges from the top of the mask and terminates above with a ball float shut-off valve.

B.

A model with a chinpiece to enclose the eyes, the nose and the mouth. Permanent twin snorkels emerge from either side of the mask and terminate above with "gamma" shut-off valves.

C.

A model enclosing the eyes and nose only. Removable twin snorkels emerge from either side of the mask and terminate above with ball float shut-off valves. Supplied with plugs for use without snorkels, as illustrated.

Integrated snorkels are tentatively classified here by their tube configuration and by the face coverage of the masks to which they are attached.

Early manufacturers and retailers generally classed integrated snorkel masks by the number of breathing tubes projecting from their tops and sides. Their terse product descriptions often read: "single snorkel mask", "twin snorkel mask", "double snorkel mask" or "dual snorkel mask".

[ 75 ] Integrated snorkel construction [ edit ] An integrated snorkel consists essentially of a tube topped with a shut-off valve to block water ingress during immersion, and opening at the bottom into the interior of a modified diving mask via sockets moulded into the rubber of the skirt or the plastic of the frame.

Shut-off valves fitted to older snorkels Integrated snorkel tubes are made of strong but lightweight rigid materials, usually a tough plastic. At the top end, they are fitted with valves made of plastic, rubber, or more recently, silicone. Three typical first generation shut-off valves are illustrated.

A.

Ball valve using a ping-pong ball in a cage to prevent water ingress when submerged. This device may be the most common and familiar valve used on first-generation snorkels, whether separate or integrated.

B.

Hinged "gamma" valve to prevent water ingress when submerged. This device was invented in 1954 by Luigi Ferraro , fitted as standard on every Cressi-sub mask with integrated breathing tubes and granted US patent 2,815,751 on 10 December 1957.

[ 76 ] C.

Sliding float valve to prevent water ingress when submerged. This device was used on Britmarine brand snorkels manufactured by the Haffenden company in Sandwich, Kent during the 1960s.

Integrated snorkels must be fitted with valves to shut off the snorkel's air inlet when submerged or water will pour into the opening at the top and flood the interior of the mask. Snorkels are attached to sockets on the top or the sides of the mask.

The skirt of the diving mask attached to the snorkel is made of rubber, a synthetic elastomer, or latterly a silicone elastomer. First-generation snorkel masks have a single oval, round or rounded triangular lens retained in a groove in the skirt of the mask by a metal clamp. An adjustable head strap or harness ensures a snug fit on the wearer's face. The body of a mask with full-face coverage is fitted with a chinpiece to enable a complete leak-tight enclosure of the face, and to prevent the buoyancy of the mask from lifting it up the face and exposing the mouth.

Some designs had unusual features. One design separated the eyes and the nose into separate mask compartments to reduce fogging and dead space. Others enabled the user to remove integrated snorkels and insert plugs instead, converting the snorkel-mask into an ordinary diving mask. Second generation snorkel-masks may enclose the nose and the mouth within an inner orinasal pocket which may be directly connected to the single snorkel with its float valve at the upper end.

Half-face snorkel masks [ edit ] Half-face snorkel-masks, or integrated snorkel half-masks, are based on standard diving half-masks with built-in breathing tubes topped with float valves. They cover the eyes and the nose only, excluding the mouth altogether. The integral snorkels enable swimmers to keep their mouths closed, inhaling and exhaling air through their noses instead, while they are at, or just below, the surface of the water. When the snorkel tops submerge, their float activated valves are supposed to shut off automatically, blocking nasal respiration and preventing mask flooding.

[ citation needed ] Apart from the integral tubes and their sockets, older snorkel-half-masks generally used the same lenses, skirts and straps used for standard diving masks without snorkels. Several models of this kind could be converted to standard masks by replacing their detachable tubes with air- and water-tight plugs. Conversely, the 1950s Typhoon Super Star and the modern-retro Fish Brand M4D diving half-masks came with sealed but snorkel-ready sockets at the top of the skirt moulding.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The 1950s US Divers "Marino" hybrid comprised a single snorkel mask with eye and nose coverage only and a separate snorkel for the mouth.

[ 79 ] There are numerous mid-twentieth-century examples of commercially available snorkel-masks covering the eyes and the nose only, requiring the user to breathe through the nose while face down on the surface, but allowing immediate mouth breathing in an emergency if the head is lifted so that the mouth clears the water. New-generation versions remain relatively rare commodities in the early twenty-first century.

[ citation needed ] Full-face snorkel masks [ edit ] Ocean Reef snorkel mask Snorkelling equipment: FFSM, fins and underwater camera Full-face snorkel masks (FFSMs) allow users to breathe nasally or orally and can avoid gag reflex in response to standard snorkel mouthpieces. The breathing air path through a full-face snorkel mask can vary depending on basic layout and internal details.

Some first-generation snorkel masks were full-face masks covering the eyes, nose and mouth, while others excluded the mouth, covering the eyes and the nose only. They did not use an orinasal pocket, and had a two-directional airflow, with a large dead space, and mixing of fresh and exhaled air in the mask volume.
Most second-generation snorkel-masks are full-face masks covering the eyes, nose and mouth. The integral snorkel of a second generation full-face snorkel mask may have separate channels for inhaled and exhaled air to minimise mechanical dead space, which is the volume of exhaled air inhaled on the next breath. It is not practicable to eliminate all mechanical dead space.

In all cases fresh air enters through the snorkel tube at the top of the mask when the user inhales. This passes into the upper part of the mask and over the inner face of the viewport. If there is an inner divider isolating an orinasal pocket, air from the upper section will pass into it via holes provided for that purpose. These holes may be fitted with non-return valves. The air then enters the user's nose or mouth into the anatomical air passages, and some reaches the alveoli of the lungs, where gas exchange with the blood occurs. On exhalation, air passes back into the orinasal pocket, and if there are non-return valves on the inlet ports, and the orinasal pocket seals correctly against the user's face, it is constrained to pass through the exhaust ducting, either to an alternative exhaust tube in the snorkel, or to exhaust ports in the body of the mask, and out into the surroundings, either above or into the water. If there are functioning non-return valves in the exhaust ducting at any point, and no leaks to other air spaces, the exhaled air will not return to the orinasal pocket by this route on inhalation. The exact positioning of the non-return valves in the inhalation and exhalation parts of the circuit may affect the effective dead space to some extent, but their presence in both parts, and a small orinasal pocket volume, are critical to minimising carbon dioxide buildup, and consequent hypercapnia. It is also necessary that the orinasal pocket skirt seal against the face between the two inner compartments is effective if the mask relies on non-return valves in the orinasal moulding to prevent backflow to the upper compartment.

[ 4 ] The orinasal pocket and one way airflow prevent warm, moisture saturated, exhaled air from flowing over the inside surface of the viewport, which reduces the amount of fogging. 
The exhaust ports lead from the orinasal pocket to the outside of the mask, either directly, or through ducting in the sides of the mask. An exhaust port at the bottom of the orinasal pocket can drain moderate quantities of water from inside the orinasal chamber. 
Other positions for exhaust ports have been through alternative snorkel channels, and at the temples, which reduce hydrostatic back pressure at the cost of a longer flow path with more frictional resistance. Manually blocking temple exhaust ports and forcibly exhaling will drain water from the mask interior through a chin drain port. Design details of ducting and valves will affect breathing effort at different flow rates. Variations on this system are used by several manufacturers with a history of manufacturing breathing apparatus for scuba diving and industrial breathing apparatus. They generally provide warnings that the masks are not suitable for freediving or extended exertion.

[ 59 ] [ 4 ] Unless the snorkeler is able to equalize their ears without pinching their nose, a full-face snorkel mask can only be used at or near the surface, since the design makes it impossible to pinch the nose. A full-face snorkel mask with an orinasal pocket using non-return valves in the ports between the orinasal and main chambers to force a one-way flow of air to minimise dead space cannot be equalised by partially exhaling through the nose or mouth during descent, so will cause mask squeeze if used for diving.

[ 59 ] A problem with all full-face breathing masks is that the skirt must fit around the whole face well enough to form a reliable watertight seal, and since no two faces are the same shape, it is necessary for each user to test each model of mask for a good fit. Small amounts of water can be purged through the lower exhaust port where present, but in the event of major flooding, the whole mask must be removed to continue breathing, which requires quick release straps.

[ 59 ] Full-face masks are easy to use in ideal conditions, without special knowledge or training, so the user may not learn the skills of quick removal and clearing which may be necessary when conditions are less ideal, and the mask floods or necessary exertion increases carbon dioxide levels. Under these conditions the untrained and unskilled user may react inappropriately or panic, with a risk of drowning.

[ 59 ] FFSMs are considerably bulkier than half masks, and quite light for their size because of the tough plastic viewport, but the viewport is also easily scratched. Some models can be fitted with optional frames with corrective lenses, and wireless voice communications systems.

[ 59 ] As a result of an unusually high number of snorkeling deaths in Hawaii in 2019, [ 80 ] there is some suspicion that the design of the masks can result in buildup of excess carbon dioxide, particularly in cheaper versions of full-face snorkel masks marketed by manufacturers with no track record in breathing equipment.

High carbon dioxide levels are known to induce discomfort, a feeling of suffocation, an urgent need to breathe, and panic, which may be combined with irrational responses and a high risk of drowning. It is not certain that the masks are at fault, or which models, but the state of Hawaii has begun to track the equipment being used in cases of snorkeling fatalities. Besides the possibility that the masks, or at least some makes of the masks, have excessive dead space and are difficult to quickly remove in an emergency, other theories include the possibility that the masks make snorkeling accessible to people who have difficulty with traditional snorkeling equipment, and that ease of access may result in more snorkelers who lack basic skills and experience or have underlying medical conditions, possibly exacerbating problems that are unrelated to the type of equipment being used.

[ 81 ] During the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic related shortages , some full-face snorkel masks were adapted to use as oxygen dispensing emergency respiratory masks by using 3D printed adaptors and carrying out minimal modifications to the original mask.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] French sportwear and snorkel masks producer Decathlon temporarily discontinued its sale of snorkel masks, redirecting them toward medical staff, patients and 3D printer operations.

[ 85 ] Associated equipment [ edit ] Typical snorkeling equipment: snorkel, diving mask and swimfins.

Child's snorkel, worn with swim goggles Woman wearing snorkeling vest Main articles: Diving mask , Swimfin , Wetsuit , and Dry suit Vision aids If a separate snorkel is used, the user will usually wear a diving half mask or swimming goggles to improve underwater vision . By creating an airspace in front of the cornea, the mask enables the snorkeler to see clearly underwater. Scuba- and freediving masks consist of flat lenses, also known as a faceplate, a soft rubber skirt, which encloses the nose and seals against the face, and a head strap to hold the mask in place. There are different styles and shapes, which range from oval shaped models to lower internal volume masks and may be made from different materials; common choices are silicone and rubber. A snorkeler who remains at the surface can use swimmer's goggles which do not enclose the nose, as there is no need to equalise the internal pressure. In this case a nose clip may be used if needed.

Swimming aids The most common swimming aids used by snorkellers are swimfins. A snorkelling vest may be used for buoyancy.

Environmental protection It is common for snorkellers to wear protection against exposure to cold water and the ultra-violet in sunlight. A wetsuit is most popular for thermal protection, and a wetsuit, diving skins or a rash vest provide various levels of UV protection. Often worn by snorkellers during the 1950s and early 1960s, dry suits have seen something of a resurgence in the new millennium for surface snorkelling in lakes and rivers.

Safety and competition standards [ edit ] To comply with the current European standard EN 1972 (2015), a tube snorkel for users with larger lung capacities should not exceed 38 centimeters (15 in) in length and 230 cubic centimeters (14 cu. in.) in internal volume, while the corresponding figures for users with smaller lung capacities are 35 cm (14 in) and 150 cc (9¼ cu. in.) respectively.

[ 50 ] Integrated snorkel masks were specifically excluded from the scope of the world's first national standard on snorkels and face masks, British Standard BS 4532 of 1969: "Combined masks and snorkels in which the snorkel tubes open into the face masks are not acceptable under the terms of this specification". There is currently (2023) no definitive standard for performance of full-face snorkel masks or other forms of integrated mask and snorkel, but there are standards for similar equipment which may be partially applicable, and may be useful to estimate probable safety in the absence of legal requirements.

[ 4 ] Current World Underwater Federation (CMAS) Surface Finswimming Rules (2017) require snorkels used in official competitions to have a total length between 43 and 48 cm (17 and 19 in) and to have an inner diameter between 1.5 and 2.3 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 and 1 in).

[ 86 ] A full-face snorkel mask may be considered as combining the technology of tube snorkels and gas masks , and to a considerably lesser extent, of full-face scuba masks, which combine the technology of gas masks and scuba regulators , but the snorkel mask does not contain a pressure reducing mechanism for breathing gas, and is not intended for use at significant depths underwater. The safety and ergonomic requirements for gas masks are logically the most directly applicable, and some of the requirements for snorkels, such as EN 1972 (Diving equipment - Snorkels - Requirements and test methods), will also apply. Specifically, the maximum dead space volume of 230 cc is relevant, as tube bore and length are not relevant if the breathing passage is a one-way circuit for the tube component, and breathing effort limit of 10 mbar (100 mm water column, 0.1 msw ) for both inhalation and exhalation is relevant.

[ 4 ] Most functional requirements for compressed air breathing apparatus, such as specified in EN 250 (Respiratory equipment. Open-circuit self-contained compressed air diving apparatus. Requirements, testing, marking), are not logically relevant as the snorkel mask does not use compressed air or supply air at raised ambient pressures.

[ 4 ] EN 136 (Respiratory protective devices - Full-face masks - Requirements, testing and marking) has relevance for some aspects of performance, and gives a maximum limit for concentration of carbon dioxide in masks with orinasal pockets of 1% at a ventilation rate of 50 litres per minute The carbon dioxide limit is the same for EN 1972 and EN 136. This criterion has been used by at least one manufacturer of FFSMs.

[ 4 ] For comparison, the US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set limits for the acceptable concentration of carbon dioxide in workplace environments. These are 0.5% by volume (5000 ppm) for continuous exposure, (10 hour shift periods in 40 hour working weeks), and a short term exposure limit of 3% (for periods of up to 15 minutes).

[ 4 ] The British Standards Institution published British standard BS 8647 entitled "Respiratory equipment – Full-face snorkel masks – Specification" [ 51 ] in October 2024. This publication is the world's first Standard, national or international, dedicated to regulating snorkel-masks with full-face coverage and enabling the user to breathe through the nose and the mouth.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Roberts, Fred M. (1963).

Basic Scuba: Self contained underwater breathing apparatus: Its operation, maintenance and use (2nd ed.). New York: Van Nostrand Reinholdt.

^ Blount, Steve; Taylor, Herb (1984).

The Joy of Snorkeling . New York, NY: Pisces Book Company. p. 21.

^ a b c " Arrêté du 2 août 1989 portant suspension de la fabrication, de l'importation, de la mise sur le marché et ordonnant le retrait des masques de plongée comportant un tuba incorporé muni d'une balle de ping-pong [Order of August 2, 1989 suspending the manufacture, importation, placing on the market and ordering the withdrawal of diving masks containing an incorporated snorkel fitted with a ping-pong ball]" .

Légifrance (in French).

Archived from the original on 21 December 2023 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h "Safety of Ocean Reef Full Face Snorkeling Masks" (PDF) .

snorkeling.oceanreefgroup.com . 15 October 2019.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

^ a b Dead space ratio V d /V t is the ratio of dead space volume V d to inhaled (tidal) volume V t .

Quinn, M; St Lucia, K; Rizzo, A. (19 February 2023).

"Anatomy, Anatomic Dead Space" .

StatPearls [Internet] . Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing.

^ Ogle, W.

"Aristotle on the parts of animals, tr. with notes by W. Ogle" .

Internet Archive . Retrieved 20 May 2013 .

Just then as divers are sometimes provided with instruments for respiration, through which they can draw air from above the water, and thus may remain for a long time under the sea, so also have elephants been furnished by nature with their lengthened nostril; and, whenever they have to traverse the water, they lift this up above the surface and breathe through it.

^ "Online gallery. Leonardo da Vinci. Diving Apparatus" .

British Library . Archived from the original on 7 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ " El traje de buceo de Leonardo da Vinci [Leonardo da Vinci's diving suit]" .

Buceo Ibérico (in Spanish). 26 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ a b Doukan, Gilbert (1957).

The World Beneath The Waves . Universal Digital Library. John De Graff, Inc.

^ See, for example, Faustolo Rambelli: "Sulle maschere da sub, e qualche autorespiratore, ante II G. M.", HDS Notizie No. 28 November 2003, p. 19. Retrieved on 20 February 2019 at https://www.hdsitalia.org/sites/www.hdsitalia.org/files/documenti/HDSN28.pdf Archived 6 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Espacenet – Original document" .

worldwide.espacenet.com .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ US patent 1845263 , Girden, Barney B., "Swimming device", issued 16 February 1932 Archived 29 December 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ US patent 1901219 , Joseph L. Belcher, "Breathing apparatus", issued 14 March 1933 Archived 6 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Perrier, Alain (2008).

250 Réponses aux questions du plongeur curieux [250 Answers to the curious diver's questions] (in French). Editions de Gerfaut. p. 70.

^ " Un masque français révolutionnaire [A revolutionary French mask]" .

le-scaphandrier.blog4ever.com (in French).

Archived from the original on 16 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ " Le Scaphandre, découverte d'un nouveau monde – Photos d'Expositions [The diving suit, discovery of a new world – Exhibition photos]" .

cmaexpositions.canalblog.com (in French). 12 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 20 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ US patent 2317237 , Charles H. Wilen, "Swimmer's mask'", issued 20 April 1943 Archived 6 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ "US Design Patent 138286 Swimmer's mask " (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ "Underwater swimming equipment".

Consumer Reports . Vol. 22, no. 7. July 1957. pp.

324– 330.

^ Hopkins, Adam (20 December 1973). "Into the undersea world".

The Sunday Times . p. 45.

^ "Majorca Sub" . Archived from the original on 2009-06-10 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ "Balco Mask 558" .

fishingmegashop.com .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 19 February 2019 .

^ "US Design Patent 775,722, Mask with snorkel " (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ FR patent 847848 , Maxime Forjot & Albert Méjean, " Masque pour l'exploration sous-marine avec visibilité normale et toutes autres applications ", issued 10 July 1939 ^ de Latil, Pierre (August 1949).

" Masques et respirateurs sous-marins [Underwater masks and respirators]" .

Le Chasseur Français (in French). No. 630. p. 621.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ "Forum der Historischen Tauchergesellschaft e.V.  •  Thema anzeigen – Erste Einglasmaske, ab wann? [Forum of the Historical Diving Society e.V. • Show topic – First single-lens mask, when?]" .

forum.historische-tauchergesellschaft.de (in German).

Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ "The ripping-off of Maxime's mask" .

Divernet .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ "Human Submarine Shoots Fish with Arrows | Modern Mechanix" . 2015-09-16. Archived from the original on 16 September 2015 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Embocadura hermetica para tubos respiratorios de caza submarina y otras aplicaciones [Airtight mouthpiece for respiratory tubes for underwater hunting and other applications]" .

patentados.com (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2019 .

^ "Combined mask-tube".

Neptune . Vol. 1, no. 3. January 1956. p. 23.

^ US patent 2317236 , Alexandre Kramarenko, "Breathing apparatus for swimmers", issued 20 April 1943 Archived 6 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Devaux, Robert (1947).

Initiation à la chasse sous-marine . Cannes: Imprimerie Robaudy. p. 64.

^ Gilliam, Bret.

"Dick Bonin, founder of Scubapro" .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2019 . Retrieved 17 February 2019 .

^ "Vintage Double Hose – Index page" .

vintagedoublehose.com .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2023 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ "Dacor diving equipment guide 1968" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 March 2019 . Retrieved 17 February 2019 .

^ a b Alexander, John E. (1977). "Allergic reactions to mask skirts, regulator mouthpieces and snorkel mouthpieces".

Journal of the South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society .

7 (2): 44– 45.

^ "Snorkel" .

dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ Kirby, Mary (2 April 1950). "Fins For Fishermen: Former Lifeguard Turns Manufacturer".

The Register . Santa Ana, California. p. 14.

^ "Advertisement".

Honolulu Star-Bulletin . Honolulu, Hawaii. 10 November 1950. p. 21.

^ "Skin Diver First Issue" (PDF) .

divinghistory.org .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 25 June 2022 .

^ VanderKogel, Albert; Lardner, Rex (1955).

Underwater sport . New York: Henry Holt and Company. pp.

22– 26.

^ Broadhurst, Alan (May–June 1957). "Let's get it right".

Triton . Vol. 2, no. 3. pp.

20– 21.

^ Brookes, G.F. (July–August 1957). "Watch your language".

Triton . Vol. 2, no. 4. p. 12.

^ British Standards Institution: BS 4532: Specification for snorkels and face masks . London: British Standards Institution. 1969.

^ Amendment Slip No. 1 to BS 4532:1969 Snorkels and face masks . London: British Standards Institution. 30 December 1977.

^ Deutsches Institut für Normung: DIN 7878: Tauch-Zubehör: Schnorchel. Maße. Anforderungen. Prüfung (Diving accessories for skin divers; snorkel; technical requirements of safety, testing) . Berlin/Cologne: Beuth Verlag. 1980.

^ Deutsches Institut für Normung: DIN 7878: Tauch-Zubehör: Schnorchel. Sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen und Prüfung (Diving accessories for skin divers; snorkel; safety requirements and testing) . Berlin/Cologne: Beuth Verlag. 1991.

^ Austrian Standards International: ÖNORM S 4223: Tauch-Zubehör; Schnorchel; Abmessungen, sicherheitstechnische Anforderungen, Prüfung, Normkennzeichnung. Diving accessories; snorkel; dimensions, safety requirements, testing, marking of conformity , Vienna: Austrian Standards International, 1988.

^ British Standards Institution: BS EN 1972: Diving accessories – Snorkels – Safety requirements and test methods . London: British Standards Institution. 1997.

^ a b BS EN 1972: Diving equipment - Snorkels - Requirements and test methods . London: British Standards Institution. 2015.

^ a b British Standards Institution: BS 8647: Respiratory equipment – Full-face snorkel masks – Specification . London: British Standards Institution. 2024.

^ "Air Composition" . The Engineering ToolBox . Retrieved 2017-07-04 .

The composition of air is unchanged until elevation of approximately 10.000 m ^ Hallett, S.; Toro, F; Ashurst, J.V. (1 May 2023).

"Physiology, Tidal Volume" .

StatPearls [Internet] . Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 29494108 .

^ Intagliata, S.; Rizzo, A.; Gossman, W. (4 July 2023). "Physiology, Lung Dead Space".

StatPearls [Internet] . Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 29494107 .

^ Shykoff, Barbara; Warkander, Dan (28 February 2018).

"What's All the Fuss about CO 2 in Breathing Gas?" .

Shearwater.com .

^ Stigler, R. (1913). "Die Taucherei".

Fortschritte der Naturwissenschaftlichen Forschung (in German).

IX . Berlin/Wien.

^ "Immersion Pulmonary Oedema" .

www.ukdmc.org . UK Diving Medical Committee . Retrieved 6 June 2022 .

^ "Unit 3- Diving Skills" (PDF) .

Underwater World . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c d e f "Full-Face Snorkeling Masks: Pros And Cons" .

dipndive.com .

Archived from the original on 24 September 2023 . Retrieved 26 December 2023 .

^ Snorkel Ken (1 August 2015).

"Full Face Snorkel Mask Reviews: Tribord EasyBreathe Alternatives and Best Prices" .

The Snorkel Store .

Archived from the original on 2017-11-29 . Retrieved 2023-12-21 .

^ a b "US patent 5,404,872, Splash-guard for snorkel tubes " (PDF) . 11 April 1995.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 March 2019 . Retrieved 1 March 2019 .

^ "Snorkel Care" .

The Scuba Doctor .

Archived from the original on 2023-11-15 . Retrieved 2023-12-21 .

^ a b "Snorkels: Pros & Cons" . DAN Southern Africa. 10 April 2017 . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

^ "Monofin: Finswimming in the UK : Finswimming Snorkels" .

monofin.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ NOAA Diving Program (U.S.) (December 1979). "4 - Diving equipment". In Miller, James W. (ed.).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (2nd ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: US Department of Commerce: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Ocean Engineering. p. 24.

^ "Snorkels" .

dipndive.com . Retrieved 13 January 2024 .

^ PADI Diver Manual . Santa Ana, CA: PADI. 1983. p. 17.

^ Serebrenitsky, P. P. (1969).

" Техника подводного спорта [Underwater sports equipment]" . Lenizdat. p. 92. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 22 February 2019 .

.

^ "Folding Snorkel - is a Collapsible One for You? Fold It up and Put It Away" .

www.scuba-diving-smiles.com .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2019 . Retrieved 22 February 2019 .

^ Cross, Ian (2019-08-07).

"Ameo Powerbreather - Unique Twin Tube Fresh Air Training Snorkel Review" .

Swimming Without Stress .

Archived from the original on 2022-08-14 . Retrieved 2023-12-21 .

^ "Phelps: Swimming Gear: Competitive Swim Store" .

www.michaelphelps.com .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2019 . Retrieved 22 February 2019 .

^ Codrington, Simon (1954).

Guide to underwater hunting . London: Adlard Coles. pp.

17– 18.

^ Lumière, Cornel (1956).

Beneath the seven seas . London: Hutchinson. pp.

18– 20, 30.

^ Small, Peter (1957).

Your guide to underwater adventure . London: Lutterworth Press. p. 5.

^ "Early Mfg. & Retailers - Florida Frogman No.19" . Archived from the original on 12 April 2009 . Retrieved 26 February 2019 .

^ "US Patent US2815751: Breathing valve for a submarine mask " (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 27 February 2019 .

^ "The Diving Mask" .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 24 February 2020 .

^ "M4D" .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2023 . Retrieved 24 February 2020 .

^ "Early Mfg. & Retailers - US Divers No.43" .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2019 .

^ "Full Face Snorkel Mask Dangers : What's all the Hub Bub, Bub? -" . 11 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ "Increasingly popular full-face snorkel masks raise safety concerns - CBS News" .

CBS News . 14 March 2018.

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ Opoczynski, David (23 March 2020).

"Coronavirus : quand les inventeurs viennent à la rescousse des hôpitaux" .

leparisien.fr .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2020 . Retrieved 24 March 2020 .

^ "Emergency mask for hospital ventilators" .

YouTube . 21 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 25 March 2020 . Retrieved 1 April 2020 .

^ "Easy COVID 19 emergency mask for hospital ventilators" .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2020 . Retrieved 24 March 2020 .

^ "Pourquoi ne pas distribuer des masques de plongée Décathlon? BFMTV répond à vos questions [Why not distribute Decathlon diving masks? BFMTV answers your questions]" .

YouTube (in French). 31 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 April 2020 .

^ CMAS Finswimming Rules Version 2017/01 . p. 6.

Archived from the original on 2 March 2019 . Retrieved 19 February 2019 .

v t e Breathing apparatus High altitude breathing apparatus Aviation breathing apparatus Emergency oxygen system Mountaineering breathing apparatus Occupational breathing apparatus Respirator Regulated by NIOSH and others Gas mask Canister Supplied-air respirator Self-contained breathing apparatus Self-contained self-rescue device Particulate respirator N95 respirator Dust mask Powered air-purifying respirator Chemical cartridge Facepieces Smoke hood Elastomeric respirator Regulations 42 CFR 84 (United States) ANSI K13.1-1973 EN 149/14683/143 (Europe) GB2626 (China), and others Medical breathing apparatus Anaesthetic machine Bubble CPAP Continuous positive airway pressure Resuscitator Bag valve mask Pocket mask Ventilator Iron lung Non-invasive ventilation Oxygen therapy Hyperbaric medicine Built-in breathing system Positive airway pressure Respiratory gas humidification Supplemental oxygen Nasal cannula Reservoir cannula Non-rebreather mask Oxygen hood Oxygen mask Oxygen tent Partial rebreather mask Simple face mask Venturi mask Underwater breathing apparatus Open-circuit scuba Diving helmet Diving rebreather Full-face diving mask Surface-supplied diving equipment Snorkel Helicopter escape set Submarine escape set Atmospheric diving suit Gas extender Helium reclaim system User respiratory interface Breathing mask Full facepiece Half mask orinasal mask General Breathing gas Breathing performance of regulators Dead space Emergency gas supply Escape breathing apparatus Facepiece Hazmat suit Negative pressure breathing Open circuit breathing apparatus Oxygen concentrator Positive pressure breathing Respiratory protective equipment Pressure regulator Constant flow regulator Demand valve Rebreather Closed circuit rebreather Counterlung Oxygen rebreather Carbon dioxide scrubber Semi-closed circuit Work of breathing Escape respirator Category Commons Glossary v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐dldpw
Cached time: 20250817050524
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.794 seconds
Real time usage: 2.028 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11251/1000000
Revision size: 95283/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 690714/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17382/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 308820/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.915/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9998983/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1459.220      1 -total
 51.34%  749.094      1 Template:Reflist
 19.60%  286.079     47 Template:Cite_web
 15.63%  228.139      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 14.42%  210.431     19 Template:Cite_book
  9.29%  135.604     36 Template:Navbox
  9.00%  131.350      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  7.34%  107.034      9 Template:Citation_needed
  7.30%  106.520     12 Template:Fix
  7.21%  105.208      1 Template:Breathing_apparatus Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12559296:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050524 and revision id 1301215727. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Snorkel_(swimming)&oldid=1301215727 " Categories : Swimming equipment Underwater diving equipment Breathing apparatus Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2023 Pages with broken anchors Pages containing broken anchor template with unsupported parameters Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2023 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 17:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Snorkel (swimming) 22 languages Add topic

