Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Party program Toggle Party program subsection 2.1 Basic principles 2.2 Education 2.3 Civil rights 2.4 Democracy 2.5 Social policy 2.6 Health policy 2.7 Economic Policy 2.8 European Union 2.9 Foreign Policy 3 Leadership 4 Federal state parties 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Liberal Democrats (Germany) 6 languages Dansk Deutsch Español 한국어 Plattdüütsch Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political party in Germany Liberal Democrats Liberale Demokraten Abbreviation LD Chairperson Paul Vossiek General Secretary Philipp Gräser Founder Ulrich Krüger Founded 28 November 1982 ; 42 years ago ( 1982-11-28 ) Split from Free Democratic Party Headquarters Aachen , North Rhine-Westphalia [ 1 ] Membership (2023) 100 Ideology Liberalism ( German ) Social liberalism Progressivism Pro-Europeanism Political position Centre to Centre-left Colours Orange Bundestag 0 / 709 State Parliaments 0 / 1,821 European Parliament 0 / 96 Website liberale-demokraten .de Politics of Germany Political parties Elections This article is part of a series on Liberalism in Germany Ideologies Christian democracy Classical Economic Green National Neo Ordo Radical Social Principles Civil and political rights Due process Equality before the law Freedom economic press religion speech Liberal democracy Popular sovereignty Rule of law Social justice History Hambach Festival March Revolution November Revolution Old Liberals Weimar Constitution Resistance to Nazism Peaceful Revolution People Barth Bennigsen Brentano Dahrendorf Dehler Flach Genscher Gerlach Harnack Heuss Humboldt Kant Koch Külz Lambsdorff Lasker Lindner Maier Mommsen Naumann Preuß Rathenau Richter Röpke Scheel Schlözer Stresemann Unruh Weber Westerwelle Parties Active Free Democratic Party (FDP) Liberal Democrats (LD) Party of Humanists (PdH) South Schleswig Voters' Association (SSW) Volt Deutschland Defunct Democratic Union (DV) Free-minded People's Party (FVP) Free-minded Union (FVG) Free People's Party (FVP) German Democratic Party (DDP) German Free-minded Party (DFP) German People's Party (DtVP) German People's Party (DVP) German Progress Party (DFP) German State Party (DStP) Imperial Liberal Party Liberal Union National Liberal Party (NLP) National-Social Association (NSV) Old Liberals Progressive People's Party (FVP) Organizations Active Friedrich Naumann Foundation German Taxpayers Federation Defunct Berliner Mittwochsgesellschaft Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold Young German Order Media Berliner Tageblatt Cicero Focus Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Frankfurter Zeitung Der Freitag Handelsblatt Der Spiegel Stern Süddeutsche Zeitung Der Tagesspiegel Vossische Zeitung Wirtschaftswoche Die Zeit Related topics Anti-clericalism Grundgesetz wehrhafte Demokratie Politics of Germany Conservatism Max Weber and German politics Wandel durch Handel Liberalism portal Germany portal v t e The Liberal Democrats – The Social Liberals ( German : Liberale Demokraten – Die Sozialliberalen ), abbreviated to LD , is a minor social liberal party in Germany , founded in 1982 and currently led by Paul Vossiek.

History [ edit ] The party was founded on 28 November 1982 mainly by former members of the Free Democratic Party , after the FDP had left the social-liberal coalition led by Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and formed a new government with the conservative Christian Democratic Union .

[ 2 ] On 21 March 2017, the Party held a joint press conference along with the Pirate Party Germany , the Party of Humanists , the New Liberals , the Transhuman Party Germany, and the youth organization of The Left to announce a "social liberal proclamation" ( German : Sozialliberale Erklärung ) and better cooperation among the participating organizations.

[ 3 ] The proclamation was followed by a joint press statement with the New Liberals in early 2020, declaring an intent of embracing a close cooperation between the parties in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia .

[ 4 ] Party program [ edit ] Basic principles [ edit ] The Liberal Democrats passed their "social-liberal principles" ( German : Sozialliberale Leitgedanken ) in their 47th general assembly in Göttingen . Therein, they call for "human dignity through self-determination", "equality of all mankind", "progress through reason" and "democratisation of society".

[ 5 ] Education [ edit ] For the Liberal Democrats, education is deemed as "one of the most important goals of social liberal politics". They call for a federally uniform educational system and centralised exams. The educational system shall be reformed as a comprehensive school system. They also call for the replacement of the current religious education through a single class taken by all students regardless of religious and cultural affiliation.

[ 6 ] Civil rights [ edit ] As outlined in their "social-liberal principles", the Liberal Democrats advocate for "equal civil rights for all human beings". Securing privacy is one of the core elements of their policy. They demand the extension of the secrecy of correspondence to an overall secrecy of communications including digital communication. Furthermore, they oppose data retention without prior suspicion as well as eavesdropping operations on homes.

[ 7 ] The Liberal Democrats refer to personal data as "property of the data subject" and demand user-friendly privacy. They urge for a right to end-to-end encrypted communication and oppose the introduction of voting machines .

[ 8 ] Amongst equal rights for all human beings, they demand equal rights and acceptance for homosexual couples and other forms of relationship.

[ 9 ] They also urge to abolish the blood donation prohibition for homosexual people in Germany.

[ 10 ] Democracy [ edit ] The Liberal Democrats call for decreasing the electoral threshold , a single transferable vote and lowering the voting age to 16. They claim that non-citizens with a long-term main residence in Germany are also part of the multicultural society and shall be eligible to vote. They also demand to introduce more direct democratic elements and a stricter separation of church and state .

[ 11 ] Social policy [ edit ] The Liberal Democrats call for the introduction of an unconditional basic income , in which all tax-financed social assistance of the state is combined.

[ 12 ] This should be available immediately via an adjustment of the tax curve in the event of income shortfalls, without representing an additional income for people with high incomes.

[ 12 ] They also urge to "actively fight against homelessness through housing instead of pushing the topic into the background". To that end, they propose a Housing First solution and demand to end financial subsidies for defensive architecture .

[ 13 ] Health policy [ edit ] The Liberal Democrats favour to establish a national healthcare scheme similar to the British National Health Service . Additional coverage through complementary insurances shall remain possible. They focus on the infrastructure, personnel as well as digitalisation of the healthcare system.

Mental health is also one of the main points in their health policy.

[ 10 ] They also demand to reform various legal frameworks. As such, they outline conditions under which assisted suicide shall be legalised. They urge to abolish the prohibition of blood donation by homosexual individuals as well as to ease access to abortion and assisted reproductive technology .

[ 10 ] Economic Policy [ edit ] The Liberal Democrats call for a social market economy . They define social market economy as an economy in which the state shall interfere as less as possible. However at the point at which the invisible hand fails and the economy acts in disfavour of society, the state shall interfere. Safeguarding access to basic supplies and infrastructure has the highest priority in their economic policy. They also take high priority in ensuring labor welfare and outline it as a main condition for access to any subventions from the state. Providing the same wage for the same work regardless of a person's gender is also considered part of the fair working conditions they demand.

[ 14 ] They favor a structural policy that focuses on innovation and adjustment. They demand to uphold a balanced budget amendment with little exceptions to it. They are also proposing to reform the tax system partially while sustaining progressive taxation . Furthermore, they demand to establish a fiscal union within the European Union .

[ 14 ] European Union [ edit ] The Liberal Democrats favour the European Union and demand to further deepen the Union. To do so, they urge to reform the EU as a "European Republic" with a European Parliament with more competences at its core. They call for establishing a common European government and constitution.

[ 15 ] The Liberal Democrats urge for solutions at EU-level for various topics, such as in asylum and migration policy, labour policy as well as a common defense policy through establishing an EU-Army.

[ 15 ] Furthermore, they propose to establish a fiscal union.

[ 14 ] Foreign Policy [ edit ] The Liberal Democrats make positive remarks on how the European Economic Community evolved into the EU and emphasise the advantages of international cooperation.

[ 14 ] As such, they demand to increase development aid and establish a global partnership in the fight against poverty. Furthermore, they demand to reform the United Nations with a UN Parliamentary Assembly representing humankind at its core. The reformed UN shall also establish a UN-Army, making national armies unnecessary.

[ 16 ] The Liberal Democrats demand that military actions shall always be seen as a last resort and always follow legitimation through a UN resolution or a casus foederis . They also condemn violations to international law in terms of invasion, occupation, resettlements and coups in foreign territory while endorsing nonviolent resistances of groups of people for their right of self-determination . They consider aiming for multilateral agreements to be the best way to resolve conflicts.

[ 16 ] Leadership [ edit ] The current federal committee of the Liberal Democrats was elected through postal vote and consists of five members: [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Paul Vossiek (Party Leader) Finn-Luca Plötz (Deputy Chair) Josephine Lode (Deputy Chair) Philipp Gräser (General Secretary) Jens Lünenstraß (Managing Director) Stefanie Hylla (Treasurer) Luca Kunert (Deputy Treasurer) Thorsten Rödel (Board Member) Moritz Weck (Board Member) Federal state parties [ edit ] Federal state party Chairman Election participation Baden-Württemberg Michael Kaiser [ 19 ] none Berlin Chris Ward [ 20 ] 2021 Berlin state election 2023 Berlin state election Lower Saxony Steve Bourne [ 21 ] none North Rhine-Westphalia Simon Kleinlützum [ 22 ] [ 23 ] 2017 North Rhine-Westphalia state election Saarland Alexander Heusel Philip Lukas none Saxony David Hildebrandt none References [ edit ] ^ "Impressum" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2022-03-24 .

^ "Geschichte" .

^ "Liberale Demokraten – Die Sozialliberalen –" .

liberale-demokraten.de . Archived from the original on 2020-08-08.

^ "Liberale Demokraten – Die Sozialliberalen –" .

liberale-demokraten.de . Archived from the original on 2020-07-22.

^ "Social-liberal Principles" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ "Education" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ "Privacy" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ "Digital Policy" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ "Youth & Family" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2014-07-06 .

^ a b c "Healthcare Policy" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ "Democracy Policy" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ a b "Bedingungsloses Grundeinkommen" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-04 .

^ "Social Policy" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ a b c d "Economic Policy" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ a b "Europe" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ a b "Foreign Policy & Security" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-15 .

^ "Federal Executive Board" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2022-02-01 .

^ "New Federal Executive Board Elected" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German). 28 January 2022 . Retrieved 2022-02-01 .

^ "Baden-Württemberg" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-12 .

^ "Berlin" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-12 .

^ "Niedersachsen" .

Liberale Demokraten - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-12-14 .

^ "Landesparteitag 2021" .

Liberale Demokraten NRW - Die Sozialliberalen (in German). 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 2021-09-12 .

^ "Personen" .

Liberale Demokraten NRW - Die Sozialliberalen (in German) . Retrieved 2021-09-12 .

External links [ edit ] Website of the Liberal Democrats Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberal_Democrats_(Germany)&oldid=1301171441 " Categories : Liberal parties in Germany Social liberal parties Pro-European political parties in Germany Political parties established in 1982 1982 establishments in West Germany Universal basic income in Germany Political parties supporting universal basic income Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox political party with unknown parameters Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 12:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberal Democrats (Germany) 6 languages Add topic

