Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Lexicology Toggle Lexicology subsection 1.1 Coinage 1.2 Similar terms 1.2.1 Analogous labels 1.2.2 Juvenoia 2 History 3 Causes 4 Effects Toggle Effects subsection 4.1 Social discrimination 4.2 Commercial gain 4.3 Governmental policy 4.4 Education 5 Combating ephebiphobia 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ephebiphobia 10 languages العربية Български Ελληνικά Euskara Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Македонски Русский Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fear of youth Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Youth rights Activities Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co.

Child Labor Deterrence Act Children's Online Privacy Protection Act Kids Online Safety Act Convention on the Rights of the Child Fair Labor Standards Act Hammer v. Dagenhart History of youth rights in the United States Morse v. Frederick Newsboys' strike of 1899 Prez Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms Wild in the Streets Theory / concepts Adultcentrism Adultism Ageism Criminalization Democracy Ephebiphobia Fear of children Free-range parenting Intergenerational equity Future generations Paternalism Social class Suffrage Taking Children Seriously Universal suffrage Unschooling Youth activism Youth detention center Youth empowerment Youth exclusion Youth suffrage Youth voice Issues Adolescent sexuality Age of candidacy Age of consent Age-of-consent reform Age of majority Age of marriage Behavior modification facility Child labour Children in the military Child marriage Compulsory education Conscription Corporal punishment at home at school in law Curfew Child abuse Emancipation of minors Gambling age Human rights and youth sport In loco parentis Juvenile delinquency Juvenile court Juvenile law Legal drinking age ( U.S. history ) Legal working age Minimum driving age Marriageable age Minor (law) Minors and abortion Restavec School leaving age Smoking age ( U.S. history ) Status offense Underage drinking in the US Voting age Youth-adult partnership Youth participation Youth politics Youth unemployment Youth voting Organizations United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child Akt Americans for a Society Free from Age Restrictions Canadian Youth for Choice Human Rights and Youth Rights Commission Common Cents Community Alliance for the Ethical Treatment of Youth DoSomething Future Coalition Global Youth Action Network High School Democrats of America Indian Youth Climate Network International Falcon Movement – Socialist Educational International Mermaids National Union of Students LGBT+ Campaign National Youth Rights Association One World Youth Project Queer Youth Network Students for a Democratic Society Freechild Project Three O'Clock Lobby UK Youth Parliament Youth International Party Youth Liberation of Ann Arbor The Youth Cafe Young Communist League of Canada Young Democrats of America World Federation of Democratic Youth People Fletcher Hanson Henry Holt Koroknay-Palicz Duff Males Postman Yaco Related Ages of consent in Asia Ages of consent in Europe Ages of consent in North America Ages of consent in Oceania Ages of consent in South America Ages of consent in the United States Animal rights Anti-racism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Feminism French petitions against age-of-consent laws Legal status of tattooing in European countries Legal status of tattooing in the United States Libertarianism Students' rights Youth Olympic Games Youth sports Youth wing Liberation theology Communism Socialism Marxism Youth rights Society portal v t e A group of teens Ephebiphobia is the fear of youth . First coined as the "fear or loathing of teenagers ", [ 1 ] the phenomenon is recognized today as the "inaccurate, exaggerated and sensational characterization of young people" in a range of settings around the world.

[ 2 ] Studies of the fear of youth occur in sociology and youth studies . It is distinguished from pedophobia by being more focused on adolescents than prepubescent children .

Lexicology [ edit ] Coinage [ edit ] The word ephebiphobia is formed from the Greek ἔφηβος éphēbos , meaning " youth " or " adolescent " and φόβος phóbos , meaning "fear" or " phobia ". The coinage of this term is attributed to a 1994 article by Kirk Astroth published in Phi Delta Kappan .

[ 3 ] Today, common usage occurs internationally by sociologists, government agencies, [ 4 ] and youth advocacy organizations that define ephebiphobia as an abnormal or irrational and persistent fear or loathing of teenagers or adolescence .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Similar terms [ edit ] Analogous labels [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( March 2020 ) The term paedophobia has gained popular acceptance in Europe to describe the aforementioned "fear of youth".

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Pediaphobia is the fear of infants and children.

Hebephobia (from the Greek ἥβη , hḗbē , "youth, puberty") has also been proposed [ citation needed ] . Similar terms include adultism , which is a predisposition towards adults that is biased against children and youth, and ageism , which describes discrimination against any person because of their age.

Juvenoia [ edit ] In the context of the 21st century, the neologism juvenoia has been used by publications such as The Christian Science Monitor to describe distaste and/or fear of the social culture associated with young people. The psychological distancing is prominently tied to advancements in technology and the exposure it facilitates to material that violates traditional values.

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] The fear of youth, along with fear of street culture and the fear of crime , is said to have been in Western culture for "time immemorial".

[ 10 ] Machiavelli is said to have realized that a fear of youth is what kept the city of Florence from keeping a standing army.

[ 11 ] Ancient Greece and medieval Venice are also said to have had floundering public policy because of their fear of youth.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Early American Puritanism has been seen as reliant on a fear of youth, who were seen as embodying adventure and enlightenment, and therefore were viewed as susceptible to "decadent morality ".

[ 14 ] During the Industrial Revolution , Western European and North American popular media was particularly driven to propagate the fear of children and youth in order to further the industrialization of schooling, [ 15 ] and eventually to remove young people from the workplace when their labor became unnecessary due to mechanization and the influx of new labor.

[ 16 ] Post- World War II France was said to have been stricken by concern for mal de jeunesse when they created policies that reflected their fear of youth. "Send them to summer camps, place others in reformatories, the rest should have some fresh air, build some athletic fields..." were the intentions of youth policies in that era.

[ 17 ] Following World War II the United States military identified the growing number of youth in the Deep South as a problematic scenario for national security . Analysts have suggested the upswing in the popular culture's fear of youth may be attributed to defense policies created in response to that threat.

[ 18 ] "In the 1990s public fear of adolescents mounted", caused by the "increased youth access to handguns , the syndicatization of territorial youth gangs into illegal drug cartels , racist stereotyping of urban youth, academic and political pandering, media frenzy, and a spate of high-profile school shootings of students by their fellow students".

[ 19 ] The Seattle Weekly specifically cited the fear of youth as the driving factor behind Seattle, Washington 's now-defunct Teen Dance Ordinance .

[ 20 ] The government of Prime Minister Tony Blair introduced the Anti-Social Behaviour Order in 1998, which has also been attributed directly to a fear of youth.

[ 21 ] Causes [ edit ] See also: Mid-Life Crisis § Characteristics , and Baby Boom Generation § Aging and end-of-life issues Media , marketers, politicians, youth workers and researchers have been implicated in perpetuating the fear of youth.

[ 22 ] Since young people in developed countries are expected to stay out of the workforce, any role for them outside that of consumer is potentially threatening to adults.

[ 23 ] Selling safety to parents and teachers has also been a driving force, as home security systems, cellphones, and computer surveillance usage is marketed to parents; and X-ray machines, metal detectors and closed-circuit television are increasingly sold to schools on the premise that young people are not to be trusted. These steps are in spite of the fact that experience consistently shows that monitoring youth does little to prevent violence or tragedy: the Columbine High School massacre occurred in a building with video surveillance and in-building police.

[ 24 ] The very creation of the terms youth , adolescence and teenager have all been attributed to the fear of youth.

[ 25 ] As the western world became more industrialized, young people were increasingly driven from the workforce , including involuntary and voluntary positions, and into increasingly total institutions where they lost personal autonomy in favor of social control .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Government policies outside of schools have been implicated as well, as over the last forty years curfews , anti- loitering and anti- cruising laws, and other legislation apparently targeted at teenagers have taken hold across the country. Courts have increasingly ruled against youth rights , as well.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Before the 1940s "teenagers" were not listed in newspaper headlines, because as a group they did not exist. The impact of youth since World War II on western society has been immense, largely driven by marketing that proponents them as the " Other ". In turn, youth are caused to behave in ways that appear different from adults. This has led to the phenomenon of youth, and in turn has created a perpetuated fear of them.

[ 30 ] Effects [ edit ] The fear of youth is thought to exist throughout the entire Western world .

[ 31 ] Sociologist Ray Oldenburg has attributed the generation gap and the "increasing segregation of youth from adults in American society " to "adult estrangement and fear of youth".

[ 32 ] At least one major economist has proposed that the fear of youth can have grave effects on the economic health of nations.

[ 33 ] A growing number of researchers report that the fear of youth affects the health of democracy , reporting that the consequential vilification of youth has in the past, and continues to presently undermine public, [ 34 ] social, political, [ 35 ] religious, [ 36 ] and cultural [ 37 ] participation among current and future generations.

As it affects young people themselves, ephebiphobia has been recognized as a barrier towards successful academic achievement, [ 38 ] a barrier to successful social intervention programs, [ 1 ] and as an indicator of the ineptitude of many adults to be successful parents.

[ 39 ] Social discrimination [ edit ] "Today citizens as a whole as well as people who work with children live in fear of youth in our homes and schools and on our streets".

[ 40 ] While "society loves their attractive bodies, youthfulness and commercial firepower", we also "vilify adolescents as a noncontributing drain on the economy and our democracy". In the mainstream media, young people are most often portrayed as self-absorbed and apathetic , uninterested in the common good or in advancing social goals.

[ 41 ] Many social programs and social critics view the fear of youth as a condemning force against youth throughout society, particularly when coupled with racism .

[ 42 ] Poet Gwendolyn Brooks was applauded for her consciousness-raising work around the fear of youth, particularly young African-Americans.

[ 43 ] Popular contemporary beliefs about adolescents are different from historical narratives; in the past youth were portrayed as "the future" and the "leaders of tomorrow"; today they are seen as "a source of worry, not potential," contributing to a fear of adolescents, especially racial and ethnic minorities.

[ 44 ] In turn this racist and adultist perspective informs urban law enforcement, [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] public schools , [ 49 ] and social services.

[ 50 ] Sociologists have suggested that much of the current spread of the fear of youth is due to "adult anxiety over the shifting racial mix in the general population".

[ 51 ] The effects of sexism are similarly reported to be amplified by ephebiphobia.

[ 52 ] However, New York University professor Pedro Noguera has suggested that the fear of youth extends beyond color boundaries, as " skateboarders , punks , even straight-laced suburban teenagers can evoke anxiety among adults by congregating in large numbers in places deemed off-limits to youth".

[ 53 ] The ability of youth to participate throughout society is seen as compromised because of the fear of youth, and is often disguised as a paternalism or protectionism among adults.

[ 54 ] Additionally, scholar Henry Jenkins , "links criticism of new media with fear of adolescents, who are the most eager adopters.

Teen culture seems meaningless and dangerous without an appreciation of its context".

[ 55 ] Commercial gain [ edit ] Academics specifically acknowledge the force of ephebiphobia in the commercial sector , where this fear of youth has been extensively exploited for financial gain.

[ 56 ] This is elaborated on by researchers and social critics who claim that popular media, including cinema and television, specifically exacerbated society's fear of youth for financial gain, [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] as one study reports, "Extreme fear of youth is an established media panic ".

[ 60 ] Pulp novels in the 1950s were mass-produced to specifically cash in on the growing fear of youth that was spreading throughout society.

[ 61 ] Ironically, it has also been said that popular media's effects on young people are not as powerful as the fear of youth, which drives the fear of technology and in turn perpetuates the fear of youth.

[ 62 ] Governmental policy [ edit ] Decision-making by government agencies, including public schools , policing and courts , have been found to be driven by the fear of youth.

[ 63 ] The fear of adolescents has been said to cause a disjunction between what is said about the value of young people and what is done to them in education and social services, and causes them to be seen, "primarily as threats—to persons, to institutions, to status quo ".

[ 64 ] A number of observers have indicated the deliberate perpetuation of mass social ephebiphobia in order to elicit particular public and social responses.

American sociologist Mike Males has identified trends among politicians and policy-makers of stoking the fear of youth among society in order to make headway in political campaigns and build popular support or otherwise "generate media sensation and public fear".

[ 65 ] Similarly, the fear of youth has been identified as the driving factor behind many governmental programs designed to combat so-called "youth violence," in which the actions of few youth are attributed to the population of youth in general.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] In a specific instance, "In Dallas , fear of youth led to accelerated surveillance and policing, particularly in its poorest area, Gaston ".

[ 69 ] The fear of adolescents is also said to have caused many governments to lower their age of criminal responsibility and escalate the detention of young people from childhood through adulthood .

[ 70 ] Education [ edit ] Examining the Black Power movement of the 1970s, one researcher wrote, "The common adult dislike and fear of youth is compounded by the teacher's fear—fear of losing control in the classroom, fear of losing one's authority".

[ 71 ] A specific increase in the fear of youth in schools following the Columbine High School massacre of 1999 is seen as a particular cause in evidence suggesting an overall decrease in student engagement throughout high schools today.

[ 72 ] Fear of youth has led to the development of zero tolerance policies in many schools, [ 73 ] which in turn is attributed as the cause of the increase in arrests for juvenile crime on school campuses, which has promoted the fear of youth and led school administrators to call police for infractions once dealt with internally.

[ 74 ] Combating ephebiphobia [ edit ] The American Library Association has developed a resource collection for librarians specifically to combat the ephebiphobia by promoting customer service skills specific to youth.

[ 75 ] However, sociologist Mike Males has suggested that ephebiphobia does not analyze the problem deep enough, as the fear of adult stereotype of adolescence , or kourophobia, is the core challenge facing young people today.

[ 76 ] See also [ edit ] Adultcentrism Americans for a Society Free from Age Restrictions Fear of children Herding instinct In loco parentis List of phobias List of youth subcultures Mass hysteria Moral panic Mosquito alarm , an 'anti-loitering device' which plays high-frequency soundwaves specifically targeted towards children and teens National Youth Rights Association Social control " Help, My Teenager Hates Me!

", an episode of the animated television series South Park dealing with the stereotypes of teenagers " Teenagers ", a My Chemical Romance song about the singer's fear of teenagers Youth culture Youth voice Holt, J. (1964) How Children Fail .

New York: Delta.

Llewellyn, G. (n.d.) The Teenage Liberation Handbook: how to quit school and get a real life and education.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Astroth, K. (1994) Beyond ephebiphobia: problem adults or problem youths? (fear of adolescents).

Phi Delta Kappan . January 1, 1994.

^ Hoffman, A.M. and Summers, R.W. (2001) Teen Violence: A Global View.

Greenwood Press. p 2.

^ Gough, P. (2000) "Detoxifying Schools." Phi Delta Kappan . March 1, 2000.

^ European Union's Stop Discrimination website - Glossary on age Archived October 17, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Grønnestad-Damur, W. & Pratch, L. (n.d.) No Ephebiphobia Here!

Edmonton: Edmonton Public Library.

^ Clark, C. (2004) Hurt: Inside the World of Today's Teenagers (Youth, Family, and Culture).

Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Book House.

^ Childhood is changing, but "paedophobia" makes things worse Archived 2007-09-04 at the Wayback Machine Institute for Public Policy Research. 22 October 2006.

^ Waiton, S. (2006) The Roots of Paedophobia . Online.

^ "Juvenoia: The kids are all right, even on the Internet" .

Christian Science Monitor . 23 July 2013.

^ Pearson, G. (1983).

Hooligan: A History of Respectable Fears . London: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 236.

ISBN 0-333-23399-9 .

^ Trexler, R. C. (1980).

Public Life in Renaissance Florence . Ithaca: Cornell University Press. p. 390.

ISBN 0-8014-2694-4 .

^ Garland, Robert (1993). "Review of Ancient Youth: The Ambiguity of Youth and the Absence of Adolescence in Greco-Roman Society by M. Kleijwegt".

Journal of Hellenic Studies .

113 : 204– 205.

doi : 10.2307/632438 .

JSTOR 632438 .

S2CID 163442168 .

^ Strauss, B. (1993).

Fathers and Sons in Athens: Ideology and Society in the Era of the Peloponnesian War . London: Routledge. p. 16.

ISBN 0-415-04146-5 .

^ Meily, C. (1911) Puritanism.

C. H. Kerr & Company. p 118.

^ Gatto, J.T.

, (2001) The Underground History of American Education.

Oxford Village Press.

^ Savage, J. (2007) Teenage: The Creation of Youth Culture.

Viking Adult.

^ Jobs, R.I. (2007) Riding the New Wave: Youth and the Rejuvenation of France After the Second World War . Stanford University Press. p 230 ^ Davis, Angela (2002). "The 'Youth Bulge' in the South". In Silliman, J.; Bhattacharjee, A.; Davis, A. J. (eds.).

Policing the National Body: Sex, Race, and Criminalization . Cambridge: South End Press . p. 235.

ISBN 0-89608-661-5 .

^ Rosenheim, M.K., Zimring, F.E. and Tanenhaus, D.S. (2002) A Century of Juvenile Justice.

University of Chicago Press. p 282.

^ Parrish, G. (1999).

"Fear of Youth" Archived 2013-05-15 at the Wayback Machine , Seattle Weekly.

February 29, 1999.

^ Street-Porter, J. (2005) " The Politicians Fear of Youth Culture Archived 2007-09-30 at the Wayback Machine ", The Independent April 7, 2005.

^ Fletcher, A. (2006) Washington Youth Voice Handbook Archived 2008-04-14 at the Wayback Machine . CommonAction. p 11. Retrieved 6/3/08.

^ Sternheimer, K. (2006) Kids These Days: Facts and Fictions about Today's Youth . Rowman & Littlefield. p 140.

^ Sternheimer, K. (2006) p 146.

^ Savage, J. (2007) Teenage: The Creation of Youth 1875-1945.

Chatto & Windus.

^ Gatto, J.T.

(2001) The Underground History of American Education.

Oxford Village Press. p 306.

^ Breeding, J. (2002) True nature and great misunderstandings: On How We Care for Our Children.

Virtualbookworm Publishing. p 10.

^ Lauter, P. and Howe, P. (1971) The conspiracy of the young.

Meridian. p 304.

^ Epstein, R. (2007) The case against adolescence . Quill Driver Books. p 323.

^ Palladino, G. (1996) Teenagers: An American perspective.

BasicBooks. p 247.

^ Konopka, G. (1983) Social Group Work: A Helping Process.

Prentice Hall. p 40.

^ Oldenburg, R. (1999) The Great Good Place: Cafés, Coffee Shops, Bookstores, Bars, Hair Salons.

Marlowe & Company. p xx.

^ Gray, D. (1999) Negroponte: Europe's Net development held back by fear of youth, risk taking CNN. September 15, 1999.

^ Jones, P., Shoemaker, S. Chelton, M. (2001) Do It Right! Best Practices for Serving Young Adults in School and Public Libraries New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers.

^ Lawrence Grossberg , (2005) Caught In The Crossfire: Kids, Politics, And America's Future (Cultural Politics & the Promise of Democracy) New York: Paradigm Publishers ^ Rice, W. (1998) Junior High Ministry: A Guide to Early Adolescence for Youth Workers.

Zondervan Publishing. p 15.

^ Giroux, H. (2004) Take Back High Education: Race, Youth, and the Crisis of Democracy in the post-Civil Rights Era New York: Palgrave ^ Butts, P.M. (2000) Beyond Ephebiphobia: Overcoming the Fear of Middle & High School Students; A Program for Public Librarians.

Macatawa, MI: Macatawa Public Library.

^ Coontz, S. (1999) The Way We Really Are: Coming to Terms With America's Changing Families.

New York: Basic Books.

^ Bender, S.J., Neutens, J., Skonie-Hardin, S., et al. (1997) Teaching health science: Elementary and middle school.

Jones & Bartlett Publishers. p 7.

^ Jee, K. and Sherman, R. (2006) "Youth as important civic actors: From the margins to the center" Archived 2008-05-15 at the Wayback Machine , National Civic Review. 95 ;1.

^ Delgado, M. (2001) Where are All the Young Men and Women of Color?

Columbia University Press. p 231.

^ Levingston, K. (2001) "New Statistics Puncture Myth of Violent Kids" , Philadelphia Inquirer.

January 6, 2001. Retrieved 5/9/08.

^ Zeldin, S. (2002). "Sense of community and positive adult beliefs toward adolescents and youth policy in urban neighborhoods and small cities".

Journal of Youth and Adolescence .

31 (5): 331– 342.

doi : 10.1023/A:1015624507644 .

S2CID 141934241 .

^ Males, M. (2002) "The New Demons: Ordinary teens" Archived 2005-05-18 at the Wayback Machine .

Los Angeles Times . April 21, 2002.

^ Youth Media Council . (2005) Reclaiming Meaning, Echoing Justice Archived 2006-10-10 at the Wayback Machine . Oakland, CA: Author.

^ Collins, J. (2002).

Gangs, Crime and Community Safety: Perceptions and Experiences in Multicultural Sydney Archived 2006-12-31 at the Wayback Machine Sydney: University of Technology.

^ Scottish Executive (2006) Measurement of the Extent of Youth Crime in Scotland.

^ Kozol, J. (2005) The Shame of a Nation: The Restoration of Apartheid Schooling in America . New York: Three Rivers Press.

^ Abram, S. (2007) "Ephebiphobia," p 130 in Abram, S.

Out Front with Stephen Abram: A Guide for Information Leaders.

ALA Editions.

^ Rapping, E. (2003) Law and Justice as Seen on TV.

NYU Press. p 208.

^ Bromwich, R.J. (2002) Beyond Villains and Victims: Some Thoughts on Youth and Violence in Canada Archived 2007-02-14 at the Wayback Machine .

Toronto, ON: Women's Justice Network.

^ Noguera, P. (2003) City Schools and the American Dream: Reclaiming the Promise of Public Education.

Teachers College Press. p 127.

^ Fredman, S. and Spencer, S. (2003) Age as an Equality Issue.

Hart Publishing. p 34.

^ Tushnet, R. ( "Volunteers from the Audience: Audience Interests and the First Amendment," Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine Georgetown University Law Center. p 3., footnote 10.

^ Palladino, G. (1997) Teenagers: An American History.

New York: Basic Books.

^ "Studios caught in teen-age dilemmas Multiplex issues," Worcester Telegram & Gazette (MA), July 20, 2001.

^ Shary, T. (2002).

Generation Multiplex: The Image of Youth in Contemporary American Cinema.

Austin: University of Texas Press. p. 4.

^ Giroux, H. (1999) The Mouse that Roared: Disney and the End of Innocence . New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

^ Hope, A. and Oliver, P. (2005) Risk, education and culture.

Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p 79.

^ Shary, T. (2005) Teen Movies: American Youth on Screen.

Wallflower Press. p 20.

^ Sternhiemer, S. (2003) It's Not the Media: The Truth about Pop Culture's Influence on Children.

Westview Press. p 115.

^ Giroux, H. (2003) The Abandoned Generation: Democracy beyond the culture of fear.

New York: Palgrave.

^ Beker, J. and Magnuson, D. (1996) Residential Education as an Option for At-Risk Youth.

Haworth Press. p 60.

^ Males, M. (2001) "Lies, Damn Lies, and 'Youth Risk' Surveys" Youth Today . April 2001 ^ Barak, G. (2003) Violence and Nonviolence: Pathways to Understanding . Sage Publications Inc. p 132.

^ Collins, J., Noble, G., and Poynting, B. (2000) Kebabs, Kids, Cops and Crime: Youth, Ethnicity and Crime.

Pluto Press Australia. p 122.

^ Walgrave, L. and Bazemore, B. (1999) Restorative Juvenile Justice: Repairing the Harm of Youth Crime.

Criminal Justice Press. p 192.

^ Wilson, D. (2005) Inventing Black-on-Black Violence: Discourse, Space, and Representation.

Syracuse University Press. p 144.

^ Susskind, A. (1987) "Issues in Institutional Child Sexual Abuse The Abused, the Abuser, and the System," Residential Treatment for Children & Youth. 4 ;2. p 19.

^ Ornstein, A.C. (1972) Urban Education: Student Unrest, Teacher Behaviors, and Black Power.

Charles E. Merrill Publishing Co. p 73.

^ Campbell, N. (2004) American Youth Cultures.

Routledge. p 19.

^ Lyons, W. and Drew, J. (2006) Punishing Schools: Fear And Citizenship In American Public Education.

University of Michigan Press. p 4.

^ Acland, C.R. (1995) Youth, Murder, Spectacle: The Cultural Politics of "youth in crisis".

Westview Press. p 144.

^ ALA President's Program. (1994) "Beyond Ephebiphobia: A tool chest for customer service to young adults". American Library Association.

^ Males, M. (1999) Framing Youth: 10 myths about the next generation.

Common Courage Press. p 47.

Bibliography [ edit ] Lesko, N. (2001) Act Your Age!: A Cultural Construction of Adolescence.

Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-92833-8 .

(n.d.) "Youth liberation" , Z magazine online.

Three Types of Youth Liberation - by Sven Bonnichsen Pro-Youth - A firm text against ageism towards teenagers, presenting a case of ageism committed by a jury.

Everyone deserves to be given a chance - An essay against ageism towards teenagers, written by a Canadian adolescent.

"Are We Down On Our Kids?" - A Review of Caught in the Crossfire: Kids, Politics, and America's Future by Lawrence Grossberg in Endeavours magazine that diagnoses cultural ephebiphobia in the U.S.

Ayotte, W. (1986) As Soon as You're Born They Make You Feel Small: Self Determination for Children.

Chicago Anarchist Youth Federation (n.d.) Schoolstoppers Textbook.

Cullen, S. (1991) Children in Society: a libertarian critique.

London: Freedom Press.

Goodman, P.

(1964) Compulsory Miseducation and The Community of Scholars .

New York: Vintage Books.

Illich, I. (1970) Deschooling Society.

New York: Harrow Books .

Holt, J. (1972) Freedom and Beyond.

New York: E.P. Dutton & Co.

Miller, A. (1990) For Your Own Good: Hidden cruelty in child-rearing and the roots of violence.

3rd edition. New York: Noonday Press.

Sternheimer, K. (2006) Kids These Days: Facts and Fictions about Today's Youth.

Rowman and Littlefield.

External links [ edit ] Look up ephebiphobia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up hebephobia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Ephebiphobia," The Freechild Project.

v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Youth empowerment Elements Evolving capacities Free-range parenting Future generations Intergenerational equity Leaving the nest Student voice Youth-adult partnership Youth mainstreaming Youth rights Youth voice Types Anarchistic free school Community youth development Democratic education Popular education Positive youth development Student activism Student-centered learning Student rights Teen court Youth activism Youth council Youth engagement Youth leadership Youth-led media Youth organizations Youth participation Youth philanthropy Youth politics Youth service Youth suffrage Youth vote Youth work Barriers Adultcentrism Adultism Age restrictions Ageism Control freak Eleutherophobia Ephebiphobia Fear of children Gerontocracy Grounding Helicopter parent Infantilization Intrusiveness Narcissism Parental respect Paternalism Patriarchy School-to-prison pipeline Vicariousness Youth control complex Youth exclusion Related topics Age of candidacy Age of consent Age-of-consent reform Age of criminal responsibility Beat Generation Beatnik The Catcher in the Rye Counterculture of the 1960s Greaser Hippies Hungry generation International Youth Year LGBTQ student movement Subcultures of the 1950s Taking Children Seriously The Teenage Liberation Handbook Teenage rebellion UK underground Voting age Index of youth rights–related articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ephebiphobia&oldid=1299661912 " Categories : Ageism Phobias Youth Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Articles to be expanded from March 2020 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 17:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ephebiphobia 10 languages Add topic

