Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Outline 2 Support 3 Criticism 4 Research 5 Alternatives 6 In education 7 In U.S. Supreme Court opinions 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Racial color blindness 11 languages Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 IsiZulu Polski Português Setswana Svenska Xitsonga 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sociological and legal term for disregard of race This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Racial color blindness" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Racial color blindness refers to the belief that a person's race or ethnicity should not influence their legal or social treatment in society.

The multicultural psychology field generates four beliefs that constitute the racial color-blindness approach. The four beliefs are as follows: (1) skin color is superficial and irrelevant to the quality of a person's character, ability or worthiness, (2) in a merit-based society, skin color is irrelevant to merit judgments and calculation of fairness, (3) as a corollary, in a merit-based society, merit and fairness are flawed if skin color is taken into the calculation, (4) ignoring skin color when interacting with people is the best way to avoid racial discrimination.

[ 1 ] The term metaphorically references the medical phenomenon of color blindness . Psychologists and sociologists also study racial color blindness. This is further divided into two dimensions, color evasion and power evasion.

Color evasion is the belief that people should not be treated differently on the basis of their color.

Power evasion posits that systemic advantage based on color should have no influence on what people can accomplish, and accomplishments are instead based solely on one's own work performance.

[ 2 ] At various times in Western history, this term has been used to signal a desired or allegedly achieved state of freedom from racial prejudice or a desire that policies and laws should not consider race. Proponents of racial color blindness often assert that policies that differentiate by racial classification could tend to create, perpetuate or exacerbate racial divisiveness. Critics often believe it fails to address systemic discrimination.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] It has been used by justices of the United States Supreme Court in several opinions relating to racial equality and social equity , particularly in public education.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Outline [ edit ] A color-blind society, in sociology , is one in which racial classification does not affect a person's socially created opportunities. A racially color blind society is or would be free from differential legal or social treatment based on race or color. A color-blind society would have race-neutral governmental policies and would reject all racial discrimination.

Racial color blindness reflects a societal ideal that skin color is insignificant. The ideal was most articulated "along with the emergence of the Civil Rights Movement in the US and anti-racist movements abroad".

[ 10 ] Color-blind ideology is based on tenets of non-discrimination, due process of law, equal protection under the law, and equal opportunities regardless of race, ideas which have strongly influenced Western liberalism in the post-World War II period.

[ 11 ] Proponents of "color-blind" practices largely believe that treating people equally as individuals leads to a more equal society or that racism and race privilege no longer exercise the power they once did, rendering the need for policies such as race-based affirmative action obsolete.

[ 12 ] Support [ edit ] Professor William Julius Wilson of Harvard University has argued that "class was becoming more important than race" in determining life prospects within the black community.

[ 13 ] Wilson has published several works including The Declining Significance of Race (1978) and The Truly Dis-advantaged (1987) explaining his views on black poverty and racial inequality. He believes that affirmative action primarily benefits the most privileged individuals within the black community. This is because strictly race-based programs disregard a candidate's socioeconomic background and therefore fail to help the poorer portion of the black community that actually needs the assistance.

[ 13 ] He claims that in a society where millions of black people live in the middle and upper classes and millions of white people live in poverty, race is no longer an accurate indication of privilege. Recognizing someone's social class is more important than recognizing someone's race, indicating that society should be class-conscious, not race-conscious, Wilson argues.

In his famous 1963 speech " I Have a Dream ", Martin Luther King Jr.

proclaimed, "I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character." This statement was widely interpreted as an endorsement of color-blind racial ideology.

[ 14 ] Roger Clegg, the President of the Center for Equal Opportunity, felt that this quotation supported the idea that race-conscious and equal opportunity should not exist, as he believes people should not be treated differently based on the color of their skin. However, not all agreed with this interpretation. American author Michael Eric Dyson felt that Dr. King only believed in the possibility of a color-blind society under the condition that racism and oppression were ultimately destroyed.

[ 15 ] Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas has supported color-blind policies. He believes the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment forbids consideration of race, such as race-based affirmative action or preferential treatment. He believes that race-oriented programs create "a cult of victimization" and imply black people require "special treatment in order to succeed".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] When defending new voting rights bills in 2020, Republican Texas legislators claimed that since the process they wanted to establish for voter registration did not involve different processes for people of different races and did not involve collecting information about race or ethnicity, their new requirements for eligibility to vote were "color blind" and should not be considered racially discriminatory.

[ 18 ] Some argue that the existence of majority-majority and majority-minority areas are not the result of racial discrimination and that this viewpoint ignores the possibility of other factors underlying residential segregation such as the attitude of realtors, bankers, and sellers.

[ 19 ] While the field of whiteness studies often discusses alleged failures of racial color blindness, it has been criticized for its focus on reprimanding the white population, whereas similar fields such as black studies , women's studies , and Chicano studies celebrate the contributions of the eponymous group.

[ 20 ] Among conservative presidents, color blindness as an idea has increased in the late 20th century as well as in the 21st century.

[ 21 ] Where racial disparities were once explained in terms of biology, they are now being discussed in terms of culture. "Culture" in this framework is seen as something fixed and hard to change.

[ 19 ] One example form of rhetoric used in this framework is the argument, "if Irish, Jews (or other ethnic groups) have 'made it', how come black people have not?" [ 22 ] Some supporters of racial color blindness argue racial inequality can be supported by relying on cultural, rather than biological, explanations such as "this race has too many babies". Some no longer view racism as a problem under this belief and see government programs targeting race as no longer necessary due to the avoidance of racism.

[ 23 ] Bonilla-Silva describes naturalization as a frame that portrays racism as a natural outcome of individuals' choices, and "just the way things are". While Bonna-Silva himself disagrees with these as "minimization of racism", these are views common among supporters of racial color blindness.

In response to the global Black Lives Matter movement, the phrase All Lives Matter came into being as a term for racial color blindness. Several notable individuals have supported All Lives Matter, such as NFL cornerback Richard Sherman who said, "I stand by what I said that All Lives Matter and that we are human beings." [ 24 ] A 2015 telephone poll in the US found that 78% of respondents said that "all lives matter" was closest to their own personal views.

[ 25 ] Despite this, the term was criticized by professor David Theo Goldberg as reflecting a view of "racial dismissal, ignoring, and denial." [ 26 ] Criticism [ edit ] In 1997, Leslie G. Carr published Color-Blind Racism which reviewed the history of racist ideologies in America. He saw "color-blindness" as an ideology that undercuts the legal and political foundation of racial integration and affirmative action.

[ 27 ] [ page needed ] Stephanie M. Wildman's Privilege Revealed: How Invisible Preference Undermines America , writes that advocates of a meritocratic, race-free worldview do not acknowledge the systems of privilege which benefit them, such as social and financial inheritance. She argues that this inheritance privileges "whiteness", "maleness", and heterosexuality while disadvantaging descendants of slaves.

[ 28 ] [ page needed ] Sociologist Ginger Jacobson criticized color-blind ideology as enabling systemic racism by permitting members of a hierarchical society to deny the obstacles people who are on the lower end of that hierarchy face.

[ 29 ] Sociologist Eduardo Bonilla-Silva writes that majority groups use color-blindness to avoid discussing racism and discrimination.

[ 30 ] This is supported by sociologist Jason Rodriquez who writes that color-blindness is a way to disconnect race from discussions of inequality in society.

[ 31 ] Within a color-blind society, majority groups also tend to disconnect from their own race as a way of absolving blame of harm caused by their place in a hierarchy.

[ 32 ] Color-blindness can be seen as a way to undermine minority hardships, as it used to argue that the United States is a meritocracy , in which people succeed only because they work hard and not their privilege.

[ 33 ] John R. Logan has disagreed with this notion of meritocracy, as the average black or Hispanic household earning more than $75,000 still live in a less affluent neighborhood than a white household earning less than $40,000 and poverty rates are higher for minorities.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Amy Ansell of Bard College argues that color-blindness operates under the assumption that we are living in a world that is " post-race ", where race no longer matters.

[ 36 ] She argues this is not true and if it was that race would not be taken into consideration even when trying to address inequality or remedy past wrongs.

[ 37 ] Abstract liberalism utilizes themes from political and economic liberalism , such as meritocracy and the free market , to argue against the strong presence of racism.

[ 38 ] Some suggest it results in people being for equality in principle but against government action to implement equality, described by some sociologists as laissez-faire racism .

Robert D. Reason and Nancy J. Evans outline a similar description of color-blindness, which is based on four beliefs: 1. Privilege is based on merit. 2. Most do not care about a person's race. 3. Social inequality is due to "cultural deficits" of individual people. 4. Given the previous three beliefs, there is no need to pay "systematic attention" to any current inequities. They argue the prevalence of color-blindness is attributed to lack of knowledge or lack of exposure. They argue that due to racial separation in housing and education many Americans lack direct contact with present racism.

[ 39 ] In Social Inequality and Social Stratification in US Society , Christopher Doob argues that racial color blindness's proponents "assert...that they are living in a world where racial privilege no longer exists, but their behavior 'supports' racialized structures and practices".

[ 40 ] This assertion has allowed proponents of racial color blindness to define and separate themselves from racialized structures by using coded language, while also not needing to address race.

[ 29 ] Effectively, this argued for the separation of race and class in the beliefs of these proponents.

Eduardo Bonilla-Silva has argued racial color blindness is insufficient to address racial inequality.

[ 41 ] He argues it involves egalitarianism while opposing concrete proposals to reduce inequality. He has argued it ignores the under-representation of minorities in prestigious institutions, along with institutional practices that encourage segregation.

Eberhardt, Davies, Purdie-Vaughns, and Johnson studied implicit racial biases, suggesting people react differently to faces of members of their race compared to members of other races.

[ 42 ] They found a correlation between race and judicial outcomes and suggest a color blind approach may not actually be possible.

[ 43 ] Research [ edit ] This section needs additional citations to secondary or tertiary sources .

Help add sources such as review articles, monographs, or textbooks. Please also establish the relevance for any primary research articles cited. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged and removed.

( September 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fryer et al. argued that color-blind affirmative action is about as efficient as race-conscious affirmative action in the short run but is less profitable [ clarification needed ] in the long term.

[ 44 ] In 2010, Apfelbaum et al. exposed elementary school students to color-blind ideology and found that those students were less likely to detect or report overt racial discrimination. The authors argued racial color blindness allows overt racism to persist." [ 45 ] Research has found that color-blindness is used as a way for white Americans to justify adopting cultural symbols and signifiers belonging to people of color . This has been analyzed through white Americans appropriation of hip-hop culture using the method of participant observation. When looking at reasons for this behavior, it was found white Americans wanted to obtain characteristics of blackness commonly seen as 'cool.' [ 31 ] Many white hip-hop consumers used color-blind reasoning that justified their participation in hip-hop culture and spaces, even when those spaces explicitly pointed out racial differences, in which they exhibited what Bonilla-Silva calls "race talk," where white people use specific rhetoric to address racial topics without explicitly mentioning race.

[ 41 ] Amy Ansell, a sociologist at Bard College , has compared and contrasted the development of the color-blindness in the United States and South Africa. Given that white people are a minority population in South Africa and a majority population in the United States, Ansell expected to see a significant difference in the manifestation of color-blindness in both countries. The thirty-year time difference between the departure from Jim Crow and cessation of apartheid and differences in racial stratification and levels of poverty also led Ansell to expect a clear difference between the colorblindness ideology in the United States and South Africa. However, she concludes contemporary color-blindness in the two countries is nearly identical.

[ 36 ] Vorauer, Gagnon, and Sasaki examined the effect that messages with a color-blind ideology had on white Canadians entering one-on-one interactions with Aboriginal Canadians. White Canadians who heard messages emphasizing color-blind ideology were much more likely to be concerned with ensuring the subsequent interaction did not go badly and were more likely hostile, uncomfortable, and uncertain.

[ 46 ] White participants who heard messages emphasizing multicultural ideology, or the valuing of people's differences, asked more positive questions focused on the other person more relaxedly.

[ 46 ] Alternatives [ edit ] Researchers also offer alternatives to the color-blindness discourse. Reason and Evans call for people to become "racially cognizant" and continuously acknowledge the role that race plays in their lives. They argue it is important to balance personal identity and a person's race.

[ 39 ] Researcher Jennifer Simpson argued that "in setting aside color blindness, White [people] must learn to see, accept...the possibility that some of the good, ease, or rewards they have experienced have not been solely the result of hard work" but from "a system biased in their favor." This conscious exploration of whiteness as a racial and social identity and the acknowledgment of the role of whiteness is connected to modern whiteness studies .

[ 47 ] In a recent publication of the academic journal Communication Theory , Jennifer Simpson proposed a "more productive dialogue about race". New dialogue must take a more complex look at race, openly looking at different perspectives on race. Simpson argues white people must engage with other races in discussing the ongoing effects of racism, requiring white people to participate in "communicative behavior that may threaten simultaneously their sense of self and their material power in the social order".

[ 47 ] In education [ edit ] A multisite case study of Atlantic State University, a primarily white institution, and Mid-Atlantic State University, a historically black college , explored color-blind ideologies among the institutions' white faculty members at the undergraduate and graduate level.

[ 48 ] In interviews with white faculty members at both institutions, researchers found the faculty often engaged with students from a color-blind perspective, avoiding racial terms but implying them allowed white faculty to label minority students "as academically inferior, less prepared, and less interested in pursuing research and graduate studies while potentially ignoring structural causes" of inequity.

[ 48 ] The study concludes that color-blind ideology held by school faculty can reduce a student of color's perception of their academic abilities and potential to achieve success in STEM disciplines and in graduate school.

A case study of a suburban, mixed-race high school examined the trend toward color-blind ideology in schools among white faculty.

[ 49 ] It argued white schoolteachers's color-blind ideology often masks their fears of being accused of racism and prevents a deeper examination of race.

Case studies of three large school districts, (Boston, Massachusetts; Wake County, North Carolina; and Jefferson County, Louisville) found that the districts' race-neutral, or color-blind, policies to combat school segregation may disadvantage minorities and "reframe privilege as common sense" while ignoring structural inequalities .

[ 50 ] In U.S. Supreme Court opinions [ edit ] Further information: Constitutional colorblindness In his dissenting opinion to Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), Justice John Marshall Harlan wrote that "Our Constitution is color-blind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens. In respect of civil rights, all citizens are equal before the law. The humblest is the peer of the most powerful. The law regards man as man, and takes no account of his surroundings or of his color when his civil rights as guaranteed by the supreme law of the land are involved." [ 6 ] His opinion could thus be interpreted as saying that laws should not differentiate between people of different races. His opinion was not the majority-supported decision, which at the time was that laws requiring racial segregation were allowable, establishing the idea that " separate but equal " treatment was constitutionally acceptable.

More recently, the term color blind has appeared in United States Supreme Court opinions involving affirmative action, in opinions that support consideration of race when evaluating laws and their effects: In a concurring opinion of Regents v. Bakke (1978), Justices William J. Brennan Jr.

, Byron White , Thurgood Marshall , and Harry Blackmun objected to the color blind term, writing that "we cannot ... let color blindness become myopia which masks the reality that many 'created equal' have been treated within our lifetimes as inferior both by the law and by their fellow citizens." [ 7 ] In her dissenting opinion to Gratz v. Bollinger (2003), Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg quoted from a 1966 5th Circuit decision: [ which?

] " 'The Constitution is both color blind and color conscious. To avoid conflict with the equal protection clause, a classification that denies a benefit, causes harm, or imposes a burden must not be based on race. In that sense, the Constitution is color blind. But the Constitution is color conscious to prevent discrimination being perpetuated and to undo the effects of past discrimination.

' " [ 8 ] In his concurring opinion to PICS v. Seattle (2007), Justice Clarence Thomas wrote that "the color-blind Constitution does not bar the government from taking measures to remedy past state-sponsored discrimination –  indeed, it requires that such measures be taken in certain circumstances." [ 9 ] In Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard (2023), the Supreme Court ruled against affirmative action in college admissions, effectively overruling Grutter v. Bollinger (2003) [ 51 ] and Regents v. Bakke (1978).

[ 52 ] In his concurring opinion, Justice Clarence Thomas affirmed his "defense of the colorblind Constitution" and argued that "all forms of discrimination based on race — including so-called affirmative action — are prohibited under the Constitution".

[ 53 ] See also [ edit ] Gender-blind Post-racial America Constitutional colorblindness White privilege Whiteness theory Equalized odds References [ edit ] ^ Jackson, Matthew C.; Wilde, Vera Katelyn; Goff, Phillip Atiba (2016), "Seeing color blindness: Color-blind racial ideology research methods in social psychology." , The myth of racial color blindness: Manifestations, dynamics, and impact.

, Washington: American Psychological Association, pp.

125– 140, doi : 10.1037/14754-008 , ISBN 978-1-4338-2073-1 , retrieved April 24, 2023 ^ Mio, Jeffery Scott; Barker, Lori A.; Domenech Rodriguez, Melanie M.; Gonzalez, John (2020).

Multicultural Psychology (5th ed.). New York, New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

213– 214.

ISBN 978-0190854959 .

^ Holmes, David G. (2007) Affirmative Reaction: Kennedy, Nixon, King, and the Evolution of Color-Blind Rhetoric , Rhetoric Review, 26:1, 25–41, DOI: ^ Ansell, Amy E. (2008).

"Color Blindness" . In Schaefer, Richard T. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society . SAGE Publications. pp.

320– 322.

ISBN 978-1-45-226586-5 .

^ Sears, David O.; et al. (2000).

Racialized politics: the debate about racism in America . University of Chicago Press. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0-22-674405-6 .

^ a b "U.S. Reports: Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537" (PDF) .

Supreme Court of the United States . 1896. p. 559 – via Library of Congress .

^ a b "U.S. Reports: Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265" (PDF) .

Supreme Court of the United States . 1978 – via Library of Congress .

^ a b "U.S. Reports: Gratz et al.

v. Bollinger et al.

, 539 U.S. 234" (PDF) .

Supreme Court of the United States . 2003 – via Library of Congress .

^ a b Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1 https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/06pdf/05-908.pdf ^ Ansell, Amy Elizabeth (2013).

Race and Ethnicity: The Key Concepts . Routledge. p. 42.

ISBN 978-0-41-533794-6 .

^ Ansell (2013) , pp. 42–3.

^ Stuart Wells, Amy (2009).

Both Sides Now: The Story of School Desegregation's Graduates .

University of California Press . p. 33.

ISBN 978-0-52-025678-1 .

^ a b "Interview William Julius Wilson" .

Frontline . PBS. 1997 . Retrieved December 29, 2013 .

^ King, Martin Luther.

"I Have A Dream" .

The Avalon Project . Yale Law School . Retrieved April 28, 2022 .

^ Babbitt, Laura G.

; Toosi, Negin R.; Sommers, Samuel R. (2016). "3". In Neville, Helen A.; Gallardo, Miguel E.; Sue, Derald Wing (eds.).

The Myth of Racial Color Blindness: Manifestations, Dynamics, and Impact . American Psychological Association. pp.

53– 64.

^ "Clarence Thomas: The Justice Nobody Knows" .

CBS News . September 27, 2007.

^ Text of Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña , 515 U.S. 200 (1995) is available from: Findlaw Justia LII ^ Ura, Alexa (April 9, 2021).

"Texas Republicans say their proposed voting restrictions are color blind. But many see 'Jim Crow in a tuxedo' " .

The Texas Tribune . Retrieved May 1, 2021 .

^ a b Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2001). "Color-blind racism: toward an analysis of white racial ideology". In Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (ed.).

White Supremacy and Racism in the Post-Civil Rights Era . Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc. pp.

137– 166.

ISBN 978-1-58826-032-1 .

^ Fears, Darryl (June 20, 2003).

"Hue and cry on 'whiteness studies' " .

The Washington Post . p. A1.

ISSN 0190-8286 .

^ Holmes, David G. (2007). "Affirmative Reaction: Kennedy, Nixon, King, and the Evolution of Color-Blind Rhetoric".

Rhetoric Review .

26 (1): 25– 41.

doi : 10.1080/07350190709336684 .

ISSN 0735-0198 .

JSTOR 20176758 .

S2CID 144516819 .

^ Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo; Lewis, Amanda; Embrick, David G. (December 2004). "I did not get that job because of a black man...!: the story lines and testimonies of color-blind racism".

Sociological Forum .

19 (4): 555– 581.

doi : 10.1007/s11206-004-0696-3 .

S2CID 143829833 .

^ Bonilla-Silva (2010) , pp. 28–30.

^ Samuel, Ebenezer (July 27, 2016).

"Seahawks cornerback Richard Sherman explains why he stands by that All Lives Matter" .

Daily News . New York . Retrieved August 6, 2016 .

^ "Black Lives Matter Or All Lives Matter?" .

Rasmussen Reports . August 20, 2015 . Retrieved July 14, 2016 .

^ Goldberg, David Theo (September 25, 2015).

"Why 'Black Lives Matter' Because All Lives Don't Matter in America" .

HuffPost . Retrieved November 18, 2015 .

^ Carr, L.G. (1997).

'Color-Blind' Racism . Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE Publications.

ISBN 978-0-7619-0443-4 .

^ Wildman, Stephanie M. (1996).

Privilege revealed : how invisible preference undermines America (1st ed.). New York University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-9303-9 .

^ a b Jacobson, Ginger (2015).

"Racial Formation Theory and Systemic Racism in Hip-Hop Fans' Perceptions" .

Sociological Forum .

30 (3): 832– 851.

doi : 10.1111/socf.12186 .

ISSN 0884-8971 .

JSTOR 43654135 .

^ Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2014).

Racism Without Racists: Color-blind racism and the persistence of racial inequality in the United States (4th ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

101– 102.

ISBN 978-1-44-222055-3 .

^ a b Rodriquez, Jason (December 1, 2006).

"Color-Blind Ideology and the Cultural Appropriation of Hip-Hop" .

Journal of Contemporary Ethnography .

35 (6): 645– 668.

doi : 10.1177/0891241606286997 .

ISSN 0891-2416 .

^ Lewis, Amanda E. (December 1, 2004).

" "What Group?" Studying Whites and Whiteness in the Era of "Color-Blindness"*" .

Sociological Theory .

22 (4): 623– 646.

doi : 10.1111/j.0735-2751.2004.00237.x .

ISSN 0735-2751 .

^ Gallagher, Charles A. (2003). "Color-Blind Privilege: The Social and Political Functions of Erasing the Color Line in Post Race America".

Race, Gender & Class .

10 (4): 22– 37.

JSTOR 41675099 .

^ Ellis, Glenn (December 2015). "Sobering numbers on kids, poverty, race".

Philadelphia Tribune .

ProQuest 1757017932 .

^ Logan, John R. (July 2011).

Separate and Unequal: The Neighborhood Gap for Blacks, Hispanics, and Asians in Metropolitan America (PDF) (Report). Brown University.

^ a b Ansell, Amy E. (March 2006). "Casting a blind eye: the ironic consequences of color-blindness in South Africa and the United States".

Critical Sociology .

32 ( 2– 3): 333– 356.

doi : 10.1163/156916306777835349 .

S2CID 143485250 .

^ Doane, Ashley (March 2006). "What is racism? Racial discourse and racial politics".

Critical Sociology .

32 ( 2– 3): 255– 274.

doi : 10.1163/156916306777835303 .

S2CID 144244399 .

^ Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2003). " 'New racism,' color-blind racism, and the future of whiteness in America". In Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo; Doane, Ashley W. (eds.).

White out: the continuing significance of racism . New York: Routledge. pp.

271– 284.

ISBN 978-0-415-93583-8 .

^ a b Reason, Robert D.; Evans, Nancy J. (Winter 2007). "The complicated realities of whiteness: from color blind to racially cognizant".

New Directions for Student Services .

2007 (120): 67– 75.

doi : 10.1002/ss.258 .

^ Doob, Christopher B. (2013).

Social Inequality and Social Stratification in U.S. Society . Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson.

ISBN 978-0-20-579241-2 .

^ a b Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo (2010).

Racism Without Racists: Color-blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in America (3rd ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

26– 28.

ISBN 978-1-44-220218-4 .

^ Jones, James M.

(2016). Neville, Helen A.; Gallardo, Miguel E.; Sue, Derald Wing (eds.).

The Myth of Racial Color Blindness: Manifestations, Dynamics, and Impact . American Psychological Association.

^ Eberhardt, Jennifer L.; Davies, Paul G.; Purdie-Vaughns, Valerie J.; Johnson, Sheri Lyn (2006). "Looking Deathworthy: Perceived Stereotypicality of Black Defendants Predicts Capital-Sentencing Outcomes".

Psychological Science .

17 (5): 383– 386.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01716.x .

PMID 16683924 .

S2CID 15737940 .

^ Fryer, R. G.

; Loury, G. C.; Yuret, T. (November 29, 2007). "An Economic Analysis of Color-Blind Affirmative Action".

Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization .

24 (2): 319– 355.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.169.4230 .

doi : 10.1093/jleo/ewm053 .

^ Apfelbaum, E. P.; Pauker, K.; Sommers, S. R.; Ambady, N. (September 28, 2010). "In Blind Pursuit of Racial Equality?".

Psychological Science .

21 (11): 1587– 1592.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.418.9317 .

doi : 10.1177/0956797610384741 .

PMID 20876878 .

S2CID 11580845 .

^ a b Vorauer, Jacquie D., Gagnon, Annette, & Sasaki, Stacey J. (2009). Salient Intergroup Ideology and Intergroup Interaction. Psychological Science, 20, 838-845.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02369.x ^ a b Simpson, Jennifer Lyn (February 2008). "The color-blind double bind: whiteness and the (im)possibility of dialogue".

Communication Theory .

18 (1): 139– 159.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2885.2007.00317.x .

^ a b McCoy, D. L., Winkle-Wagner, R., & Luedke, C. L. (2015). Colorblind mentoring? Exploring white faculty mentoring of students of color. Journal Of Diversity In Higher Education, 8, 225-242.

doi:10.1037/a0038676 ^ Modica, Marianne (2015). "Unpacking the 'colorblind approach': accusations of racism at a friendly, mixed-race school".

Race Ethnicity and Education .

18 (3): 396– 418.

doi : 10.1080/13613324.2014.985585 .

S2CID 144180704 .

^ McDermott, Kathryn A.; Frankenberg, Erica; Diem, Sarah (May 2015). "The 'Post-Racial' Politics of Race: Changing Student Assignment Policy in Three School Districts".

Educational Policy .

29 (3): 504– 554.

doi : 10.1177/0895904813510775 .

S2CID 145014408 .

^ Watson, Bill (August 25, 2023).

"Did the Court in SFFA Overrule Grutter?" .

Notre Dame Law Review Reflection (99) – via SSRN.

^ "Affirmative action: Supreme Court justices clash over 'colourblind' America" . June 29, 2023 . Retrieved October 9, 2024 .

^ " 'Colorblind Constitution': Supreme Court wrangles over the future of race in the law" .

NBC News . July 1, 2023 . Retrieved October 9, 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Alexander, Michelle (2012).

The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness (revised ed.). New York: New Press.

ISBN 978-1-59-558643-8 .

Brown, Michael K.; et al. (2005).

Whitewashing Race: The myth of a color-blind society . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-52-024475-7 .

Burrowes, Philip (February 12, 2002).

"A Look at Color-Blindness" .

The Tech . Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Jakubowski, Dawn (2004). "The Rhetoric Of Color-Blindness".

NAAAS Conference Proceedings : 1230– 1242.

OCLC 664590421 .

Lo, Marie (2015). "Blinded by colorblindness".

The Asian Reporter : 6– 7.

ProQuest 1654867222 .

Mueller, Jennifer (2017).

"Producing Colorblindness: Everyday Mechanisms of White Ignorance" .

Social Problems .

64 (2): 219– 238.

doi : 10.1093/socpro/spw061 (inactive July 10, 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) Scruggs, Afi-Odelia E. (2009).

"Colorblindness: the New Racism?" .

Teaching Tolerance . Montgomery, Ala.: Southern Poverty Law Center.

Sinckler, Latjona (2014).

"And the Oscar Goes to; Well, It Can't Be You, Can It: A Look at Race-Based Casting and How it Legalizes Racism, Despite Title VII Laws" .

The American University Journal of Gender, Social Policy and the Law .

22 (4): 857– 891.

Full text Sun, William H. (December 2000).

"Power and Problems of Performance across Ethnic Lines, An Alternative Approach to Nontraditional Casting" (PDF) .

TDR/The Drama Review .

44 (4): 86– 95.

doi : 10.1162/10542040051058492 .

S2CID 11510433 .

Examines racial and ethnic considerations in theatrical role casting.

Wingfield, Adia Harvey (September 13, 2015).

"Color-Blindness Is Counterproductive" .

The Atlantic .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Racial color blindness .

Standing Up for Playwrights and Against ‘Colorblind’ Casting American Theatre , Theatre Communications Group v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Racial_color_blindness&oldid=1299742589 " Categories : Politics and race in the United States Affirmative action in the United States Race in the United States Color blindness Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from September 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2021 Articles lacking reliable references from November 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with limited geographic scope from August 2022 United States-centric Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from June 2025 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2021 Articles lacking reliable references from September 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2022 CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 04:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Racial color blindness 11 languages Add topic

