Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hydrometeorological forecasting 2 Risk assessment 3 Operational hydrometeorology in practice 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hydrometeorology 25 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Қазақша Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of meteorology and hydrology Watercycle-french.jpg Hydrometeorology is a branch of meteorology and hydrology that studies the transfer of water and energy between the land surface and the lower atmosphere for academic research, commercial gain or operational forecasting purposes.

Whilst traditionally meteorologists and hydrologists sit within separate organisations, hydrometeorlogists may work in joint project teams, virtual teams, deal with specific incidents or be permanently co-located to deliver specific objectives. Hydrometeorlogists typically have a foundation in one or other discipline before undertaking additional training and specialist forecaster training depending on requirements. The cross over skills and knowledge between the two disciplines can bring organisational benefits in terms of efficiencies in terms of using tools and data available, and provide benefits in terms of enhanced lead times ahead of hydrometeological hazards occurring.

UNESCO has several programs and activities in place that deal with the study of natural hazards of hydrometeorological origin and the mitigation of their effects.

[ 1 ] Among these hazards are the results of natural processes and atmospheric , hydrological , or oceanographic phenomena such as floods , tropical cyclones , drought , and desertification . Many countries have established an operational hydrometeorological capability to assist with forecasting , warning, and informing the public of these developing hazards.

Hydrometeorological forecasting [ edit ] One of the more significant aspects of hydrometeorology involves predictions about and attempts to mitigate the effects of high precipitation events.

[ 2 ] There are three primary ways to model meteorological phenomena in weather forecasting, including nowcasting , numerical weather prediction , and statistical techniques.

[ 3 ] Nowcasting is good for predicting events a few hours out, utilizing observations and live radar data to combine them with numerical weather prediction models.

[ 3 ] The primary technique used to forecast weather, numerical weather prediction uses mathematical models to account for the atmosphere, ocean, and many other variables when producing forecasts.

[ 3 ] These forecasts are generally used to predict events days or weeks out.

[ 3 ] Finally, statistical techniques use regressions and other statistical methods to create long-term projections that go out weeks and months at a time.

[ 3 ] These models allow scientists to visualize how a multitude of different variables interact with one another, and they illustrate one grand picture of how the Earth's climate interacts with itself.

[ 4 ] Risk assessment [ edit ] A major component of hydrometeorology is mitigating the risk associated with flooding and other hydrological threats. First, there has to be knowledge of the possible hydrological threats that are expected within a specific region.

[ 3 ] After analyzing the possible threats, warning systems are put in place to quickly alert people and communicate to them the identity and magnitude of the threat.

[ 3 ] Many nations have their own specific regional hydrometeorological centers that communicate threats to the public. Finally, there must be proper response protocols in place to protect the public during a dangerous event.

[ 3 ] Operational hydrometeorology in practice [ edit ] Rainfall forecasts for the 1909 Velasco hurricane produced by the US Hydrometeorological Prediction Center (now the Weather Prediction Center) Countries with a current operational hydrometeorological service include, among others: Australia ( Bureau of Meteorology ) Brazil (National Center for Natural Disaster Monitoring and Alerts) [ 5 ] Canada ( Environment Canada ) England and Wales ( Flood Forecasting Centre ) [ 6 ] France [ 7 ] Germany [ 8 ] India [ 9 ] Scotland (Flood Forecasting Service) [ 10 ] Serbia (Republic Hydrometeorological Service of Serbia) [ 11 ] Russia ( Hydrometeorological Centre of Russia ) United States (Hydrometeorological Prediction Center, known as the Weather Prediction Center since 2013) References [ edit ] ^ "Hydro-meteorological hazards | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" . Unesco.org . Retrieved 2016-08-05 .

^ Dale, Murray; Davies, Paul; Harrison, Tim (2012). "Review of recent advances in UK operational hydrometeorology".

Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers - Water Management .

165 (2): 55– 64.

Bibcode : 2012ICEWM.165...55D .

doi : 10.1680/wama.2012.165.2.55 .

^ a b c d e f g h Sene, Kevin (2015).

Hydrometeorology: Forecasting and Applications . Springer International Publishing Switzerland. p. 1.

ISBN 978-3-319-23546-2 .

^ Betts, Alan (2004).

"Understanding Hydrometeorology Using Global Models" .

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society .

85 (11): 1673– 1688.

Bibcode : 2004BAMS...85.1673B .

doi : 10.1175/BAMS-85-11-1673 .

^ "Centro Nacional de Monitoramento e Alertas de Desastres Naturais (Cemaden)" . labhidro-IGEO-UFRJ . Retrieved 2017-06-29 .

^ "Flood Forecasting Centre" . Ffc-environment-agency.metoffice.gov.uk. 2011-09-22. Archived from the original on 2019-06-17 . Retrieved 2014-05-28 .

^ "Information nationale" . Vigicrues . Retrieved 2014-05-28 .

^ "Hydrometeorology and water management" . Deutscher Wetterdienst . Retrieved 2021-11-20 .

^ "Hydro-Meteorology" . Imd.gov.in. Archived from the original on 2014-06-30 . Retrieved 2014-05-28 .

^ "Flood Forecasting Service" . Sepa.org.uk. Archived from the original on 2015-03-26 . Retrieved 2014-05-28 .

^ "Republic Hydrometeorological service of Serbia Kneza Višeslava 66 Beograd" . Hidmet.gov.rs. 2014-05-18 . Retrieved 2014-05-28 .

External links [ edit ] World Meteorological Organization – List of national hydrological and hydrometeorological services Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hydrometeorology&oldid=1242518663 " Categories : Hydrology Branches of meteorology Oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 August 2024, at 07:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hydrometeorology 25 languages Add topic

