Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Display 2 Themes 3 Imagery 4 Records 5 Subjects of pittura infamante Toggle Subjects of pittura infamante subsection 5.1 Bologna 5.2 Fermo 5.3 Florence 5.4 Milan 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Pittura infamante 6 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Defamatory depiction of petty criminals in Renaissance Italian art The Hanged Man from Tarot decks is thought to be typical of pittura infamante frescoes, although none are extant Preparatory drawings for pittura infamante by Andrea del Sarto A German Schandbild [ de ] (circa 1490) Pittura infamante ( pronounced [pitˈtuːra iɱfaˈmante] ; Italian for "defaming portrait"; plural pitture infamanti ) is a genre of defamatory painting and relief , common in Renaissance Italy in city-states in North Italy and Central Italy during the Trecento , Quattrocento , and Cinquecento .

[ 1 ] Popular subjects of pitture infamanti include traitors , thieves , and those guilty of bankruptcy or public fraud , often in cases where no legal remedy was available. Commissioned by governments of city-states and displayed in public centers, pitture infamanti were both a form of "municipal justice" (or " forensic art " [ 2 ] ) and a medium for internal political struggles.

[ 3 ] According to Samuel Edgerton, the genre began to decline precisely when it came to be regarded as a form of art rather than effigy ; the power of the genre derived from a feudal-based code of honor , where shame was one of the most significant social punishments .

[ 1 ] As such, pittura infamante has its roots in the doctrines of fama and infamia in ancient Roman law .

[ 4 ] Display [ edit ] Pitture infamanti could appear in any public place, but some places were more frequently adorned with them; for example, the first floor exterior of the Bargello (originally a barracks and prison, now an art museum) periodically contained numerous, life-size, pittura infamante frescoes . Florentine law required the Podestà have such caricatures painted, and accompanied by verbal identification of those held in contempt of court for financial offenses ( bad debt , bankruptcy, fraud, forgery , etc.).

[ 5 ] Pitture infamanti were far more common in Republican Florence than in autocratic city states , whose rulers often deemed them to be sources of "disrepute".

[ 6 ] Themes [ edit ] Common themes of pitture infamanti – which were meant to be humiliating – include depicting the subject as wearing a mitre , hanging upside down, or being in the presence of unclean animals such as pigs or donkeys or those deemed evil like snakes; pitture infamanti would also contain captions listing the offenses of the subject.

[ 7 ] Pitture infamanti could originate as more favorable depictions, only to be transformed after the subject had fallen out of favor.

[ 8 ] Imagery [ edit ] Pitture infamanti always depicted men and never women, and generally depicted upper-class men (who would have the most to lose from character assassination ).

[ 4 ] The act of hanging itself was also significant, as affluent criminals would generally be afforded the privilege of beheading rather than hanging; hanging was also shameful in religious contexts (e.g.

Judas ).

[ 4 ] The topos of mundus inversus ("world upside down") is often associated with comedy and humiliation.

[ 9 ] Famous artists who painted pittura infamante frescoes include Andrea del Castagno , Sandro Botticelli , and Andrea del Sarto .

[ 10 ] There are no surviving examples of pittura infamante frescoes, but contemporary sources suggest that they were brightly colored.

[ 2 ] [ 7 ] Detailed descriptions of pitture infamanti in primary sources are rare.

[ 11 ] A very few preparatory drawings, however, are extant, and The Hanged Man from Tarot cards is thought to resemble the archetypal pittura infamante theme, as Tarot decks were first produced in northern Italy in the 1440s.

[ 4 ] Records [ edit ] Documentary evidence for pittura infamante outside Italy is rarer but existent. For example, records support the use of "very unpleasant pictures" painted on cloths during the Hundred Years' War and the reign of King Louis XI of France , and – later – in England and north Germany .

[ 12 ] Pitture infamanti were the counterpoint of another contemporary form of secular, full-length portrait: uomini famosi ("famous men") or uomini illustri ("illustrious men"), which depicted figures from the Old Testament or Antiquity in a positive context, generally on the interior of private or civic buildings as moral exemplars.

[ 13 ] Subjects of pittura infamante [ edit ] Bologna [ edit ] Konrad von Landau , painted on the walls of Bologna for treachery; in response Landau created his own pittura infamante on the saddle of his horse, depicting the local politicians hung upside down by their feet in the hand of a giant whore.

[ 14 ] Fermo [ edit ] Rinaldo da Monteverde , the papal governor of Fermo , "fell victim to humiliating popular justice" in the form of a pittura infamante .

[ 15 ] Florence [ edit ] Niccolò Piccinino , in the Palazzo della Signoria in 1428, [ 16 ] which depicted him hanging upside down in chains; [ 17 ] "depaint[ed]" in April 1430.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Hanging upside down by one foot was a common theme for pitture infamanti of condottieri who switched sides.

[ 5 ] The eight Pazzi conspirators , on the wall above the Dogana by Botticelli , commissioned by the Otto di Guardia in 1478; visible from the Sala dei Gigli until its removal in 1494.

[ 19 ] Ridolfo di Camerino , "traitor to the Holy Mother Church , to the popolo and commune of Florence and to all its allies", painted upside down on a gallows , hanging by his left foot on the facade of the Army Pay Office with a siren on his left and a basilisk on his right while wearing a bishop's mitre (circa October 13, 1377).

[ 11 ] Rodolfo II da Varano , who defected to the papacy during the War of the Eight Saints , depicted on a gallows attached to the neck of a devil.

[ 20 ] Milan [ edit ] Reliefs of Frederick Barbarossa and Beatrice of Burgundy set on the Porta Romana and Porta Tosa , Milan.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] The Allegory of Good and Bad Government Death of Benito Mussolini § Piazzale Loreto Denunciation Graffiti Upside-down painting – Practice of hanging paintings in inverted orientation Wanted poster Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Edgerton, 1985. Chapters 2 and 3.

^ a b Edgerton, 1980, p. 31.

^ Wieruszowski, 1944.

^ a b c d Mills, 2005, p. 38.

^ a b Edgerton, 1980, p. 30.

^ Dean, 2000, p. 8.

^ a b Dean, 2000, p. 7.

^ Dean, 2000, p. 37.

^ Mills, 2005, p. 39.

^ Edgerton, 1980, p. 30-31.

^ a b Dean, 2000, p. 45.

^ Mills, 2005, p. 43-49.

^ Mills, 2005, p. 42.

^ Caferro, 2006, p. 290.

^ Dean, 2000, p. 229.

^ Caferro, 2006, p. 320.

^ a b Hudson, 2006, p. 6.

^ Wegener, 1993, p. 144 ^ Hegarty, 1996, p. 267.

^ Caferro, 2006, p. 193.

^ Gardner, 1987, p. 208.

References [ edit ] Antal, Frederick. 1947.

Florentine Painting and Its Social Background. The Bourgeois Republic before Cosimo de' Medici's Advent to Power: Fourteenth and Early Fifteenth Centuries.

Kegan Paul.

Caferro, William. 2006.

John Hawkwood: An English Mercenary in Fourteenth Century Italy.

Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 0-8018-8323-7 Dean, Trevor. 2000.

The Towns of Italy in the Later Middle Ages.

Manchester University Press.

ISBN 0-7190-5204-1 Edgerton, Samuel Y. 1980. "Icons of Justice." Past and Present, 89: 23–38.

Edgerton, Samuel Y. 1985.

Pictures and Punishment. Art and Criminal Prosecution during the Florentine Renaissance.

Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.

Garberti, M. Preceruti. 1974.

Il Castello Sforzesco. Le raccolte artistiche: Pittura e sculptura.

Milan.

Gardner, Julian. 1987. "An Introduction to the Iconography of the Medieval Italian City Gate." Dumbarton Oaks Papers, 41: 199–213.

Hegarty, Melinda. 1996. "Laurentian Patronage in the Palazzo Vecchio: The Frescoes of the Sala dei Gigli." The Art Bulletin, 78(2): 265–285.

Hudson, Hugh. 2006. "The Politics of War: Paolo Uccello’s Equestrian Monument for Sir John Hawkwood in the Cathedral of Florence." Parergon 23: 1–33.

Mills, Robert. 2005.

Suspended animation: pain, pleasure and punishment in medieval culture.

Reaktion Books.

ISBN 1-86189-260-8 Ortalli, Gherardo. 2015 [1979].

La pittura infamante. Secoli XIII-XVI.

New edition. Rome: Viella.

ISBN 978-88-6728-020-9 Wegener, Wendy J. 1993. "'That the practice of arms is most excellent declare the statues of valiant men': the Luccan War and Florentine Political ideology in paintings by Uccello and Castagno." Renaissance Studies 7 (2): 129–167.

Wieruszowski, Helene. 1944. "Art and the Commune in the Time of Dante." Speculum , 19 (1): 14–33.

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pittura_infamante&oldid=1267376190 " Categories : Italian art genres Caricature Iconography Political art Punishments Italian words and phrases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing German-language text Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 4 January 2025, at 21:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pittura infamante 6 languages Add topic

