Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Legacy 2 References 3 Sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Campaspe 14 languages Български Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mistress of Alexander the Great For other uses, see Campaspe (disambiguation) .

Campaspe Taking off Her Clothes in Front of Apelles by Order of Alexander , c. 1883 by Auguste Ottin (1811–1890). North façade of the Cour Carrée in the Louvre , Paris.

Alexander the Great Offering His Concubine Campaspe to the Painter Apelles ( Gaetano Gandolfi , c. 1793–97) Campaspe ( / k æ m ˈ p æ s p iː / ; Greek: Καμπάσπη, Kampaspē ), or Pancaste ( / p æ ŋ ˈ k æ s t iː / ; Greek: Παγκάστη, Pankastē ; also Pakate ), [ 1 ] was a supposed mistress of Alexander the Great and a prominent citizen of Larissa in Thessaly. No Campaspe appears in the five major sources for the life of Alexander and the story may be apocryphal. The biographer Robin Lane Fox traces her legend back to the Roman authors Pliny ( Natural History ), Lucian of Samosata and Aelian 's Varia Historia . Aelian surmised that she initiated the young Alexander in love.

According to tradition, she was painted by Apelles , who had the reputation in antiquity for being the greatest of painters. The episode occasioned an apocryphal exchange that was reported in Pliny's Natural History : [ 2 ] "Seeing the beauty of the nude portrait, Alexander saw that the artist appreciated Campaspe (and loved her) more than he. And so Alexander kept the portrait, but presented Campaspe to Apelles." Fox describes this bequest as "the most generous gift of any patron and one which would remain a model for patronage and painters on through the Renaissance." [ 3 ] Apelles also used Campaspe as a model for his most celebrated painting of Aphrodite "rising out of the sea", the iconic Venus Anadyomene , "wringing her hair, and the falling drops of water formed a transparent silver veil around her form".

[ 4 ] Legacy [ edit ] Campaspe became a generic poetical synonym for a man's mistress; the English University wit and poet John Lyly (1553–1606), who produced his comedy Campaspe in 1584, also wrote: Cupid and my Campaspe play'd At cards for kisses—Cupid paid: He stakes his quiver, bow and arrows, His mother's doves, and team of sparrows; Loses them too; then down he throws The coral of his lip, the rose Growing on's cheek (but none knows how); With these, the crystal of his brow, And then the dimple of his chin: All these did my Campaspe win.

At last he set her both his eyes, She won, and Cupid blind did rise.

O Love! has she done this to thee?

What shall (alas!) become of me?

The Spanish playwright Pedro Calderón de la Barca wrote his own play on the Campaspe story, Darlo todo y no dar nada (1651).

In 1819, the painting Générosité d'Alexandre , by Jérôme-Martin Langlois depicted the scene where Alexander the Great gifted Campaspe to Apelles.

[ 5 ] The Campaspe River in Victoria, Australia, the Campaspe River in Queensland, Australia and the Shire of Campaspe are named after her.

[ 6 ] In E. R. Eddison 's books of Zimiamvia , Campaspe is a water nymph who changes from human shape to a water-rat and back again. She is one of the attendants of Antiope, who represents Aphrodite .

References [ edit ] ^ Her Thessalian name is sometimes reported in Atticized form as Pancaste .

^ John J. Popovic, "Apelles, the greatest painter of Antiquity" Source quotes from Natural History 35.79–97.

^ Fox, Alexander the Great , 1973:50.

^ Peck (1898).

^ "Alexander Ceding Campaspe to Apelles" .

www.getty.edu . Getty . Retrieved 24 January 2023 .

^ "The romance of Australian place names" .

The Australian Women's Weekly . 27 May 1964. p. 59 . Retrieved 14 October 2013 – via National Library of Australia.

Sources [ edit ] Pothos.org: Alexander's lovers Harry Thurston Peck, Harper's Dictionary of Classical Antiquities , 1898 "Campaspe" John Lyly: "Cupid and my Campaspe..." John Lyly: A Moste Excellent Comedie of Alexander, Campaspe, and Diogenes 1584 External links [ edit ] Media related to Campaspe at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Artists ULAN People DDB Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Campaspe&oldid=1306358243 " Categories : 4th-century BC Greek women Ancient Larissaeans Ancient Thessalian women Artists' models of ancient Greece Courtiers of Alexander the Great Mistresses of Alexander the Great Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 09:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Campaspe 14 languages Add topic

