Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 First Vienna Circle (1907–1912) 1.2 Formative years (1918–1924) 1.3 Non-public phase – Schlick Circle (1924–1928) 1.4 Public phase – Schlick Circle and Verein Ernst Mach (1928–1934) 1.5 Disintegration, emigration, internationalization (1934–1938) 1.6 Overview of the members 1.7 Reception in the United States and the United Kingdom 2 Congresses and publications 3 Topics and debates Toggle Topics and debates subsection 3.1 The Manifesto (1929) 3.2 Unified science 3.3 Critique of metaphysics 4 Institute Vienna Circle / Vienna Circle Society 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 7.1 Primary literature 7.2 Secondary literature 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Vienna Circle 50 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1924–1936 group of philosophers and scientists Entrance to the Mathematical Seminar at the University of Vienna , Boltzmanngasse 5. Meeting place of the Vienna Circle.

The Vienna Circle ( German : Wiener Kreis ) of logical empiricism was a group of elite philosophers and scientists drawn from the natural and social sciences , logic and mathematics who met regularly from 1924 to 1936 at the University of Vienna , chaired by Moritz Schlick . The Vienna Circle had a profound influence on 20th-century philosophy , especially philosophy of science and analytic philosophy .

The philosophical position of the Vienna Circle was called logical empiricism (German: logischer Empirismus ), logical positivism or neopositivism . It was influenced by Ernst Mach , David Hilbert , French conventionalism ( Henri Poincaré and Pierre Duhem ), Gottlob Frege , Bertrand Russell , Ludwig Wittgenstein and Albert Einstein . The Vienna Circle was pluralistic and committed to the ideals of the Enlightenment . It was unified by the aim of making philosophy scientific with the help of modern logic . Main topics were foundational debates in the natural and social sciences, logic and mathematics; the modernization of empiricism by modern logic; the search for an empiricist criterion of meaning; the critique of metaphysics and the unification of the sciences in the unity of science .

[ 1 ] The Vienna Circle appeared in public with the publication of various book series – Schriften zur wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung ( Monographs on the Scientific World-Conception ), Einheitswissenschaft ( Unified Science ) and the journal Erkenntnis – and the organization of international conferences in Prague ; Königsberg (today known as Kaliningrad ); Paris ; Copenhagen ; Cambridge , UK, and Cambridge, Massachusetts . Its public profile was provided by the Ernst Mach Society (German: Verein Ernst Mach ) through which members of the Vienna Circle sought to popularize their ideas in the context of programmes for popular education in Vienna.

During the era of Austrofascism and after the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany most members of the Vienna Circle were forced to emigrate. The murder of Schlick in 1936 by former student Johann Nelböck put an end to the Vienna Circle in Austria.

History [ edit ] The history and development of the Vienna Circle shows various stages: [ 2 ] First Vienna Circle (1907–1912) [ edit ] The pre-history of the Vienna Circle began with meetings on the philosophy of science and epistemology from 1908 [ 3 ] on, promoted by Philipp Frank , Hans Hahn and Otto Neurath .

[ 4 ] Hans Hahn , the oldest of the three (1879–1934), was a mathematician. He received his degree in mathematics in 1902. Afterwards he studied under the direction of Ludwig Boltzmann in Vienna and David Hilbert , Felix Klein and Hermann Minkowski in Göttingen . In 1905 he received the Habilitation in mathematics. He taught at Innsbruck (1905–1906) and Vienna (from 1909).

Otto Neurath (1882–1945) studied mathematics , political economy , and history in Vienna and Berlin. From 1907 to 1914 he taught in Vienna at the Neue Wiener Handelsakademie (Viennese Commercial Academy). Neurath married Olga, Hahn's sister, in 1911.

Philipp Frank , the youngest of the group (1884–1966), studied physics at Göttingen and Vienna with Ludwig Boltzmann, David Hilbert and Felix Klein. From 1912, he held the chair of theoretical physics in the German University in Prague .

Their meetings were held in Viennese coffeehouses from 1907 onward. Frank remembered: After 1910 there began in Vienna a movement which regarded Mach's positivist philosophy of science as having great importance for general intellectual life [...] An attempt was made by a group of young men to retain the most essential points of Mach's positivism, especially his stand against the misuse of metaphysics in science. [...] To this group belonged the mathematician H. Hahn, the political economist Otto Neurath, and the author of this book [i.e. Frank], at the time an instructor in theoretical physics in Vienna. [...] We tried to supplement Mach's ideas by those of the French philosophy of science of Henri Poincaré and Pierre Duhem , and also to connect them with the investigations in logic of such authors as Couturat , Schröder , Hilbert, etc.

— Uebel, Thomas, 2003, p. 70.

A number of further authors were discussed in the meetings such as Franz Brentano , Alexius Meinong , Hermann von Helmholtz , Heinrich Hertz , Edmund Husserl , Sigmund Freud , Bertrand Russell , Alfred North Whitehead , Vladimir Lenin and Gottlob Frege .

[ 5 ] Presumably the meetings stopped in 1912, when Frank went to Prague , to hold the chair of theoretical physics left vacant by Albert Einstein . Hahn left Vienna during World War I and returned in 1921.

Formative years (1918–1924) [ edit ] The formation of the Vienna Circle began with Hahn returning to Vienna in 1921.

[ 6 ] Together with the mathematician Kurt Reidemeister he organized seminars on Ludwig Wittgenstein 's Tractatus logico-philosophicus and on Whitehead and Russell's Principia Mathematica .

With the support of Hahn, Moritz Schlick was appointed to the chair of philosophy of the inductive sciences at the University of Vienna in 1922 – the chair formerly held by Ernst Mach and partly by Boltzmann . Schlick had already published two important works Raum und Zeit in die gegenwärtigen Physik ( Space and Time in contemporary Physics ) in 1917 and Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre ( General Theory of Knowledge ) in 1918.

Immediately after Schlick's arrival in Vienna, he organized discussions with the mathematicians around Hahn. In 1924 Schlick's students Friedrich Waismann and Herbert Feigl suggested to their teacher a sort of regular "evening circle". From winter term 1924 on regular meetings were held at the Institute of Mathematics in Vienna's Boltzmanngasse 5 on personal invitation by Schlick. These discussions can be seen as the beginning of the Vienna Circle.

[ 7 ] Non-public phase – Schlick Circle (1924–1928) [ edit ] The group that met from 1924 on was quite diverse and included not only recognized scientists such as Schlick, Hahn, Kraft, Philipp Frank, Neurath, Olga Hahn-Neurath , and Heinrich Gomperz , but also younger students and doctoral candidates.

[ 8 ] In addition, the group invited foreign visitors.

In 1926 Schlick and Hahn arranged to bring Rudolf Carnap to the University of Vienna as a Privatdozent (private lecturer). Carnap's Logical Structure of the World was intensely discussed in the Circle.

Also Wittgenstein's Tractatus logico-philosophicus was read out loud and discussed. From 1927 on personal meetings were arranged between Wittgenstein and Schlick, Waismann, Carnap and Feigl.

[ 9 ] Public phase – Schlick Circle and Verein Ernst Mach (1928–1934) [ edit ] In 1928 the Verein Ernst Mach ( Ernst Mach Society ) was founded, with Schlick as its chairman.

[ 10 ] The aim of the society was the spreading of a "scientific world conception" through public lectures that were in large part held by members of the Vienna Circle.

[ 11 ] In 1929 the Vienna Circle made its first public appearance under this name – invented by Neurath [ 12 ] – with the publication of its manifesto Wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung. Der Wiener Kreis ( The Scientific Conception of the World. The Vienna Circle also known as Viewing the World Scientifically: The Vienna Circle [ 13 ] ) The pamphlet is dedicated to Schlick, and its preface was signed by Hahn, Neurath and Carnap.

The manifesto was presented at the Tagung für Erkenntnislehre der exakten Wissenschaften ( Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences ) in autumn 1929, organized by the Vienna Circle together with the Berlin Circle . This conference was the first international appearance of logical empiricism and the first of a number of conferences: Königsberg ( 1930 ), Prague (1934), Paris (1935), Copenhague (1936), Cambridge , UK (1938), Cambridge, Mass.

(1939), and Chicago (1941).

While primarily known for its views on the natural sciences and metaphysics, the public phase of the Vienna Circle was explicitly political. Neurath and Hahn were both socialists and believed the rejection of magic was a necessary component for liberation of the working classes. The manifesto linked Karl Marx and Friedrich Nietzsche to their political and anti-metaphysical views, indicating a blur between what are now considered two separate schools of contemporary philosophy – analytic philosophy and continental philosophy .

[ 14 ] In 1930 the Vienna Circle and the Berlin Society took over the journal Annalen der Philosophie and made it the main journal of logical empiricism under the title Erkenntnis , edited by Carnap and Reichenbach. In addition, the Vienna Circle published a number of book series: Schriften zur wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung ( Monographs on the Scientific World-Conception , ed. by Schlick und Frank, 1928–1937), [ 15 ] Einheitswissenschaft ( Unified Science , edited by Neurath, 1933–1939), and later the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science (edited by Neurath, Carnap and Charles W. Morris , 1938–1970).

Disintegration, emigration, internationalization (1934–1938) [ edit ] From the beginning of the 1930s the first signs of disintegration appeared for political and racist reasons: Herbert Feigl left Austria in 1930. Carnap was appointed to a chair at Prague University in 1931 and left for Chicago in 1935.

1934 marks an important break: Hahn died after surgery, Neurath fled to Holland because of the victory of Austrofascism in the Austrian Civil War following which the Ernst Mach Society was dissolved for political reasons by the Schuschnigg regime.

The murder of Moritz Schlick by the former student Hans Nelböck for political and personal reasons in 1936 set an end to the meetings of the Schlick Circle.

[ 16 ] Some members of the circle such as Kraft, Waismann, Zilsel, Menger and Gomperz continued to meet occasionally. But the annexation of Austria to Nazi Germany in 1938 meant the definite end of the activities of the Vienna Circle in Austria.

[ 17 ] With the emigration went along the internationalization of logical empiricism . Many former members of the Vienna Circle and the Berlin Circle emigrated to the English-speaking world where they had an immense influence on the development of philosophy of science . The unity of science movement for the construction of an International Encyclopedia of Unified Science , promoted mainly by Neurath, Carnap, and Morris, is symptomatic of the internationalization of logical empiricism, organizing numerous international conferences and the publication of the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science .

[ 18 ] Overview of the members [ edit ] Apart from the central figures of the Schlick Circle the question of membership in the Vienna Circle is in many cases unsettled. The partition into "members" and "those sympathetic to the Vienna Circle" produced in the manifesto from 1929 is representative only of a specific moment in the development of the Circle.

[ 19 ] Depending on the criteria used (regular attendance, philosophical affinities etc.) there are different possible distributions in "inner circle" and "periphery".

In the following list (in alphabetical order), the "inner circle" is defined using the criterion of regular attendance. The "periphery" comprises occasional visitors, foreign visitors and leading intellectual figures who stood in regular contact with the Circle (such as Wittgenstein and Popper).

[ 20 ] Inner Circle: Gustav Bergmann , Rudolf Carnap , Herbert Feigl , Philipp Frank , Kurt Gödel , Hans Hahn , Olga Hahn-Neurath , Béla Juhos , Felix Kaufmann , Victor Kraft , Karl Menger , Richard von Mises , Otto Neurath , Rose Rand , Josef Schächter , Moritz Schlick , Friedrich Waismann , Edgar Zilsel .

Periphery: Alfred Jules Ayer , Egon Brunswik , Karl Bühler , Josef Frank , Else Frenkel-Brunswik , Heinrich Gomperz , Carl Gustav Hempel , Eino Kaila , Hans Kelsen , Charles W. Morris , Arne Naess , Karl Raimund Popper , Willard Van Orman Quine , Frank P. Ramsey , Hans Reichenbach , Kurt Reidemeister , Alfred Tarski , Olga Taussky-Todd , Ludwig Wittgenstein .

Reception in the United States and the United Kingdom [ edit ] The spread of logical positivism in the United States occurred throughout the 1920s and 1930s. In 1929 and in 1932, Schlick was a visiting professor at Stanford , while Feigl, who immigrated to the United States in 1930, became lecturer (1931) and professor (1933) at the University of Iowa . The definite diffusion of logical positivism in the United States was due to Carl Hempel, Hans Reichenbach, Rudolf Carnap, Philipp Frank, and Herbert Feigl, who emigrated and taught in the United States.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Another link to the United States is Willard Van Orman Quine , who traveled in 1932 and 1933 as a Sheldon Traveling Fellow to Vienna , Prague , and Warsaw . Moreover, American semiotician and philosopher Charles W. Morris helped many German and Austrian philosophers emigrate to the United States, including Rudolf Carnap, in 1936.

In the United Kingdom it was Alfred Jules Ayer who acquainted the British academia with the work of the Vienna Circle with his book Language, Truth, and Logic (1936).

Karl Popper was also important for the reception and critique of their work, even though he never participated in the meetings of the Vienna Circle.

Congresses and publications [ edit ] See also: International Encyclopedia of Unified Science § International Congresses for the Unity of Science The Vienna Circle was very active in advertising their new philosophical ideas. Several congresses on epistemology and philosophy of science were organized, with the help of the Berlin Circle . There were some preparatory congresses: Prague (1929), Königsberg (1930), Prague (1934) and then the first congress on scientific philosophy held in Paris (1935), followed by congresses in Copenhagen (1936), Paris (1937), Cambridge , UK (1938), Cambridge, Massachusetts . (1939). The Königsberg congress (1930) was very important, for Kurt Gödel announced that he had proven the completeness of first-order logic and the incompleteness of formal arithmetic . Another very interesting congress was the one held in Copenhagen (1936), which was dedicated to quantum physics and causality .

Between 1928 and 1937, the Vienna Circle published ten books in a collection named Schriften zur wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung ( Monographs on the Scientific World-Conception ), edited by Schlick and Frank.

Karl Raimund Popper 's book Logik der Forschung was published in this collection. Seven works were published in another collection, called Einheitswissenschaft ( Unified Science ). In 1930 Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach undertook the editorship of the journal Erkenntnis , which was published between 1930 and 1940 (from 1939 the editors were Otto Neurath, Rudolf Carnap and Charles Morris).

The following is the list of works published in the two collections edited by the Vienna Circle.

Schriften zur wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung ( Monographs on the Scientific World-Conception ), edited by Schlick and Frank: Richard von Mises , Wahrscheinlichkeit, Statistik und Wahrheit , 1928 ( Probability, Statistics, and Truth , New York: Macmillan company, 1939) Rudolf Carnap, Abriss der Logistik , 1929 Moritz Schlick, Fragen der Ethik , 1930 ( Problems of Ethics , New York: Prentice-Hall, 1939) Otto Neurath, Empirische Soziologie , 1931 Philipp Frank, Das Kausalgesetz und seine Grenzen , 1932 ( The Law of Causality and its Limits , Dordrecth; Boston: Kluwer, 1997) Otto Kant, Zur Biologie der Ethik , 1932 Rudolf Carnap, Logische Syntax der Sprache , 1934 ( The Logical Syntax of Language , New York: Humanities, 1937) Karl Raimund Popper, Logik der Forschung , 1934 ( The Logic of Scientific Discovery , New York: Basic Books, 1959) Josef Schächter , Prolegomena zu einer kritischen Grammatik , 1935 ( Prolegomena to a Critical Grammar , Dordrecht; Boston: D. Reidel Pub. Co., 1973) Victor Kraft, Die Grundlagen einer wissenschaftliche Wertlehre , 1937 ( Foundations for a Scientific Analysis of Value , Dordrecht; Boston: D. Reidel Pub. Co., 1981) Einheitswissenschaft ( Unified Science ), edited by Carnap, Frank, Hahn, Neurath, Jørgensen (after Hahn's death), Morris (from 1938): Hans Hahn, Logik, Mathematik und Naturerkennen , 1933 Otto Neurath, Einheitswissenschaft und Psychologie , 1933 Rudolf Carnap, Die Aufgabe der Wissenschaftlogik , 1934 Philipp Frank, Das Ende der mechanistischen Physik , 1935 Otto Neurath, Was bedeutet rationale Wirtschaftsbetrachtung , 1935 Otto Neurath, E. Brunswik , C. Hull, G. Mannoury , J. Woodger, Zur Enzyklopädie der Einheitswissenschaft . Vorträge, 1938 Richard von Mises, Ernst Mach und die empiristische Wissenschaftauffassung , 1939 These works are translated in Unified Science: The Vienna Circle Monograph Series Originally Edited by Otto Neurath , Kluwer, 1987.

Monographs, arranged in chronological order, published in the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science : Otto Neurath, Niels Bohr, John Dewey , Bertrand Russell , Rudolf Carnap, Charles Morris, Encyclopedia and unified science , 1938, vol.1 n.1 Charles Morris, Foundations of the theory of signs , 1938, vol.1 n.2 Victor Lenzen , Procedures of empirical sciences , 1938, vol.1 n.5 Rudolf Carnap, Foundations of logic and mathematics , 1939, vol.1 n.3 Leonard Bloomfield , Linguistic aspects of science , 1939, vol.1 n.4 Ernest Nagel , Principles of the theory of probability , 1939, vol.1 n.6 John Dewey , Theory of valuation , 1939, vol.2 n.4 Giorgio de Santillana and Edgar Zilsel , The development of rationalism and empiricism , 1941, vol.2 n.8 Otto Neurath, Foundations of social sciences , 1944, vol.2 n.1 Joseph H. Woodger , The technique of theory construction , 1949, vol.2 n.5 Philipp Frank, Foundations of physics , 1946, vol.1 n.7 Erwin Finlay-Freundlich , Cosmology , 1951, vol.1 n.8 Jørgen Jørgensen , The development of logical empiricism , 1951, vol.2 n.9 Egon Brunswik , The conceptual framework of psychology , 1952, vol.1 n.10 Carl Hempel , Fundamentals of concept formation in empirical science , 1952, vol.2 n.7 Felix Mainx, Foundations of biology , 1955, vol.1 n.9 Abraham Edel , Science and the structure of ethics , 1961, vol.2 n.3 Thomas S. Kuhn , The structure of scientific revolutions , 1962, vol.2 n.2 Gerhard Tintner , Methodology of mathematical economics and econometrics , 1968, vol.2 n.6 Herbert Feigl and Charles Morris, Bibliography and index , 1969, vol.2 n.10 Topics and debates [ edit ] The Vienna Circle cannot be assigned one single philosophy. First, there existed a plurality of philosophical positions within the Circle, and second, members often changed their views fundamentally in the course of time and in reaction to discussions in the Circle. It thus seems more convenient to speak of "the philosophies (in the plural) of the Vienna Circle".

[ 24 ] However, some central topics and debates can be identified.

The Manifesto (1929) [ edit ] This states the scientific world-conception of the Vienna Circle, which is characterized "essentially by two features.

[ 25 ] First it is empiricist and positivist: there is knowledge only from experience. Second, the scientific world-conception is marked by the application of a certain method, namely logical analysis ." [ 26 ] Logical analysis is the method of clarification of philosophical problems; it makes an extensive use of symbolic logic and distinguishes the Vienna Circle empiricism from earlier versions. The task of philosophy lies in the clarification—through the method of logical analysis—of problems and assertions.

Logical analysis shows that there are two different kinds of statements; one kind includes statements reducible to simpler statements about the empirically given; the other kind includes statements which cannot be reduced to statements about experience and thus they are devoid of meaning.

Metaphysical statements belong to this second kind and therefore they are meaningless. Hence many philosophical problems are rejected as pseudo-problems which arise from logical mistakes, while others are re-interpreted as empirical statements and thus become the subject of scientific inquiries.

One source of the logical mistakes that are at the origins of metaphysics is the ambiguity of natural language . "Ordinary language for instance uses the same part of speech , the substantive, for things ('apple') as well as for qualities ('hardness'), relations ('friendship'), and processes ('sleep'); therefore it misleads one into a thing-like conception of functional concepts ".

[ 27 ] Another source of mistakes is "the notion that thinking can either lead to knowledge out of its own resources without using any empirical material, or at least arrive at new contents by an inference from given states of affair".

[ 28 ] Synthetic knowledge a priori is rejected by the Vienna Circle. Mathematics, which at first sight seems an example of necessarily valid synthetic knowledge derived from pure reason alone, has instead a tautological character, that is its statements are analytical statements , thus very different from Kantian synthetic statements. The only two kinds of statements accepted by the Vienna Circle are synthetic statements a posteriori (i.e., scientific statements) and analytic statements a priori (i.e., logical and mathematical statements).

However, the persistence of metaphysics is connected not only with logical mistakes but also with "social and economical struggles".

[ 29 ] Metaphysics and theology are allied to traditional social forms, while the group of people who "faces modern times, rejects these views and takes its stand on the ground of empirical sciences".

[ 29 ] Thus the struggle between metaphysics and scientific world-conception is not only a struggle between different kinds of philosophies, but it is also—and perhaps primarily—a struggle between different political, social, and economical attitudes. Of course, as the manifesto itself acknowledged, "not every adherent of the scientific world-conception will be a fighter".

[ 30 ] Many historians of the Vienna Circle see in the latter sentence an implicit reference to a contrast between the so-called 'left wing' of the Vienna Circle, mainly represented by Neurath and Carnap, and Moritz Schlick. The aim of the left wing was to facilitate the penetration of the scientific world-conception in "the forms of personal and public life, in education , upbringing, architecture , and the shaping of economic and social life".

[ 31 ] In contrast, Schlick was primarily interested in the theoretical study of science and philosophy. Perhaps the sentence "Some, glad of solitude, will lead a withdrawn existence on the icy slopes of logic" is an ironic reference to Schlick.

[ 29 ] The manifesto lists Walter Dubislav , Josef Frank , Kurt Grelling , Hasso Härlen, Eino Kaila , Heinrich Loewy, F. P. Ramsey , Hans Reichenbach , Kurt Reidemeister , and Edgar Zilsel as people "sympathetic to the Vienna Circle" and Albert Einstein , Bertrand Russell , and Ludwig Wittgenstein as "leading representatives  of the scientific world-conception".

Unified science [ edit ] See also: Unity of science The final goal pursued by the Vienna Circle was unified science , that is the construction of a "constitutive system" in which every legitimate statement is reduced to the concepts of lower level which refer directly to the given experience . "The endeavour is to link and harmonise the achievements of individual investigators in their various fields of science".

[ 32 ] From this aim follows the search for clarity, neatness, and for a symbolic language that eliminates the problems arising from the ambiguity of natural language. The Vienna Circle published a collection, called Einheitswissenschaft ( Unified Science ), edited by Rudolf Carnap, Philipp Frank, Hans Hahn, Otto Neurath, Jørgen Jørgensen (after Hahn's death) and Charles W. Morris (from 1938), whose aim was to present a unified vision of science. After the publication in Europe of seven monographs from 1933 to 1939, the collection was dismissed, because of the problems arising from the World War II . In 1938 a new series of publications started in the United States. It was the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science , an ambitious project never completed devoted to unified science. Only the first section Foundations of the Unity of Sciences was published; it contains two volumes for a total of twenty monographs published from 1938 to 1969. As remembered by Rudolf Carnap and Charles Morris in the Preface to the 1969 edition of the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science: The Encyclopedia was in origin the idea of Otto Neurath. It was meant as a manifestation of the unity of science movement [...] Original plans for the Encyclopedia were ambitious. In addition to the two introductory volumes, there was to be a section on the methodology of the sciences, one on the existing state of the unification of sciences, and possibly a section on the application of the sciences. It was planned that the work in its entirety would comprise about twenty-six volumes (260 monographs) — Foundations of the Unity of Sciences , vol. 1, The University of Chicago Press, 1969, p. vii.

Thomas Kuhn 's well known work, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , was published in this Encyclopedia in 1962, as the number two in the second volume.

Critique of metaphysics [ edit ] The attitude of Vienna Circle towards metaphysics is well expressed by Carnap in the article 'Überwindung der Metaphysik durch Logische Analyse der Sprache' in Erkenntnis , vol. 2, 1932 (English translation 'The Elimination of Metaphysics Through Logical Analysis of Language' in Sarkar, Sahotra, ed., Logical empiricism at its peak: Schlick, Carnap, and Neurath , New York : Garland Pub., 1996, pp. 10–31). A language—says Carnap—consists of a vocabulary , i.e., a set of meaningful words, and a syntax , i.e., a set of rules governing the formation of sentences from the words of the vocabulary. Pseudo-statements, i.e., sequences of words that at first sight resemble statements but in reality have no meaning, are formed in two ways: either meaningless words occur in them, or they are formed in an invalid syntactical way. According to Carnap, pseudo-statements of both kinds occur in metaphysics.

A word W has a meaning if two conditions are satisfied. First, the mode of the occurrence of W in its elementary sentence form (i.e., the simplest sentence form in which W is capable of occurring) must be fixed. Secondly, if W occurs in an elementary sentence S , it is necessary to give an answer to the following questions (that are—according to Carnap—equivalent formulation of the same question): What sentences is S deducible from, and what sentences are deducible from S ?

Under what conditions is S supposed to be true, and under what conditions false?

How is S verified?

What is the meaning of S ?

(Carnap, "The Elimination of Metaphysics Through Logical Analysis of Language" in Sarkar, Sahotra 1996, p. 12) An example offered by Carnap concerns the word ' arthropod '. The sentence form "the thing x is an arthropod" is an elementary sentence form that is derivable from " x is an animal", " x has a segmented body" and " x has jointed legs". Conversely, these sentences are derivable from "the thing x is an arthropod". Thus the meaning of the word 'arthropod' is determined.

According to Carnap, many words of metaphysics do not fulfill these requirements and thus they are meaningless. As an example, Carnap considers the word 'principle'. This word has a definite meaning, if the sentence " x is the principle of y " is supposed to be equivalent to the sentence " y exists by virtue of x " or " y arises out of x ". The latter sentence is perfectly clear: y arises out of x when x is invariably followed by y , and the invariable association between x and y is empirically verifiable. But—says Carnap—metaphysicians are not satisfied with this interpretation of the meaning of 'principle'. They assert that no empirical relation between x and y can completely explain the meaning of " x is the principle of y ", because there is something that cannot be grasped by means of the experience, something for which no empirical criterion can be specified. It is the lacking of any empirical criterion—says Carnap—that deprives of meaning the word 'principle' when it occurs in metaphysics. Therefore, metaphysical pseudo-statements such as "water is the principle of the world" or "the spirit is the principle of the world" are void of meaning because a meaningless word occurs in them.

However, there are pseudo-statements in which occur only meaningful words; these pseudo-statements are formed in a counter-syntactical way. An example is the word sequence "Caesar is a prime number "; every word has a definite meaning, but the sequence has no meaning. The problem is that "prime number" is a predicate of numbers, not a predicate of human beings. In the example the nonsense is evident; however, in natural language the rules of grammar do not prohibit the formation of analogous meaningless word sequences that are not so easily detectable. In the grammar of natural languages, every sequence of the kind " x is y ", where x is a noun and y is a predicate, is acceptable. In fact, in the grammar there is no distinction between predicate which can be affirmed of human beings and predicate which can be affirmed of numbers. So "Caesar is a general" and "Caesar is a prime number" are both well-formed, in contrast for example with "Caesar is and", which is ill-formed. In a logically constructed language—says Carnap—a distinction between the various kinds of predicate is specified, and pseudo-statements as "Caesar is a prime number" are ill-formed. Now, and this is the main point of Carnap's argument, metaphysical statements in which meaningless words do not occur, are indeed meaningless because they are formed in a way which is admissible in natural languages, but not in logically constructed languages. Carnap attempts to indicate the most frequent sources of errors from which metaphysical pseudo-statements can arise. One source of mistakes is the ambiguity of the verb "to be", which is sometimes used as a copula ("I am hungry"), and sometimes to designate existence ("I am"). The latter statement incorrectly suggests a predicative form, and thus it suggests that existence is a predicate. Only modern logic, with the introduction of an explicit sign to designate existence (the sign ∃ ∃ {\displaystyle \exists \;} ), which occurs only in statements such as ∃ ∃ x P ( x ) {\displaystyle \exists \;xP(x)} , never as a predicate, has shown that existence is not a predicate, and thus has revealed the logical error from which pseudo-statements such as "cogito, ergo sum" has arisen.

Another source of mistakes is type confusions, in which a predicate of a kind is used as a predicate of another kind. For example, the pseudo-statements "we know the Nothing" is analogous to "we know the rain", but while the latter is well-formed, the former is ill-formed, at least in a logically constructed language, because "Nothing" is incorrectly used as a noun . In a formal language, "Nothing" only means ¬ ¬ ∃ ∃ x {\displaystyle \lnot \;\exists \;x} , such as "there is nothing which is outside"—i.e., ¬ ¬ ∃ ∃ x O ( x ) {\displaystyle \lnot \;\exists \;xO(x)} , and thus "Nothing" never occurs as a noun or as a predicate.

According to Carnap, although metaphysics has no theoretical content, it does have content: metaphysical pseudo-statements express the attitude of a person towards life, and this is the role of metaphysics. He compares it to an art like lyrical poetry; the metaphysician works with the medium of the theoretical; he confuses art with science, attitude towards life with knowledge, and thus produces an unsatisfactory and inadequate work. "Metaphysicians are musicians without musical ability".

[ 33 ] Institute Vienna Circle / Vienna Circle Society [ edit ] In 1991 the Institute Vienna Circle (IVC) was established as a society in Vienna. It is dedicated to studying the work and influence of the Vienna Circle. In 2011 it was integrated in the University of Vienna as a subunit of the Faculty of Philosophy and Education.

[ 34 ] Since 2016 the former society continues its activities in close cooperation with the IVC under the changed name Vienna Circle Society (VCS).

[ 35 ] In 2015 the institute co-organized an exhibition on the Vienna Circle in the main building of the University of Vienna.

[ 36 ] See also [ edit ] Formalism (mathematics) Logical behaviorism Logicism List of Austrian intellectual traditions Mastermind group Notes [ edit ] ^ Cp. Stöltzner/Uebel 2006, LII-LXXIX.

^ Cp. the phases in Stadler 2001. See 579–580 for an overview.

^ Wittgenstein's Vienna, New Edition, Elephant Paperback, 1996.

^ Cp. Frank 1949, Stadler 2001, Uebel 2000. The expression goes back to Rudolf Haller, "Der erste Wiener Kreis", in: Fragen zu Wittgenstein und Aufsätze zur Österreichischen Philosophie , Amsterdam 1986.

^ Cp. Stadler 2001, 143–161.

^ Stadler 2001, 195–218.

^ Stadler 2001, 199.

^ Stadler 2001, 199–218.

^ For the recording of these meetings see McGuinness, Brian , ed. (1979).

Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle: Conversations Recorded by Friedrich Waismann . translation by Joachim Schulte and Brian McGuinness. New York: Barnes & Noble Books .

ISBN 978-0-06-497310-6 .

^ Stadler 2001, 219–290.

^ For an overview of the lectures of the Ernst Mach Society 1929–1932 see Stadler 2001, 342–344.

^ Frank 1949, 38.

^ Edmunds, D. and Eidenow, J.

Wittgenstein's Poker: The Story of a Ten-Minute Argument Between Two Great Philosophers, 2001, page 151.

^ Josephson-Storm, Jason (2017).

The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

246– 7.

ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6 .

^ In 1934 Karl Popper's Logic of Scientific Discovery was published in this series.

^ For documents concerning the murder of Moritz Schlick and the trial against Nelböck see Stadler 2001, 869–909.

^ Only after the war in 1949 arose the Kraft Circle in Vienna, a successor to the Vienna Circle, under the leadership of Viktor Kraft, a former member of the Vienna Circle. Among the members of this circle was Paul Feyerabend .

^ For a chronology of the emigration of the Vienna Circle see Hans-Joachim Dahms, "The Emigration of the Vienna Circle", in: Friedrich Stadler, Peter Weibel (ed.), The Cultural Exodus from Austria , Vienna 1995.

^ Stöltzner and Uebel 2006, XX.

^ Cp. Stadler 2001, 573. This list follows the presentation in Stadler 2001, 571ff., including further bio-bibliographical information on all the persons listed.

^ E. Nagel, "Nature and Convention" in: The Journal of Philosophy , 26, 1929, in which Nagel discussed Reichenbach's interpretation of the theory of relativity; ^ S. Hook, "Personal Impression of Contemporary German Philosophy" in: The Journal of Philosophy , 27, 1930, in which Hook presented a favorable report on logical positivism; ^ A. E. Blumberg and H. Feigl, "Logical Positivism: A New Movement in European Philosophy" in: The Journal of Philosophy , 28, 1931.

^ Cp.

Thomas Uebel , "Vienna Circle", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = < http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/vienna-circle/ >.

^ On the historical background of the manifesto see Stadler 2001, 334–339.

^ The Scientific Conception of the World. The Vienna Circle in Sarkar, Sahotra, 1996, p. 331—hereinafter VC ^ VC p. 329 ^ VC p. 330 ^ a b c VC p. 339 ^ VC p. 339 ^ VC p. 339–340 ^ VC p. 328 ^ Carnap, 'The Elimination of Metaphysics', in Sarkar, Sahotra 1996, p. 30 ^ "Institute Vienna Circle" . University of Vienna . Retrieved 19 March 2020 .

^ "Vienna Circle Society" . Vienna Circle Society . Retrieved 19 March 2020 .

^ "The Vienna Circle – Exact Thinking in Demented Times" . University of Vienna . Retrieved 19 March 2020 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Primary literature [ edit ] Carnap, Rudolf. "Überwindung der Metaphysik durch Logische Analyse der Sprache" in Erkenntnis , vol. 2, 1932 (English translation "The Elimination of Metaphysics Through Logical Analysis of Language" in Sarkar, Sahotra, ed., Logical empiricism at its peak: Schlick, Carnap, and Neurath , New York : Garland Pub., 1996, pp. 10–31) Neurath, Otto and Carnap, Rudolf and Morris, Charles W.

Foundations of the Unity of Sciences , vol. 1, Chicago : The University of Chicago Press, 1969.

Wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung. Der Wiener Kreis , 1929. English translation The Scientific Conception of the World. The Vienna Circle in Sarkar, Sahotra, ed., The Emergence of Logical Empiricism: from 1900 to the Vienna Circle , New York : Garland Publishing, 1996, pp. 321–340 Stadler, Friedrich and Uebel, Thomas (eds.): Wissenschaftliche Weltauffassung. Der Wiener Kreis. Hrsg. vom Verein Ernst Mach (1929).

Reprint of the first edition. With translations into English, French, Spanish and Italian. Vienna: Springer, 2012.

Stöltzner, Michael and Uebel, Thomas (eds.).

Wiener Kreis. Texte zur wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung . Meiner, Hamburg, 2006, ISBN 3-7873-1811-9 . (Anthology in German) Secondary literature [ edit ] Arnswald, Ulrich, Stadler, Friedrich and Weibel, Peter (ed.): Der Wiener Kreis – Aktualität in Wissenschaft, Literatur, Architektur und Kunst.

Wien: LIT Verlag 2019.

ISBN 978-3-643-50937-6 Ayer, Alfred Jules.

Language, Truth and Logic.

London , Victor Gollancz, 1936.

Ayer, Alfred Jules.

Logical Positivism . Glencoe, Ill: Free Press, 1959.

Barone, Francesco.

Il neopositivismo logico . Roma Bari: Laterza, 1986.

Bergmann, Gustav .

The Metaphysics of Logical Positivism . New York: Longmans Green, 1954.

Cirera, Ramon.

Carnap and the Vienna Circle: Empiricism and Logical Syntax . Atlanta, GA: Rodopi, 1994.

Damböck, Christian (2013).

"Nachwort" (PDF) . In Damböck, Christian (ed.).

Der Wiener Kreis – Ausgewählte Texte (in German). Stuttgart: Reclam. pp.

227– 244.

Frank, Philipp : Modern Science and its Philosophy . Cambridge, 1949.

Friedman, Michael , Reconsidering Logical Positivism . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Gadol, Eugene T.

Rationality and Science: A Memorial Volume for Moritz Schlick in Celebration of the Centennial of his Birth . Wien: Springer, 1982.

Geymonat, Ludovico .

La nuova filosofia della natura in Germania . Torino, 1934.

Giere, Ronald N . and Richardson, Alan W.

Origins of Logical Empiricism . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997.

Haller, Rudolf.

Neopositivismus. Eine historische Einführung in die Philosophie des Wiener Kreises . Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, 1993, ISBN 3-534-06677-4 . (German) Holt, Jim . "Positive Thinking" (review of Karl Sigmund , Exact Thinking in Demented Times: The Vienna Circle and the Epic Quest for the Foundations of Science , Basic Books, 449 pp.), The New York Review of Books , vol. LXIV, no. 20 (21 December 2017), pp. 74–76.

Kraft, Victor .

The Vienna Circle: The Origin of Neo-positivism, a Chapter in the History of Recent Philosophy . New York: Greenwood Press, 1953.

Limbeck, Christoph and Stadler, Friedrich (eds.).

The Vienna Circle. Texts and Pictures of an Exhibition.

Münster-Berlin-London 2015.

ISBN 978-3-643-90649-6 McGuinness, Brian .

Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle: Conversations Recorded by Friedrich Waismann . Trans. by Joachim Schulte and Brian McGuinness. New York: Barnes & Noble Books, 1979.

Parrini, Paolo; Salmon, Wesley C.

; Salmon, Merrilee H. (ed.) Logical Empiricism – Historical and Contemporary Perspectives , Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2003.

Reisch, George.

How the Cold War Transformed Philosophy of Science : To the Icy Slopes of Logic . New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

Rescher, Nicholas (ed.).

The Heritage of Logical Positivism . University Press of America, 1985.

Richardson, Alan W. "The Scientific World Conception. Logical Positivism", in: T. Baldwin (Hg.), The Cambridge History of Philosophy , 1870–1945, 2003, 391–400.

Richardson, Alan W. and Uebel, Thomas (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Logical Empiricism . Cambridge, 2007.

Salmon, Wesley and Wolters, Gereon (ed.), Logic, Language, and the Structure of Scientific Theories: Proceedings of the Carnap-Reichenbach Centennial, University of Konstanz, 21–24 May 1991 , Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1994.

Sarkar, Sahotra .

The Emergence of Logical Empiricism: From 1900 to the Vienna Circle . New York: Garland Publishing, 1996.

Sarkar, Sahotra.

Logical Empiricism at its Peak: Schlick, Carnap, and Neurath . New York: Garland Pub., 1996.

Sarkar, Sahotra.

Logical Empiricism and the Special Sciences: Reichenbach, Feigl, and Nagel . New York: Garland Pub., 1996.

Sarkar, Sahotra.

Decline and Obsolescence of Logical Empiricism: Carnap vs. Quine and the Critics . New York: Garland Pub., 1996.

Sarkar, Sahotra.

The Legacy of the Vienna Circle: Modern Reappraisals . New York: Garland Pub., 1996.

Spohn, Wolfgang (ed.), Erkenntnis Orientated: A Centennial Volume for Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach , Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.

Stadler, Friedrich .

The Vienna Circle. Studies in the Origins, Development, and Influence of Logical Empiricism.

New York: Springer, 2001. – 2nd Edition: Dordrecht: Springer, 2015.

Stadler, Friedrich (ed.).

The Vienna Circle and Logical Empiricism. Re-evaluation and Future Perspectives.

Dordrecht – Boston London, Kluwer, 2003.

Uebel, Thomas .

Vernunftkritik und Wissenschaft: Otto Neurath und der erste Wiener Kreis.

Wien-New York 2000. (German) Uebel, Thomas, "On the Austrian Roots of Logical Empiricism" in Logical Empiricism – Historical and contemporary Perspectives , ed. Paolo Parrini, Wesley C. Salmon, Merrilee H. Salmon, Pittsburgh : University of Pittsburgh Press, 2003, pp. 76–93.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vienna Circle (philosophy) .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Vienna Circle .

Institute Vienna Circle Vienna Circle Society Vienna Circle Foundation Amsterdam Thomas Uebel, "Vienna Circle", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐cxk68
Cached time: 20250814214920
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.592 seconds
Real time usage: 0.764 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2835/1000000
Revision size: 47090/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 158509/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3575/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85951/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.302/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25687247/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  512.756      1 -total
 24.23%  124.248     10 Template:Navbox
 18.19%   93.281      1 Template:Reflist
 16.09%   82.501      1 Template:Langx
 13.64%   69.933      3 Template:Cite_book
 13.41%   68.756      1 Template:Epistemology
 10.50%   53.825      1 Template:Short_description
  7.16%   36.693      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.13%   36.584      2 Template:Sister_project
  6.92%   35.460      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:225873:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214920 and revision id 1301961425. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vienna_Circle&oldid=1301961425 " Categories : Vienna Circle Logical positivism 20th-century Austrian philosophers Science studies Philosophy of science Epistemology Epistemology of science 1924 establishments in Austria Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles containing German-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 16:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vienna Circle 50 languages Add topic

