Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Symmetries 3 Occurrence Toggle Occurrence subsection 3.1 In biology 3.2 In medicine 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Rhomboid 22 languages العربية Asturianu Català Чӑвашла Cymraeg Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Interlingua Қазақша Македонски Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geometrical concept This article is about the two-dimensional figure. For the three-dimensional shape, see Rhombohedron . For the human back muscles, see Rhomboid muscles .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rhomboid" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This page is currently being merged .

After a discussion , consensus to merge this page into Parallelogram was found. You can help implement the merge by following the merging instructions and the resolution on the discussion .

Process started in June 2025 .

Rhomboid A rhomboid is a parallelogram with two edge lengths and no right angles Type quadrilateral , trapezium Edges and vertices 4 Symmetry group C 2 , [2] + , Area b × h (base × height); ab sin θ (product of adjacent sides and sine of the vertex angle determined by them) Properties convex Traditionally, in two-dimensional geometry , a rhomboid is a parallelogram in which adjacent sides are of unequal lengths and angles are non-right angled .

The terms "rhomboid" and "parallelogram" are often erroneously conflated with each other (i.e, when most people refer to a "parallelogram" they almost always mean a rhomboid, a specific subtype of parallelogram); however, while all rhomboids are parallelograms, not all parallelograms are rhomboids.

A parallelogram with sides of equal length ( equilateral ) is called a rhombus but not a rhomboid.
A parallelogram with right angled corners is a rectangle but not a rhomboid. 
A parallelogram is a rhomboid if it is neither a rhombus nor a rectangle.

History [ edit ] Euclid introduced the term in his Elements in Book 1, Definition 22, Of quadrilateral figures, a square is that which is both equilateral and right-angled; an oblong that which is right-angled but not equilateral; a rhombus that which is equilateral but not right-angled; and a rhomboid that which has its opposite sides and angles equal to one another but is neither equilateral nor right-angled. And let quadrilaterals other than these be called trapezia.

— Translation from the page of D.E. Joyce , Dept. Math. & Comp. Sci., Clark University [1] Euclid never used the definition of rhomboid again and introduced the word parallelogram in Proposition 34 of Book 1; "In parallelogrammic areas the opposite sides and angles are equal to one another, and the diameter bisects the areas." Heath suggests that rhomboid was an older term already in use.

Symmetries [ edit ] The rhomboid has no line of symmetry, but it has rotational symmetry of order 2.

Occurrence [ edit ] In biology [ edit ] In biology, rhomboid may describe a geometric rhomboid (e.g. the rhomboid muscles ) or a bilaterally-symmetrical kite-shaped or diamond-shaped outline, as in leaves or cephalopod fins .

[ 1 ] In medicine [ edit ] In a type of arthritis called pseudogout , crystals of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate accumulate in the joint, causing inflammation.

Aspiration of the joint fluid reveals rhomboid-shaped crystals under a microscope.

In anatomy, rhomboid-shaped muscles include the rhomboid major muscle and the rhomboid minor muscle .

References [ edit ] ^ "Decapodiform Fin Shapes" .

External links [ edit ] Weisstein, Eric W.

"Rhomboid" .

MathWorld .

v t e Polygons ( List ) Triangles Acute Equilateral Ideal Isosceles Kepler Obtuse Right Quadrilaterals Antiparallelogram Apollonius Bicentric Crossed Cyclic Equidiagonal Ex-tangential Harmonic Isosceles trapezoid Kite Orthodiagonal Parallelogram Rectangle Right kite Right trapezoid Rhomboid Rhombus Square Tangential Tangential trapezoid Trapezoid By number of sides 1–10 sides Monogon (1) Digon (2) Triangle (3) Quadrilateral (4) Pentagon (5) Hexagon (6) Heptagon (7) Octagon (8) Nonagon/Enneagon (9) Decagon (10) 11–20 sides Hendecagon (11) Dodecagon (12) Tridecagon (13) Tetradecagon (14) Pentadecagon (15) Hexadecagon (16) Heptadecagon (17) Octadecagon (18) Icosagon (20) >20 sides Icositrigon (23) Icositetragon (24) Triacontagon (30) 257-gon Chiliagon (1000) Myriagon (10,000) 65537-gon Megagon (1,000,000) Apeirogon (∞) Star polygons Pentagram Hexagram Heptagram Octagram Enneagram Decagram Hendecagram Dodecagram Classes Concave Convex Cyclic Equiangular Equilateral Infinite skew Isogonal Isotoxal Magic Pseudotriangle Rectilinear Regular Reinhardt Simple Skew Star-shaped Tangential Weakly simple Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rhomboid&oldid=1304861548 " Category : Types of quadrilaterals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2012 All articles needing additional references Pages currently being merged This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 16:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rhomboid 22 languages Add topic

