Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Religious practices 3 Gothic deities Toggle Gothic deities subsection 3.1 War god *Teiws 3.2 Ancestor Gapt vs. Norse Odin 3.3 *Fairguneis, Ingwaz, and *Donaws 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Gothic paganism 3 languages العربية Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gothic paganism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Gothic paganism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Spearhead of Kovel (early 3rd century) A drawing of the Elder Futhark inscription from the Ring of Pietroassa (3rd or 4th century), read as ᚷᚢᛏᚨᚾᛁᛟᚹᛁ ᚺᚨᛁᛚᚨᚷ (gutani[o]wi hailag) . The seventh letter, here substituted as ᛟ ( o ), was destroyed when the ring was cut in half by thieves in 1875. The reading of the damaged part is disputed, but it is clear that the inscription begins with the name of the Goths ( Gutani ) and ends with the word for "holy, sacred" ( hailag ).

Gothic paganism or Gothic polytheism was the original religion of the Goths before their conversion to Christianity .

History [ edit ] The Goths first appear in historical records in the early 3rd century and were Christianised in the 4th and the 5th centuries. 
Information on the form of Germanic paganism practiced by the Goths before Christianisation is thus limited to a comparatively narrow and sparsely documented time window in the 3rd and the 4th centuries.

[ citation needed ] The centre of the Gothic cult was the village or clan ( Kuni ) and the ritual sacrificial meal held by the villagers under the leadership of the reiks . 
The reiks saw themselves as the guardians of ethnic tradition. That was expressed starkly in the Gothic persecution of Christians in the 370s in which the reiks Athanaric saw his privilege threatened by the new religion. He responded by the persecution of converted Goths but not of Christian foreigners. According to the Passio of Sabas the Goth , Sabas was executed for professing Christianity or rather for refusing to sacrifice to the tribal gods, and his companion, the priest Sansalas, was let go because he was a foreigner.

[ citation needed ] After the Goths had settled in Scythia in the 2nd century, it is probable that a process of ethnogenesis was set in motion, and that most of the "Goths" of the 3rd and the 4th centuries were not in fact descended from Scandinavia but, much as was the case with the " Huns " in the following century, consisted of a heterogeneous population, which was united under the name of "Goths" by virtue of having submitted to the elite that was formed by the ruling dynasties of the reiks .

[ citation needed ] Gothic religion was purely tribal in which polytheism , nature worship , and ancestor worship were one and the same. It is known that the Amali dynasty deified their ancestors, the Ansis (cognate with Old English ēse , Old Norse æsir ), and that the Tervingi opened battle with songs of praise for their ancestors.

[ citation needed ] The gradual Christianisation of parts of the Gothic population came to a turning point in the 370s. A civil strife between the Christian reiks Fritigern and the pagan reiks Athanaric prompted Roman military intervention on the side of the Christians, which led to the Gothic War (376–382) . In 376, the Romans allowed a number of ostensibly-Christian Goths, including bishops and priests, to cross the Danube and to be granted asylum.

[ citation needed ] Religious practices [ edit ] The English word god itself is cognate with the Gothic word guþ for a pagan idol, presumably a wooden statue of the kind paraded by Winguric on a chariot when he challenged the Gothic Christians to worship the tribal gods. It became the word for the Christian God in the Gothic Bible with its grammatical gender changed from neuter to masculine only in the new sense.

[ citation needed ] The name of the Goths themselves is presumably related and means "those who libate", and guþ "idol" is the object of the act of libation.

[ citation needed ] The words for "to sacrifice" and for "sacrificer" were blotan and blostreis , which were used in Biblical Gothic in the sense of "Christian worship" and "Christian priest".

[ citation needed ] One peculiarity that separates Gothic religion from all other forms of early Germanic religion is the absence of weapons as grave goods . Pagan warrior graves in Scandinavia, England and Germany almost invariably contained weapons until the practice was discontinued by Christianisation, the pagan Goths do not seem to have felt the need to bury their dead with weapons. That may have arisen from the fact that weapon burials began to become prominent among pagan peoples in the 5th and the 6th centuries, possibly as a method of permanently establishing prestige upon certain families by burial ritual in a period of a heightened economy and increased intergroup competition, thus well after the Goths' Christianisation.

[ 1 ] A Gothic belief in witches is attested with the story of the haliurun(n)ae (compare Anglo-Saxon hellrúne ), who were expelled from the tribe by King Filimer and later mated with evil spirits and gave birth to the Huns , who eventually destroyed the Gothic Empire. Wolfram compares the rejection of necromancy or witchcraft by the Goths to the pagan Scandinavian rejection of the seiðr of Finnic sorcerers or shamans.

[ 1 ] Gothic deities [ edit ] Very little can be said with certainty regarding the individual gods worshipped among the Goths.

In the light of comparative evidence from later forms of Germanic paganism, it seems likely that the "Germanic trinity" of Wodanaz , Tīwaz , and Þunraz may have had a parallel among the Goths, with the names Gaut, Teiws, and Fairguneis.

[ 1 ] War god *Teiws [ edit ] The Goths had a cult of a god of war , identified by the Romans with Mars , presumably cognate to the Proto-Germanic Tīwaz , perhaps called *Teiws in Gothic, on the basis on the corresponding letter names .

[ citation needed ] Among the Tervingi, perhaps also known as the Terwing , the tribe's mythical, eponymous ancestor , possibly related also to the Týrfingr lost sword legend, 'the finger' of the god Týr, which on touch caused sudden death to its enemies.

[ citation needed ] Ancestor Gapt vs. Norse Odin [ edit ] There was also Gaut or Gapt , the ancestor of the Amali dynasty and presumably eponymous of the entire people of the "Goths". It is unclear whether this deity should be considered independent of those that were just mentioned or if it is only another name by which either of them was also known.

[ citation needed ] Old Norse Gautr in later centuries served as another name for Odin in Scandinavia. It may also be significant that in the Prose Edda , Odin himself is said to have come to the north from the Black Sea region, referred to as Turkland, the lands that some believe were formerly and later inhabited by some ancestors of the Goths. If Gapt was the original " ansic " ancestor, which was later identified with Odin, the Gothic letter name *ansuz ( aza ) may testify to his importance, but that does not imply that Gaut can be assumed to have had the same attributes typical of Odin in the Viking Age.

[ citation needed ] These may be echoes that hark back to an older influence from many centuries earlier in which it is visible in the archaeological records the introduction of steppes elements from the Yamna Culture among the earliest Germanic cultural horizon, which giving birth to the Corded Ware Culture from the Copper Age.

[ citation needed ] *Fairguneis, Ingwaz, and *Donaws [ edit ] Another important god may have been called *Fairguneis , identified by the Romans as Jupiter and presumed by modern scholars to be Thor , but that relies on the accuracy of the Romans' interpretation of Gothic religion.

[ citation needed ] The Gothic letter enguz may indicate the existence among the Goths of the god Ingwaz , an older name for the god Freyr , but there is no other evidence for that.

[ citation needed ] Finally, the Danube River may have also been deified as *Donaws .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Gaut Germanic paganism Gothic Christianity Gothic runic inscriptions Ring of Pietroassa References [ edit ] ^ a b c Wolfram 1990 , pp. 116–112.

Sources [ edit ] Wolfram, Herwig (1990). "Cult and Religion among the Goths".

History of the Goths . Translated by Dunlap, Thomas J.

University of California Press . pp.

106– 112.

ISBN 0520069838 .

Further reading [ edit ] Nordgren, Ingemar (2011). "Goths and Religion". In Kaliff, Anders ; Munkhammar, Lars (eds.).

Wulfila 311-2011 (PDF) .

Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis . pp.

209– 224.

ISBN 9789155486648 .

Schwarcz, Andreas [in German] (2003). "Cult And Religion Among The Tervingi And The Visigoths And Their Conversion To Christianity". In Heather, Peter (ed.).

The Visigoths from the Migration Period to the Seventh Century .

Boydell & Brewer Ltd . pp.

447– 472.

ISBN 9781843830337 .

Thompson, E. A.

(1961).

"The Visigoths in the Time of Ulfila" .

Nottingham Medieval Studies .

5 .

Brepols : 3– 32.

doi : 10.1484/J.NMS.3.10 .

ISSN 2507-0444 . Retrieved March 5, 2020 .

Wolfram, Herwig (1997). "Cult and Religion of the Goths".

The Roman Empire and Its Germanic Peoples .

University of California Press . pp.

73– 74.

ISBN 978-0520085114 .

v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category v t e Paganism (and modern paganism ) Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions ( list ) (existing and extinct) Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawèn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese Donyi-Polo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic Paleo-Balkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Scythian Slavic Uralic Baltic Finnic Hungarian Mari Sami Middle-Eastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Māori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan Sub-Saharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern paganism ( movements ) Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu Italo-Roman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic Turko-Mongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochrane's Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blót Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tgjcq
Cached time: 20250817234244
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.568 seconds
Real time usage: 0.934 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4360/1000000
Revision size: 11023/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 188298/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19418/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 46331/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.343/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7247024/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  575.999      1 -total
 21.31%  122.741     16 Template:Citation_needed
 21.27%  122.504      9 Template:Navbox
 17.10%   98.486      4 Template:Cite_book
 17.03%   98.081     16 Template:Fix
 16.13%   92.905      1 Template:Germanic_peoples
 16.02%   92.263      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.45%   71.726      1 Template:Short_description
 11.11%   63.996      2 Template:Ambox
 10.66%   61.419      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:38646775:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817234244 and revision id 1295499096. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gothic_paganism&oldid=1295499096 " Categories : Germanic paganism Goths Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from August 2020 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 CS1 interwiki-linked names This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 03:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gothic paganism 3 languages Add topic

