Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 What is death?

2 Types of death 3 Causes of death Toggle Causes of death subsection 3.1 Causes of death, by type 3.2 Other classifications of causes of death 4 Effects of death 5 History of death 6 Philosophy and death 7 Death and culture Toggle Death and culture subsection 7.1 Medical field and death 7.2 Politics of death 7.2.1 Legalities of death 7.3 Religion and death 7.4 Death care industry 8 Science of death Toggle Science of death subsection 8.1 Psychology of death 8.2 Demography of death 9 Paranormal concepts pertaining to death 10 Death-related organizations 11 Death-related publications 12 Dead people 13 Other 14 See also 15 References 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of death Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of and topical guide to death The following outline is provided as an overview of and a topical guide to death: Death – the termination of all biological functions that sustain a living organism What is death?

[ edit ] Death can be described as all of the following: End of life – life is the characteristic distinguishing physical entities having signaling and self-sustaining processes from those that do not, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] either because such functions have ceased ( death ), or because they lack such functions and are classified as inanimate .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] (Death is) the opposite of: Life – (see above) Biogenesis – the production of new living organisms or organelles. The law of biogenesis, attributed to Louis Pasteur, is the observation that living things come only from other living things, by reproduction (e.g. a spider lays eggs, which develop into spiders).

Fertilisation (Conception) – the beginning of an organism's life, initiated by the fusion of gametes resulting in the development of a new individual organism. In animals, the process involves the fusion of an ovum with a sperm, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo.

Birth – the act or process of bearing or bringing forth offspring. In mammals, the process is initiated by hormones which cause the muscular walls of the uterus to contract, expelling the fetus at a developmental stage when it is ready to feed and breathe. Commonly considered the beginning of one's life. "First you are born, then you live life, then you die." De-extinction – the process of creating an organism, which is a member of or resembles an extinct species, or a breeding population of such organisms. Cloning is the most widely proposed method, although selective breeding has also been proposed. Similar techniques have been applied to endangered species. Though we, humans, have not been able to bring an extinct species back to life as of to date.

Survival – Survival is simply the need to live, the only real purpose of an organism is to generate offspring Indefinite lifespan – the term used in the life extension movement and transhumanism to refer to the hypothetical longevity of humans (and other life-forms) under conditions in which aging is effectively and completely prevented and treated. Their lifespans would be "indefinite" (that is, they would not be "immortal") because protection from the effects of aging on health does not guarantee survival. Such individuals would still be susceptible to accidental or intentional death by disease, starvation, getting hit by a truck, murdered, and so on, but not death from aging, some animals can live forever such as the Turritopsis dohrnii jellyfish, or the bowhead whale .

Types of death [ edit ] Individual death – termination of all biological functions within a living organism Extinction – the death of an entire species, or more specifically, death of the last member of a species Extinction event – a widespread and rapid decrease in the amount of life on Earth. Such an event is identified by a sharp reduction in the diversity and abundance of macroscopic life. Also known as a mass extinction or biotic crisis.

Human extinction – the hypothesized end of the human species. Various scenarios have been discussed in science, popular culture, and religion (see Eschatology ) Local extinction (extirpation) – a condition of a species (another taxon) that ceases to exist in the chosen geographic area of study, though it still exists elsewhere. Local extinctions are contrasted with global extinctions. Local extinction can be reversed by reintroduction of the species to the area from other locations; wolf reintroduction is an example of this.

Causes of death [ edit ] Causes of death, by type [ edit ] Accidents – unplanned events or circumstances, often with lack of intention or necessity. They generally have negative outcomes which might have been avoided or prevented had circumstances leading up to each accident had been recognized, and acted upon, prior to occurrence. An example of a type of accident that can cause death is a traffic collision .

List of accident types Biological aging – Disease – Terminal illness Injury Wound Mortal wound Killing – causing the death of a living organism, usually for the purpose of survival, including the defense of self and or others.

Predation – Homicide – Murder – killing of a human done in malice Human sacrifice Sacrifice Human sacrifice Animal sacrifice Suicide – the act of intentionally causing one's own death. Suicide is often carried out as a result of despair, the cause of which is frequently attributed to a mental disorder such as depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, borderline personality disorder, alcoholism, or drug abuse. Stress factors such as financial difficulties or troubles with interpersonal relationships often play a role. Efforts to prevent suicide include limiting access to firearms, treating mental illness and drug misuse, and improving economic circumstances.

Assisted suicide – Copycat suicide – Familicide – Forced suicide – Honor suicide – Internet suicide pact – Mass suicide – Murder–suicide – Suicide pact – Parasuicide – Suicide attack – Suicide by cop – Capital punishment – a legal process whereby a person is put to death by the state as a punishment for a crime. The judicial decree that someone is punished in this manner is a death sentence, while the actual enforcement is an execution. Also called the "death penalty".

List of methods of capital punishment Genocide – the systematic destruction of all or a significant part of a racial, ethnic, religious or national group. Well-known examples of genocide include the Holocaust, the Armenian genocide, and more recently the Rwandan genocide.

War – an organized and often prolonged conflict that is carried out by states or non-state actors. It is generally characterized by extreme violence, social disruption and an attempt at economic destruction. War should be understood as an actual, intentional and widespread armed conflict between political communities, and therefore is defined as a form of (collective) political violence or intervention. The set of techniques used by a group to carry out war is known as warfare.

Laughing oneself to death (extremely rare) – Natural disasters – Avalanches – Earthquakes – Volcanic eruptions – Hydrological disasters – disasters involving bodies of water Floods – Limnic eruptions – Tsunamis – Meteorological disasters – disasters involving weather phenomena Blizzards – Cyclonic storms – Tropical cyclones – Extratropical cyclones – Droughts – Hailstorms – Heat waves – Tornadoes – Wildfires – Epidemics – Space disasters – Impact events – Solar flares – Other classifications of causes of death [ edit ] Causes of death by rate Potential causes of death Global catastrophic risks – Preventable causes of death Effects of death [ edit ] Effects of the anticipation of death Death anxiety – a morbid, abnormal or persistent fear of one's own death or the process of his/her dying. One definition of death anxiety is a "feeling of dread, apprehension or solicitude (anxiety) when one thinks of the process of dying, or ceasing to 'be'". Also known as thanatophobia (fear of death).

Mortality salience – Effects on the deceased (and on the cadaver ) – "deceased" is short for "deceased person", which is a person who has died and who is therefore dead.  A cadaver is the body of a dead person.

End of consciousness – a dead body is no longer awake, but there is the question of where consciousness went to, if anywhere...

Is there consciousness after death ? – there is a debate between proponents of the following possibilities: Eternal oblivion Afterlife Cessation of breathing Cardiac arrest – the heart has stopped beating (no pulse ) Pallor mortis – paleness which happens in the 15–120 minutes after death Livor mortis – settling of the blood in the lower (dependent) portion of the body Algor mortis – reduction in body temperature following death. This is generally a steady decline until matching ambient temperature Rigor mortis – limbs of the corpse become stiff (Latin rigor ) and difficult to move or manipulate Decomposition – reduction into simpler forms of matter, accompanied by a strong, unpleasant odor.

Putrefaction – Other (possible) effects Death erection – Treatment of corpses In the wild Consumed by predators (if those predators made the kill) – a predator is an organism that hunts and then eats its prey Consumed by scavengers – a scavenger is an animal that feeds on dead animal and/or plant material present in its habitat Decomposed by detritivores – detritivores are organisms which recycle detritus, returning it to the environment for reuse in the food chain. Examples of detritivores include earthworms, woodlice and dung beetles.

Fossilization Catagenesis In society Embalming Disposal of human corpses Burial Burial at sea Natural burial Sky burial Cremation Preservation of human corpses Cryonics Effects on others Grief – Mourning – Depression – History of death [ edit ] Deaths of people Deaths by year Deaths of philosophers Unusual deaths Disasters by death toll Natural disasters by death toll People by cause of death TV actors who died during production Deaths of other species Timeline of extinctions Fascination with death History of dissection Mummification Premature obituaries Philosophy and death [ edit ] Meaning of life Death and culture [ edit ] Death and culture Obituary Death and the Internet Disposal of human corpses Expressions related to death Personification of death – the concept of Death as a sentient entity has existed in many societies since the beginning of recorded history. For example, in English culture, Death is often given the name "the Grim Reaper" and, from the 15th century onwards, came to be shown as a skeletal figure carrying a large scythe and clothed in a black cloak with a hood.

Wake Medical field and death [ edit ] Further information: § Effects of death Abortion Autopsy Cadaveric spasm Death rattle End-of-life care Euthanasia Lazarus sign Lazarus syndrome Medical definition of death Brain death Clinical death Death by natural causes Unnatural death Mortal wound Organ donation Terminal illness Politics of death [ edit ] Assisted suicide Martyr Mass grave Right to life Right to life debates Abortion debate Capital punishment debate Capital punishment debate in the United States Euthanasia debate Right to die Euthanasia Euthanasia debate War Legalities of death [ edit ] Abortion law Autopsy Cause of death – the purpose of a forensic autopsy is to determine the cause of death, which is the condition or conditions officially determined to have resulted in a human's death. In modern times, such a determination usually is essential data on a governmental death certificate.

Capital punishment Death row Coroner Crimes related to death Crimes against humanity related to death Murder Massacre Genocide Death threat Homicide Manslaughter Murder Homicide occurring during a felony Necrophilia Disposal of human corpses Disposition of the estate of the deceased Probate Administration of an estate on death Inheritance Probate court Probate law Will Trust law Legal death Declared death in absentia Death certificate Cause of death Right to die Religion and death [ edit ] Religious beliefs concerning death Afterlife Heaven Hell Resurrection Religious ceremonies concerning death Last rites Funeral Eulogy Wake Death care industry [ edit ] Death care industry – companies and organizations that provide services related to death (i.e., funerals, cremation or burial, and memorials).

Death care industry sectors Cemeteries – Coffin industry – Funeral homes – Crematory industry – Stonemasonry – craft of creating buildings, structures (including memorials ), and sculpture (including headstones ), using stone from the earth.

Headstone industry – Memorial industry – Death care industry products and services Coffins (product) – Funerals (service) – Burial (service) – Cremation (service) – Headstones (product) – Memorials (product) – Death care professionals Funeral director – Stonemason – using stone from the earth, stonemasons create buildings, structures, and sculpture, including headstones and memorials .

Death care companies Service Corporation International Stewart Enterprises Science of death [ edit ] Forensic pathology Funeral director Mortuary science Necrobiology Taphonomy Thanatology Psychology of death [ edit ] Death anxiety Morbid curiosity Demography of death [ edit ] Karōshi Maternal death Mortality displacement Mortality rate Maternal death Perinatal mortality Infant mortality Child mortality Paranormal concepts pertaining to death [ edit ] Pseudoscience Paranormal research Parapsychology Reincarnation research Death-related paranormal phenomena Deathbed phenomena Afterlife After-death communication Séance Ghosts Near-death experience Near-death studies Necromancy Death-related organizations [ edit ] Grief support Mothers of Murdered Offspring Rainbows The Grief Recovery Institute Organizations dedicated to the abolition of capital punishment (death penalty) International Amnesty International Buddhist Peace Fellowship Human Rights Watch International Committee Against Executions Reprieve (organisation) World Coalition Against the Death Penalty In the United States Campaign to End the Death Penalty Conservatives Concerned About the Death Penalty Death Penalty Focus National Coalition to Abolish the Death Penalty People of Faith Against the Death Penalty Texas Moratorium Network Texas Students Against the Death Penalty Witness to Innocence Death-related publications [ edit ] Book of the Dead The American Way of Death , by Jessica Mitford The American Way of Death Revisited , by Jessica Mitford The Japanese Way of Death , by Hikaru Suzuki Tibetan Book of the Dead Dead people [ edit ] Lists of deaths by year Other [ edit ] Immortality Preventable causes of death Coffin birth Post-mortem interval Promession Resomation Political/legal Cause of death Death-qualified jury Dying declaration Faked death Inquest Suspicious death After death Other aspects Afterlife Cemetery Customs Death mask Eternal oblivion Examination Funeral Grief Intermediate state Mourning Resurrection Taboo on the dead Vigil Other Death anniversary Death anxiety Death deity Personification of death Dying-and-rising god Psychopomp Death camp Death drive Death education Death hoax Death knell Death march Death messenger Death notification Death poem Death squad Festival of the dead Necrophobia The Order of the Good Death Spiritual death Thanatosensitivity Undead See also [ edit ] Outline of life science References [ edit ] ^ Koshland, Daniel E. Jr. (March 22, 2002).

"The Seven Pillars of Life" .

Science .

295 (5563): 2215– 2216.

doi : 10.1126/science.1068489 .

PMID 11910092 .

^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 4th edition, published by Houghton Mifflin Company, via Answers.com : "The property or quality that distinguishes living organisms from dead organisms and inanimate matter, manifested in functions such as metabolism , growth, reproduction, and response to stimuli or adaptation to the environment originating from within the organism." "The characteristic state or condition of a living organism." ^ Definition of inanimate .

WordNet Search by Princeton University.

^ "Merriam-Webster Dictionary" . Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 2009-06-21 .

^ "organism" .

Chambers 21st Century Dictionary (online ed.). Chambers Publishers Ltd. 1999 . Retrieved 2012-05-26 .

External links [ edit ] Death at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Death . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) v t e Death In medicine Cell death Necrosis Avascular necrosis Coagulative necrosis Liquefactive necrosis Gangrenous necrosis Caseous necrosis Fat necrosis Fibrinoid necrosis Temporal lobe necrosis Programmed cell death AICD Anoikis Apoptosis Autophagy Intrinsic apoptosis Necroptosis Paraptosis Parthanatos Phenoptosis Pseudoapoptosis Pyroptosis Autolysis Autoschizis Eschar Immunogenic cell death Ischemic cell death Pyknosis Karyorrhexis Karyolysis Mitotic catastrophe Suicide gene Abortion Accidental death Autopsy Brain death Brainstem death Clinical death DOA Death by natural causes Death rattle Dysthanasia End-of-life care Euthanasia Lazarus sign Lazarus syndrome Medical declaration of death Organ donation Terminal illness Unnatural death Lists Causes of death by rate Notable deaths by year Expressions related to death Natural disasters People by cause of death Premature obituaries Preventable causes of death Unusual deaths List of ways people dishonor the dead List of ways people honor the dead Mortality Birthday effect Child mortality Excess mortality Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality Infant mortality Karoshi Maternal death Maternal mortality in fiction Memento mori Micromort Mortality rate RAMR Mortality salience Perinatal mortality After death Body Stages Pallor mortis Livor mortis Algor mortis Rigor mortis Putrefaction Decomposition Skeletonization Fossilization Preservation Cryopreservation Cryonics Neuropreservation Embalming Maceration Mummification Plastination Prosection Taxidermy Disposal Burial Natural burial Sky burial Ocean burial Cremation Dismemberment Excarnation Promession Resomation Beating heart cadaver Body donation Cadaveric spasm Coffin birth Death erection Dissection Gibbeting Postmortem caloricity Post-mortem interval Other aspects Carrion Cemetery Consciousness after death Afterlife Tukdam Customs Crematorium Desecration of graves Eternal oblivion Examination Funeral Grief Internet Midwife Mourning Online mourning Obituary Reincarnation Palingenesis Saṃsāra Resurrection Underworld Viewing Vigil Wake Paranormal Ghosts Near-death experience Near-death studies Necromancy Out-of-body experience Reincarnation research Séance Legal Abortion law Administration Capital punishment Cause of death Civil death Coroner Death-qualified jury Death certificate Declared death in absentia Death row Dying declaration Inquest Legal death Murder Necropolitics Prohibition of dying Right to die Suspicious death Trust law Will Fields Death tech [ pt ] Forensic pathology Funeral director Mortuary science Necrobiology Post-mortem chemistry Post-mortem photography Taphonomy Biostratinomy Thanatology Other Apparent death Chinese burial money Coins for the dead Dark tourism Darwin Awards Death and culture Death anniversary Death anxiety Death deity Personification of death Dying-and-rising god Psychopomp Death camp Death drive Death education Death from laughter Death hoax Death knell Death march Death messenger Death notification Death panel Death poem Death pose Death-positive movement Death squad Death threat Death trajectory Dignified death Extinction Festival of the Dead Fascination with death Hierarchy of death Homicide Immortality Last rites Longevity Martyr Museum of Death Necronym Necrophilia Necrophobia Philosophy of death Predation Sacrifice human Suicide Assisted suicide Thanabot [ ca ] Thanatosensitivity Category Outline v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_death&oldid=1265272594 " Categories : Death Outlines of health and fitness Outlines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search CS1 errors: periodical ignored This page was last edited on 26 December 2024, at 02:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of death Add languages Add topic

