Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Background Toggle Background subsection 2.1 1609–1791 2.2 1791–1912 2.3 1912–1922 2.4 1922–1966 3 Late 1960s Toggle Late 1960s subsection 3.1 Civil rights campaign and unionist backlash 3.2 August 1969 riots and aftermath 4 1970s Toggle 1970s subsection 4.1 Violence peaks and Stormont collapses 4.2 Bloody Sunday 4.3 Sunningdale Agreement and UWC strike 4.4 Proposal of an independent Northern Ireland 4.5 Mid-1970s 4.6 Late 1970s 5 1980s 6 1990s Toggle 1990s subsection 6.1 Escalation in South Armagh 6.2 Downing Street mortar attack 6.3 First ceasefire 6.4 Second ceasefire 6.5 Political process 7 Support outside Northern Ireland Toggle Support outside Northern Ireland subsection 7.1 Arms importation 7.2 Funding 8 Collusion between security forces and paramilitaries 9 The Disappeared 10 British Army attacks on civilians 11 Shoot-to-kill allegations 12 Parades issue 13 Social repercussions 14 Casualties Toggle Casualties subsection 14.1 Responsibility 14.2 Status 14.3 Location 14.4 Chronological listing 14.5 Additional statistics 14.6 List of Deaths (1969) 15 Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 16 See also Toggle See also subsection 16.1 In popular culture 16.2 Similar conflicts 17 Explanatory notes 18 References 19 Further reading 20 External links Toggle the table of contents The Troubles 58 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Troubles (Northern Ireland) ) 1960s–1990s conflict in Northern Ireland "Troubles" redirects here. For other uses, see Troubles (disambiguation) .

The Troubles Political map of Ireland Date Late 1960s–1998 [ a ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Location Northern Ireland [ b ] Result Military stalemate [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Good Friday Agreement (1998) St Andrews Agreement (2006) Withdrawal of British forces taking part in Operation Banner [ 8 ] Disarmament of paramilitary groups Continuing sporadic violence Belligerents State security forces: British Armed Forces Royal Ulster Constabulary Irish Defence Forces Gardaí Irish republican paramilitaries: Provisional IRA (PIRA) Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) Official IRA (OIRA) Continuity IRA (CIRA) Real IRA (RIRA) Irish People's Liberation Organisation (IPLO) Ulster loyalist paramilitaries: Ulster Defence Association (UDA) Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) Red Hand Commando (RHC) Ulster Resistance (UR) Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF) Ulster Protestant Volunteers (UPV) Casualties and losses British Army : 705 (incl.

UDR ) RUC: 301 NIPS : 24 TA : 7 Other UK police : 6 Royal Air Force : 4 Royal Navy : 2 Total : 1,049 [ 9 ] Irish Army : 1 Gardaí : 9 IPS : 1 Total : 11 [ 9 ] PIRA: 292 INLA: 38 OIRA: 27 IPLO: 9 RIRA: 2 Total : 368 [ 9 ] UDA: 91 UVF: 62 RHC: 4 LVF: 3 UR: 2 UPV: 1 [ 10 ] Total : 162 [ 9 ] Civilians killed: 1,840 [ 11 ] (1,935 including ex-combatants) [ 9 ] Total dead: 3,532 [ 11 ] Total injured: 47,500+ [ 12 ] All casualties: c.

50,000 [ 13 ] v t e The Troubles in Ireland 1960s and 1970s Battle of the Bogside / 1969 riots RTÉ bombing Operation Banner Battle of St Matthew's Falls Curfew Crossmaglen bombing Scottish soldiers' killings Operation Demetrius Ballymurphy massacre Newry killings Red Lion Pub bombing McGurk's Bar bombing Balmoral showroom bombing Bloody Sunday Abercorn Restaurant bombing Donegall St bombing Battle at Springmartin Dungiven ambush Battle of Lenadoon Springhill massacre Bloody Friday Operation Motorman Claudy bombing Newry customs bombing Sanaghanroe attack Benny's Bar bombing Annie's Bar massacre Belturbet bombing Dublin bombings New Lodge Six shooting Coleraine bombings Rose & Crown Bar bombing Clogher barracks attack Dublin & Monaghan bombings Mountainview Tavern attack Bleary Darts Club shooting Strand Bar bombing Forkhill beer keg bomb Miami Showband killings Bayardo Bar attack Tullyvallen massacre October 1975 attacks Drummuckavall ambush Dublin Airport bombing Dundalk & Silverbridge attacks Central Bar bombing Reavey and O'Dowd killings Kingsmill massacre Castleblayney bombing Hillcrest Bar bombing Flagstaff Hill incident Charlemont pub attacks Walker's Bar attack Chlorane Bar attack Ramble Inn attack Stag Inn attack Andersonstown incident Garryhinch ambush 1976 Balmoral bombing Jonesborough Gazelle shootdown La Mon restaurant bombing Warrenpoint ambush Dungannon land mine attack 1980s Dunmurry train bombing Lough Foyle attacks Altnaveigh landmine attack Glasdrumman ambush Divis Flats bombing Droppin Well bombing Ballygawley land mine attack Darkley killings Kesh ambush Strabane ambush Newry mortar attack Ballygawley barracks attack Birches barracks attack Clontibret invasion Loughgall ambush Remembrance Day bombing Milltown Cemetery attack Corporals killings Avenue Bar shooting Lisburn van bombing Aughanduff Lynx shootdown Ballygawley bus bombing Drumnakilly ambush Jonesborough ambush Derryard checkpoint attack 1990s Derrygorry Gazelle shootdown Downpatrick landmine attack Operation Conservation Armagh City roadside bombing Fort Victoria Proxy bombings Lough Neagh ambush Silverbridge Lynx shootdown Mullacreevie ambush Cappagh killings Craigavon mobile shop killings Glenanne barracks bombing Coagh ambush Musgrave Park Hospital bombing Craigavon Hyster killings Teebane bombing Sinn Féin Headquarters shooting Sean Graham bookmakers' shooting Clonoe ambush Cloghoge checkpoint attack Coalisland riots South Armagh sniper campaign Forensic Lab bombing James Murray's bookmakers attack Castlerock killings Cullaville occupation Battle of Newry Road Shankill Road bombing Greysteel massacre Fivemiletown ambush Crossmaglen Lynx shootdown 1994 Shankill Road killings Loughinisland massacre Killeeshil ambush Drumcree conflict Thiepval barracks bombing Coalisland attack 1997 riots Quinn brothers' killings Banbridge bombing Omagh bombing See also: The Troubles in Britain & Europe , Assassinations during the Troubles , and Loyalist feud v t e The Troubles in Britain and continental Europe 1970 – 1981 Aldershot bombing Old Bailey bombing King's Cross & Euston bombings Westminster bombing M62 coach bombing Parliament bombing Tower of London bombing Guildford pub bombings Woolwich pub bombing Birmingham pub bombings Pillar box bombings Talbot Arms bombing Bristol bombing Carlton Tower and Portman Hotel shootings Caterham bombing Hilton bombing Piccadilly bombing Walton's bombing Biddy Mulligan's bombing Balcombe St siege West Ham attack Olympia bombing Airey Neave killing Glasgow pub bombings Brussels bombing Chelsea Barracks bombing 1982 – 1998 Hyde & Regent's Park bombings Harrods bombing Brighton hotel bombing Rheindahlen bombing Operation Flavius 1988 Netherlands attacks Glamorgan barracks bombing Deal barracks bombing Wembley bombing Roermond killings Lichfield shooting Carlton bombing London Stock Exchange bombing Downing Street mortar attack Paddington & Victoria bombings London Bridge bombing Baltic Exchange bombing Staples Cnr bombing Sussex Arms bombing Stoke Newington bomb 1992 Manchester bombing Warrington bombings 1993 Harrods bombing Camden bombing Bishopsgate bombing Finchley Rd bombings Heathrow mortar attacks Docklands bombing Aldwych bombing 1996 Manchester bombing Osnabrück attack See also: The Troubles in Ireland and Assassinations during the Troubles v t e The Troubles Assassinations in Ireland , Britain and mainland Europe 1970s John Barnhill killed by OIRA Tommy Herron killed by UDA/UFF Joe McCann killed by British Army Michael Naan and Andrew Murray killed by British Army Paddy Wilson and Irene Andrews killed by UDA/UFF Ann Ogilby killed by UDA/UFF Billy Hanna killed by UVF Jim Hanna killed by UVF Billy Fox killed by UDA/UFF Billy McMillen killed by INLA Thomas Niedermayer killed by PIRA Martin McBirney killed by PIRA William J. Staunton killed by PIRA Ross McWhirter killed by PIRA Robert McConnell killed by PIRA Majella O'Hare killed by British Army Máire Drumm killed by UVF Christopher Ewart-Biggs killed by PIRA Seamus Ludlow killed by RHC John Francis Green killed by UVF Robert Nairac killed by PIRA Seamus Costello killed by OIRA Jeffery Agate killed by PIRA Richard Sykes killed by PIRA Airey Neave killed by INLA Louis Mountbatten killed by PIRA 1980s Miriam Daly killed by UDA/UFF Ronnie Bunting killed by UDA/UFF James Stronge killed by PIRA Norman Stronge killed by PIRA William McCullough killed by INLA John McKeague killed by INLA Lenny Murphy killed by PIRA Robert Bradford killed by PIRA George Seawright killed by IPLO Edgar Graham killed by PIRA Anthony Berry killed by PIRA John Bingham killed by PIRA Larry Marley killed by UVF Ta Power killed by IPLO Gerard Steenson killed by INLA Maurice Gibson killed by PIRA Robert Seymour killed by PIRA John McMichael killed by PIRA William "Frenchie" Marchant killed by PIRA Aidan McAnespie killed by British Army James Craig killed by UDA/UFF Pat Finucane killed by UDA/UFF 1990s Ian Gow killed by PIRA Fergal Caraher killed by Royal Marines Eddie Fullerton killed by UDA/UFF Martin O'Prey killed by UVF Pearse Jordan killed by RUC Sammy Ward killed by PIRA Trevor King killed by INLA Ray Smallwoods killed by PIRA Joe Bratty killed by PIRA Raymond Elder killed by PIRA Gino Gallagher killed by INLA-GHQ Hugh Torney killed by INLA John Hemsworth killed by RUC Billy Wright killed by INLA Rosemary Nelson killed by LVF acronyms Republicans INLA = Irish National Liberation Army IPLO = Irish People's Liberation Organisation OIRA = Official Irish Republican Army PIRA = Provisional Irish Republican Army Loyalists LVF = Loyalist Volunteer Force RHC = Red Hand Commando UDA/UFF = Ulster Defence Association / Ulster Freedom Fighters UVF = Ulster Volunteer Force Security Forces RUC = Royal Ulster Constabulary see also: The Troubles in Ireland See also: The Troubles in Britain and Europe The Troubles ( Irish : Na Trioblóidí ) were an ethno-nationalist [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] conflict in Northern Ireland that lasted for about 30 years from the late 1960s to 1998.

[ 18 ] Also known internationally as the Northern Ireland conflict , [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] it began in the late 1960s and is usually deemed to have ended with the Good Friday Agreement of 1998.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Although the Troubles mostly took place in Northern Ireland, at times violence spilled over into parts of the Republic of Ireland , England, and mainland Europe.

Sometimes described as an asymmetric or irregular war [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] or a low-intensity conflict , [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] the Troubles were a political and nationalistic struggle fueled by historical events, [ 32 ] with a strong ethnic and sectarian dimension, [ 33 ] fought over the status of Northern Ireland .

Unionists and loyalists , who for historical reasons were mostly Ulster Protestants , wanted Northern Ireland to remain within the United Kingdom .

Irish nationalists and republicans , who were mostly Irish Catholics , wanted Northern Ireland to leave the United Kingdom and join a united Ireland . Despite the division between Protestants and Catholics , it was not primarily a religious war .

[ 14 ] [ 34 ] The conflict began during a campaign by the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association to end discrimination against the Catholic-nationalist minority by the Protestant-unionist government and local authorities.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] The government attempted to suppress the protests. The police, the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), were overwhelmingly Protestant and known for sectarianism and police brutality . The campaign was also violently opposed by Ulster loyalists, who believed it was a front for republican political activity. Increasing tensions led to the August 1969 riots and the deployment of British troops , in what became the British Army 's longest operation.

[ 37 ] " Peace walls " were built in some areas to keep the two communities apart. Some Catholics initially welcomed the British Army as a more neutral force than the RUC, but soon came to see it as hostile and biased, particularly after Bloody Sunday in 1972.

[ 38 ] The main participants in the Troubles were republican paramilitaries such as the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) and the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA); loyalist paramilitaries such as the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) and Ulster Defence Association (UDA); British state security forces such as the British Army and RUC (Royal Ulster Constabulary); and political activists. The security forces of the Republic of Ireland played a smaller role. Republicans carried out a guerrilla campaign against British forces as well as a bombing campaign against infrastructural, commercial, and political targets. Loyalists attacked republicans/nationalists and the wider Catholic community in what they described as retaliation. At times, there were bouts of sectarian tit-for-tat violence, as well as feuds within and between paramilitary groups. The British security forces undertook policing and counterinsurgency campaigns, primarily against republicans. There were incidents of collusion between British state forces and loyalist paramilitaries (see Stevens Inquiries ). The Troubles also involved numerous riots, mass protests, and acts of civil disobedience , and led to increased segregation and the creation of temporary no-go areas .

More than 3,500 people were killed in the conflict, of whom 52% were civilians , 32% were members of the British security forces, and 16% were members of paramilitary groups.

[ 9 ] Republic paramilitaries were responsible for 60% of total deaths, followed by loyalist paramilitaries at 30% and security forces  at 10%.

[ 39 ] Loyalists were responsible for 48% of all civilian deaths, however, followed by republicans at 39% and security forces at 10%.

[ 40 ] The Northern Ireland peace process led to paramilitary ceasefires and talks between the main political parties, which resulted in the Good Friday Agreement of 1998. This Agreement restored self-government to Northern Ireland on the basis of " power-sharing " and it included acceptance of the principle of consent , commitment to civil and political rights , parity of esteem between the two communities, police reform , paramilitary disarmament , and early release of paramilitary prisoners.

There has been sporadic violence since the Agreement, including punishment attacks , [ 41 ] loyalist gangs' control of major organised crime rackets (e.g., drugs supply, community coercion and violence, intimidation), [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] and violent crime linked to dissident republican groups .

[ 4 ] [ 24 ] [ 48 ] Name The word "troubles" has been used as a synonym for violent conflict for centuries. It was used to describe the 17th-century Wars of the Three Kingdoms by all three national parliaments. For example, after the Restoration in 1660, the English Act of free and general pardon, indemnity and oblivion starts with "The King's most excellent Majesty, taking into his gracious and serious consideration the long and great troubles ..."; as does the similar act in Scotland: "The king's most excellent majesty, considering that by the late troubles diverse of his subjects ..." (Scottish Parliament 1662); and by the Irish Parliament in the Act of Explanation (1665) "our royal father of blessed memory had been forced, during the late troubles, to make with the Irish subjects of that our kingdom" (Irish Parliament 1665, § 2). The term was used to describe the Irish revolutionary period in the early twentieth century.

[ 49 ] It was subsequently adopted to refer to the escalating violence in Northern Ireland after 1969.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Background 1609–1791 The Battle of the Boyne (12 July 1690) by Jan van Huchtenburg In 1609, Scottish and English settlers, known as planters , were given land escheated from the native Irish in the Plantation of Ulster .

[ 54 ] Coupled with Protestant immigration to "unplanted" areas of Ulster , particularly Antrim and Down , this resulted in conflict between the native Catholics and the "planters", leading in turn to two bloody religious conflicts known as the Irish Confederate Wars (1641–1653) and the Williamite war (1689–1691), both of which resulted in Protestant victories.

Anglican dominance in Ireland was ensured by the passage of the Penal Laws that curtailed the religious, legal, and political rights of anyone (including both Catholics and Protestant Dissenters, such as Presbyterians ) who did not conform to the state church, the Anglican Church of Ireland . As the Penal Laws started to be phased out in the latter part of the 18th century, there was more competition for land, as restrictions were lifted on the Irish Catholic ability to rent. With Irish Catholics allowed to buy land and enter trades from which they had formerly been banned, tensions arose resulting in the Protestant " Peep o' Day Boys " [ 55 ] and Catholic " Defenders ". This created polarisation between the communities and a dramatic reduction in reformers among Protestants, many of whom had been growing more receptive to democratic reform.

[ 55 ] 1791–1912 Following the foundation of the republican Society of the United Irishmen by Presbyterians, Catholics, and liberal Anglicans, and the resulting failed Irish Rebellion of 1798 , sectarian violence between Catholics and Protestants continued. The Orange Order (founded 1795), with its stated goal of upholding the Protestant faith and loyalty to the heirs of William of Orange , dates from this period and remains active to this day.

[ 56 ] With the Acts of Union 1800 (which came into force on 1 January 1801), a new political framework was formed with the abolition of the Irish Parliament and incorporation of Ireland into the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . The result was a closer tie between Anglicans and the formerly republican Presbyterians as part of a "loyal" Protestant community. Although Catholic emancipation was achieved in 1829, largely eliminating official discrimination against Roman Catholics (then around 75% of Ireland's population), Dissenters, and Jews, the Repeal Association 's campaign to repeal the 1801 Union failed.

In the late 19th century, the Home Rule movement was created and served to define the divide between most nationalists (usually Catholics) who sought the restoration of an Irish Parliament, and most unionists (usually Protestants) who were afraid of being a minority under a Catholic-dominated Irish Parliament and who tended to support continuing union with Great Britain.

Unionists and Home Rule advocates were the main political factions in late 19th- and early 20th-century Ireland.

[ 57 ] 1912–1922 Main article: Partition of Ireland The Ulster Covenant was issued in protest against the Third Home Rule Bill in September 1912.

The Proclamation of the Irish Republic was issued during the Easter Rising of April 1916.

Irish Boundary Commission final report map (1925) shows religious distribution of the population. The green areas signify Catholic majority areas, while the red areas signify non-Catholic majority areas.

By the second decade of the 20th century, Home Rule, or limited Irish self-government, was on the brink of being conceded due to the agitation of the Irish Parliamentary Party .
In response to the campaign for Home Rule which started in the 1870s, unionists, mostly Protestant and largely concentrated in Ulster, had resisted both self-government and independence for Ireland, fearing for their future in an overwhelmingly Catholic country dominated by the Roman Catholic Church. In 1912, unionists led by Edward Carson signed the Ulster Covenant and pledged to resist Home Rule by force if necessary. To this end, they formed the paramilitary Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF).

[ 58 ] In response, nationalists led by Eoin MacNeill formed the Irish Volunteers in 1913, whose goal was to oppose the UVF and ensure enactment of the Third Home Rule Bill in the event of British or unionist refusal. The outbreak of the First World War in 1914, and Ireland's involvement in the war , temporarily averted possible civil war in Ireland and delayed the resolution of the question of Irish independence. Home Rule, although passed in the British Parliament with Royal Assent , was suspended for the duration of the war.

The Irish Volunteers split, with a majority, known as the National Volunteers , supporting the war effort, and some of them joining Irish regiments of the New British Army . Many of those who stayed were radical nationalists, among them Irish Republican Brotherhood infiltrators. From these ranks came those who launched the Easter Rising in Dublin in 1916, led by Patrick Pearse and James Connolly . Two-and-a-half years after the executions of sixteen of the Rising's leaders, the separatist Sinn Féin party won the December 1918 general election in Ireland with 47% of the vote and a majority of seats, and set up the 1919 First Dáil (Irish Parliament) in Dublin. Their victory was aided by the threat of conscription for First World War service . The Irish War for Independence followed, leading to eventual independence in 1922 for the Irish Free State , which comprised 26 of the 32 Irish counties. In Ulster , particularly in the six counties which became Northern Ireland , Sinn Féin fared relatively poorly in the 1918 election, and unionists won a majority.

[ 58 ] The Government of Ireland Act 1920 partitioned the island of Ireland into two separate jurisdictions, Southern Ireland and Northern Ireland, both devolved regions of the United Kingdom. This partition of Ireland was confirmed when the Parliament of Northern Ireland exercised its right in December 1922 under the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921 to opt out of the newly established Irish Free State.

[ 59 ] A part of the treaty signed in 1922 mandated that a boundary commission would sit to decide where the frontier of the northern state would be in relation to its southern neighbour. After the Irish Civil War of 1922–1923, this part of the treaty was given less priority by the new Dublin government led by W. T. Cosgrave , and was quietly dropped. As counties Fermanagh and Tyrone and border areas of Londonderry , Armagh , and Down were mainly nationalist, the Irish Boundary Commission could reduce Northern Ireland to four counties or fewer.

[ 58 ] In October 1922, the Irish Free State government established the North-Eastern Boundary Bureau, a government office which by 1925 had prepared 56 boxes of files to argue its case for large areas of Northern Ireland to be transferred to the Free State.

[ 60 ] Northern Ireland remained a part of the United Kingdom, albeit under a separate system of government whereby it was given its own parliament and devolved government . While this arrangement met the desires of unionists to remain part of the United Kingdom, nationalists largely viewed the partition of Ireland as an illegal and arbitrary division of the island against the will of the majority of its people. They argued that the Northern Ireland state was neither legitimate nor democratic, but created with a deliberately gerrymandered unionist majority. Catholics initially composed about 35% of its population.

[ 61 ] A total of 557 people, mostly Catholics, were killed in political or sectarian violence from 1920 to 1922 in the six counties that would become Northern Ireland, both during and after the Irish War of Independence.

[ 62 ] The result was communal strife between Catholics and Protestants, [ 63 ] with some historians describing this violence, especially that in Belfast , as a pogrom , [ 64 ] [ 65 ] although historian Peter Hart argues that the term is not appropriate given the reciprocity of violence in Northern Ireland. (see The Troubles in Ulster (1920–1922) and Bloody Sunday (1921) ).

[ 66 ] 1922–1966 Sir James Craig , 1st Prime Minister of Northern Ireland, who said, "All I boast is that we are a Protestant Parliament and Protestant State" A marginalised remnant of the Irish Republican Army survived the Irish Civil War . This would come to have a major impact on Northern Ireland. Although the IRA was proscribed on both sides of the new Irish border , it remained ideologically committed to overthrowing both the Northern Ireland and the Free State governments by force of arms to unify Ireland. The government of Northern Ireland passed the Special Powers Act in 1922, giving sweeping powers to the government and police to intern suspects without trial and to administer corporal punishment such as flogging to re-establish or preserve law and order. The Act continued to be used against nationalists long after the violence of this period had come to an end.

[ 67 ] Various unionist militias were also incorporated into state structures, including the Ulster Special Constabulary , which Allen Feldman argues "emulated the state's fusion of repressive and ideological apparatuses".

[ 68 ] In 1920, in local elections held under proportional representation , nationalists had won control over many local governments, including the County Councils of Fermanagh and Tyrone, and the Londonderry Borough Council governing Derry City . In response, in 1922, the new unionist government re-drew the electoral boundaries to give its supporters a disproportionate majority and abolished proportional representation in favour of first past the post voting.

[ 69 ] This resulted in control by unionists of areas such as Derry City, Fermanagh, and Tyrone, where they were actually a minority of voters.

[ 70 ] The two sides' positions became strictly defined following this period. From a unionist perspective, Northern Ireland's nationalists were inherently disloyal and determined to force unionists into a united Ireland. This threat was seen as justifying preferential treatment of unionists in housing, employment, and other fields.

[ citation needed ] The prevalence of larger families and thus the potential for a more rapid population growth among Catholics was seen as a threat.

[ citation needed ] Unionist governments ignored Edward Carson 's warning in 1921 that alienating Catholics would make Northern Ireland inherently unstable. After the early 1920s, there were occasional incidents of sectarian unrest in Northern Ireland. These included severe rioting in Belfast in the 1930s and 1950s, and the IRA's brief Northern Campaign in the 1940s and Border Campaign between 1956 and 1962, which did not enjoy broad popular support among nationalists. After the IRA called off its campaign in 1962, Northern Ireland became relatively stable for a few years.

[ 58 ] Late 1960s For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Troubles .

There is little agreement on the exact date of the start of the Troubles. Different writers have suggested different dates. These include the formation of the modern Ulster Volunteer Force in 1966, [ 1 ] the civil rights march in Derry on 5 October 1968, the beginning of the ' Battle of the Bogside ' on 12 August 1969, or the deployment of British troops on 14 August 1969.

[ 58 ] The Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023, passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, defined the start of the Troubles as 1 January 1966 for the purposes of the act.

[ 71 ] Civil rights campaign and unionist backlash Main article: Northern Ireland civil rights movement In March and April 1966, Irish nationalists/republicans held parades throughout Ireland to mark the 50th anniversary of the Easter Rising . On 8 March, a group of Irish republicans dynamited Nelson's Pillar in Dublin. At the time, the IRA was weak and not engaged in armed action, but some unionists warned it was about to be revived to launch another campaign against Northern Ireland.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] In April 1966, loyalists led by Ian Paisley , a Protestant fundamentalist preacher, founded the Ulster Constitution Defence Committee (UCDC). It set up a paramilitary-style wing called the Ulster Protestant Volunteers (UPV) [ 72 ] to oust Terence O'Neill , Prime Minister of Northern Ireland . Although O'Neill was a unionist, they viewed him as being too 'soft' on the civil rights movement and opposed his policies.

[ 74 ] At the same time, a loyalist group calling itself the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) emerged in the Shankill area of Belfast. It was led by Gusty Spence , a former British soldier. Many of its members were also members of the UCDC and UPV.

[ 75 ] In April and May 1966, the UVF petrol bombed a number of Catholic homes, schools, and businesses. A firebomb killed an elderly Protestant widow, Matilda Gould.

[ 72 ] On 21 May 1966, the UVF issued a statement declaring "war" against the IRA and anyone helping it.

[ 76 ] The UVF fatally shot a Catholic civilian, John Scullion, as he walked home on 27 May. A month later it shot three Catholic civilians as they left a pub, killing Peter Ward, a Catholic from the Falls Road .

[ 72 ] [ 76 ] Shortly after, the UVF was proscribed by the Northern Ireland government.

[ 72 ] The UVF is still considered a terrorist organization by the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland.

[ 77 ] In the mid-1960s, a non-violent civil rights campaign began in Northern Ireland. It comprised groups such as the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA), the Campaign for Social Justice , the Derry Housing Action Committee , and People's Democracy , [ 78 ] whose stated goals were: an end to job discrimination – it showed evidence that Catholics/nationalists were less likely to be given certain jobs, especially government jobs an end to discrimination in housing allocation – it showed evidence that unionist-controlled local councils allocated housing to Protestants ahead of Catholics/nationalists one man, one vote – in Northern Ireland, only householders could vote in local elections, while in the rest of the United Kingdom all adults could vote an end to gerrymandering of electoral boundaries – this meant that nationalists had less voting power than unionists, even where nationalists were a majority reform of the police force ( Royal Ulster Constabulary ) – it was over 90% Protestant and criticised for sectarianism and police brutality repeal of the Special Powers Act – this allowed police to search without a warrant, arrest and imprison people without charge or trial, ban any assemblies or parades, and ban any publications; the Act was used almost exclusively against nationalists [ 72 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] Some suspected and accused NICRA of being a republican front-group whose ultimate goal was to unite Ireland. Although republicans and some members of the IRA (then led by Cathal Goulding and pursuing a non-violent agenda) helped to create and drive the movement, they did not control it and were not a dominant faction within it.

[ 58 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] On 20 June 1968, civil rights activists, including nationalist Member of Parliament (MP) Austin Currie , protested against housing discrimination by squatting in a house in Caledon, County Tyrone . The local council had allocated the house to an unmarried 19-year-old Protestant (Emily Beattie, the secretary of a local UUP politician) instead of either of two large Catholic families with children.

[ 87 ] RUC officers – one of whom was Beattie's brother – forcibly removed the activists.

[ 87 ] Two days before the protest, the two Catholic families who had been squatting in the house next door were removed by police.

[ 88 ] Currie had brought their grievance to the local council and to Stormont, but had been told to leave. The incident invigorated the civil rights movement.

[ 89 ] A monument to Northern Ireland's first civil rights march On 24 August 1968, the civil rights movement held its first civil rights march from Coalisland to Dungannon . Many more marches were held over the following year. Loyalists (especially members of the UPV) attacked some of the marches and held counter-demonstrations in a bid to get the marches banned.

[ 87 ] Because of the lack of police reaction to the attacks, nationalists saw the RUC, which was almost wholly Protestant, as backing the loyalists and allowing the attacks to occur.

[ 90 ] On 5 October 1968, a civil rights march in Derry was banned by the Northern Ireland government.

[ 91 ] When marchers defied the ban, RUC officers surrounded the marchers and beat them indiscriminately and without provocation. More than 100 people were injured, including a number of nationalist politicians.

[ 91 ] The incident was filmed by television news crews and shown around the world.

[ 92 ] It caused outrage among Catholics and nationalists, sparking two days of rioting in Derry between nationalists and the RUC.

[ 91 ] A few days later, a student civil rights group, People's Democracy , was formed in Belfast.

[ 87 ] In late November, O'Neill promised the civil rights movement some concessions, but these were seen as too little by nationalists and too much by loyalists. On 1 January 1969, People's Democracy began a four-day march from Belfast to Derry, which was repeatedly harassed and attacked by loyalists. At Burntollet Bridge , the marchers were attacked by about 200 loyalists, including some off-duty police officers, armed with iron bars, bricks, and bottles in a planned ambush. When the march reached Derry City, it was again attacked. The marchers claimed that police did nothing to protect them and that some officers helped the attackers.

[ 93 ] That night, RUC officers went on a rampage in the Bogside area of Derry, attacking Catholic homes, attacking and threatening residents, and hurling sectarian abuse.

[ 93 ] Residents then sealed off the Bogside with barricades to keep the police out, creating " Free Derry ", which was briefly a no-go area for the security forces.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] In March and April 1969, loyalists bombed water and electricity installations in Northern Ireland, blaming them on the dormant IRA and elements of the civil rights movement. Some attacks left much of Belfast without power and water. Loyalists hoped the bombings would force O'Neill to resign and bring an end to any concessions to nationalists.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] There were six bombings between 30 March and 26 April.

[ 96 ] [ 98 ] All were widely blamed on the IRA, and British soldiers were sent to guard installations. Unionist support for O'Neill waned, and on 28 April he resigned as prime minister.

[ 96 ] August 1969 riots and aftermath Main article: 1969 Northern Ireland riots On 19 April, there were clashes between NICRA marchers, the RUC, and loyalists in the Bogside. RUC officers entered the house of Samuel Devenny (42), an uninvolved Catholic civilian, and beat him along with two of his teenage daughters and a family friend.

[ 96 ] One of the daughters was beaten unconscious as she lay recovering from surgery.

[ 99 ] Devenny suffered a heart attack and died on 17 July from his injuries. On 13 July, RUC officers beat another Catholic civilian, Francis McCloskey (67), during clashes in Dungiven . He died of his injuries the next day.

[ 96 ] On 12 August, the loyalist Apprentice Boys of Derry were allowed to march along the edge of the Bogside. Taunts and missiles were exchanged between the loyalists and nationalist residents. After being bombarded with stones and petrol bombs from nationalists, the RUC, backed by loyalists, tried to storm the Bogside. The RUC used CS gas , armoured vehicles, and water cannons, but were kept at bay by hundreds of nationalists.

[ 100 ] The continuous fighting, which became known as the Battle of the Bogside , lasted for three days.

In response to events in Derry, nationalists held protests at RUC bases in Belfast and elsewhere. Some of these led to clashes with the RUC and attacks on RUC bases. In Belfast, loyalists responded by invading nationalist districts, burning houses and businesses. These sectarian attacks were characterized as the worst assaults on Catholic districts since the 1920s (see The Troubles in Ulster (1920–1922) .

[ 101 ] There were gun battles between nationalists and the RUC and between nationalists and loyalists. A group of about 30 IRA members was involved in the fighting in Belfast. The RUC deployed Shorland armoured cars mounted with heavy Browning machine guns . The Shorlands twice opened fire on a block of flats in a nationalist district, killing a nine-year-old boy named Patrick Rooney. RUC officers opened fire on rioters in Armagh, Dungannon, and Coalisland.

[ 58 ] During the riots, on 13 August, Taoiseach Jack Lynch made a television address . He condemned the RUC and said that the Irish Government "can no longer stand by and see innocent people injured and perhaps worse".

[ 102 ] He called for a United Nations peacekeeping force to be deployed and said that Irish Army field hospitals were being set up at the border in County Donegal near Derry. Lynch added that Irish re-unification would be the only permanent solution. Some interpreted the speech as a threat of military intervention.

[ 103 ] After the riots, Lynch ordered the Irish Army to plan for a possible humanitarian intervention in Northern Ireland. The plan, Exercise Armageddon , was rejected and remained classified for thirty years.

[ 104 ] On 14–15 August, British troops were deployed in Operation Banner in Derry and Belfast to restore order, [ 105 ] but did not try to enter the Bogside, bringing a temporary end to the riots. Ten people had been killed, [ 106 ] among them Rooney (the first child killed by police during the conflict), [ 107 ] and 745 had been injured, including 154 who suffered gunshot wounds.

[ 108 ] 154 homes and other buildings were demolished and over 400 needed repairs, of which 83% of the buildings damaged were occupied by Catholics.

[ 108 ] Between July and 1 September, 505 Catholic and 315 Protestant families were forced to flee their homes.

[ 109 ] The Irish Army set up refugee camps in the Republic near the border (see Gormanston Camp ). Nationalists initially welcomed the British Army, as they did not trust the RUC.

[ 110 ] On 9 September, the Northern Ireland Joint Security Committee met at Stormont Castle and decided that A peace line was to be established to separate physically the Falls and the Shankill communities. Initially this would take the form of a temporary barbed wire fence which would be manned by the Army and the Police ... It was agreed that there should be no question of the peace line becoming permanent although it was acknowledged that the barriers might have to be strengthened in some locations.

[ 111 ] On 10 September, the British Army started construction of the first "peace wall".

[ 112 ] It was the first of many such walls across Northern Ireland, and still stands today.

[ 113 ] After the riots, the Hunt Committee was set up to examine the RUC. It published its report on 12 October, recommending that the RUC become an unarmed force and the B Specials be disbanded. That night, loyalists took to the streets of Belfast in protest at the report. During violence in the Shankill , UVF members shot dead RUC officer Victor Arbuckle. He was the first RUC officer to be killed during the Troubles.

[ 114 ] In October and December 1969, the UVF carried out a number of small bombings in the Republic of Ireland.

[ 58 ] [ c ] 1970s Violence peaks and Stormont collapses 1971 newsreel about the background of the conflict Loyalist banner and graffiti on a building in the Shankill area of Belfast, 1970 Despite the British government's attempt to do "nothing that would suggest partiality to one section of the community" and the improvement of the relationship between the Army and the local population following the Army assistance with flood relief in August 1970, the Falls Curfew and a situation that was described at the time as "an inflamed sectarian one, which is being deliberately exploited by the IRA and other extremists" meant that relations between the Catholic population and the British Army rapidly deteriorated.

[ 116 ] From 1970 to 1972, an explosion of political violence occurred in Northern Ireland. The deadliest attack in the early 1970s was the McGurk's Bar bombing by the UVF in 1971.

[ 117 ] The violence peaked in 1972, when nearly 500 people, just over half of them civilians, were killed, the worst year in the entire conflict.

[ 118 ] By the end of 1971, 29 barricades were in place in Derry , blocking access to what was known as Free Derry ; 16 of these were impassable even to the British Army's one-ton armoured vehicles.

[ 95 ] Many of the nationalist or republican " no-go areas " were controlled by one of the two factions of the Irish Republican Army – the Provisional IRA and Official IRA . There are several reasons offered for why violence escalated in these years.

Unionists say the main reason was the formation of the Provisional IRA and Official IRA, particularly the former.

[ citation needed ] These two groups were formed when the IRA split into the 'Provisional' and 'Official' factions. While the older IRA had embraced non-violent civil agitation, [ 119 ] the new Provisional IRA was determined to wage "armed struggle" against British rule in Northern Ireland. The new IRA was willing to take on the role of "defenders of the Catholic community", [ 120 ] rather than seeking working-class ecumenical unity across both communities.

Nationalists point to a number of events in these years to explain the upsurge in violence. One such incident was the Falls Curfew in July 1970, when 3,000 troops imposed a curfew on the nationalist Lower Falls area of Belfast for two days as part of a weapons search, in which four civilians were killed and the army faced sporadic riots and gun battles with the Official IRA, firing over 1500 rounds of ammunition in total. Another was the introduction of internment without trial in 1971 (of 350 initial detainees, none were Protestants).

[ 121 ] Moreover, due to poor intelligence, [ 122 ] very few of those interned were actually republican activists at the time, but some internees became increasingly radicalised as a result of their experiences.

[ 58 ] In August 1971, eleven civilians were shot dead in the Ballymurphy massacre in Belfast. They were innocent and the killings were unjustified, according to a 2021 coroner's inquest. Nine victims were shot by the British Army.

[ 123 ] Bloody Sunday Main article: Bloody Sunday (1972) The Bogside massacre, colloquially known as Bloody Sunday , was the shooting dead of thirteen unarmed men by the British Army at a proscribed anti-internment rally in Derry on 30 January 1972 (a fourteenth man died of his injuries some months later), while fifteen other civilians were wounded.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] The march had been organised by the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association (NICRA). The soldiers involved were members of the 1st Battalion, Parachute Regiment , also known as "1 Para".

[ 126 ] This was one of the most prominent events that occurred during the Troubles as it was recorded as the largest number of civilians killed in a single shooting incident.

[ 127 ] Bloody Sunday greatly increased the hostility of Catholics and Irish nationalists towards the British military and government while significantly elevating tensions. As a result, the Provisional IRA gained more support, especially through rising numbers of recruits in the local areas.

[ 128 ] Following the introduction of internment, there were numerous gun battles between the British Army and both the Provisional and Official IRA. These included the Battle at Springmartin and the Battle of Lenadoon . Between 1971 and 1975, 1,981 people were interned: 1,874 were Catholic/republican, and 107 were Protestant/loyalist.

[ 129 ] There were widespread allegations of abuse and even torture of detainees, [ 130 ] [ 131 ] and in 1972, the " five techniques " used by the police and army for interrogation were ruled to be illegal following a British government inquiry.

[ 132 ] The Provisional IRA, or "Provos", as they became known, sought to establish themselves as the defender of the nationalist community.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] The Official IRA (OIRA) began its own armed campaign in reaction to the ongoing violence. The Provisional IRA's offensive campaign began in early 1971 when the Army Council sanctioned attacks on the British Army.

[ 135 ] In 1972, the Provisional IRA killed approximately 100 members of the security forces, wounded 500 others, and carried out approximately 1,300 bombings, [ 136 ] mostly against commercial targets which they considered "the artificial economy".

[ further explanation needed ] [ 118 ] [ 135 ] [ 137 ] Their bombing campaign killed many civilians, notably on Bloody Friday on 21 July, when they set off 22 bombs in the centre of Belfast, killing five civilians, two British soldiers, a Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) reservist, and an Ulster Defence Association (UDA) member.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Ten days later, nine civilians were killed in a triple car bombing in Claudy .

[ 141 ] The IRA is accused of committing this bombing but no proof for that accusation is yet published.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] In 1972, the Official IRA's campaign was largely counter-productive.

[ 144 ] The Aldershot bombing , an attack on the barracks of the Parachute Regiment in retaliation for Bloody Sunday, killed five female cleaners, a gardener and an army chaplain .

[ 145 ] The Official IRA killed three soldiers in Derry in April, but Joe McCann was killed by the Parachute Regiment in Belfast during the same month.

[ 144 ] The Official IRA called off its campaign in May 1972.

[ 146 ] British troop concentrations peaked at 1:50 of the civilian population, the highest ratio found in the history of counterinsurgency warfare, higher than that achieved during the " Malayan Emergency "/"Anti-British National Liberation War" to which the conflict is frequently compared.

[ 147 ] Operation Motorman , the military operation for the surge, was the biggest military operation in Ireland since the Irish War of Independence .

[ 148 ] In total, almost 22,000 British forces were involved.

[ 148 ] In the days before 31 July, about 4,000 extra troops were brought into Northern Ireland.

[ 148 ] Despite a temporary ceasefire in 1972 and talks with British officials, the Provisionals were determined to continue their campaign until the achievement of a united Ireland. The UK government in London, believing the Northern Ireland administration incapable of containing the security situation, sought to take over the control of law and order there. As this was unacceptable to the Northern Ireland Government, the British government pushed through emergency legislation (the Northern Ireland (Temporary Provisions) Act 1972 ) which suspended the unionist-controlled Stormont parliament and government, and introduced " direct rule " from London. Direct rule was initially intended as a short-term measure; the medium-term strategy was to restore self-government to Northern Ireland on a basis that was acceptable to both unionists and nationalists. Agreement proved elusive, however, and the Troubles continued throughout the 1970s, 1980s, and the 1990s within a context of political deadlock. The existence of "no-go areas" in Belfast and Derry was a challenge to the authority of the British government in Northern Ireland, and the British Army demolished the barricades and re-established control over the areas in Operation Motorman on 31 July 1972.

[ 58 ] [ 137 ] Sunningdale Agreement and UWC strike Belfast, 1974 British troops and police investigate a couple behind the Europa Hotel . They were taken away.

Loyalist graffiti: "You are now in Protestant teratory  [ sic ]" In June 1973, following the publication of a British White Paper and a referendum in March on the status of Northern Ireland, a new parliamentary body, the Northern Ireland Assembly , was established.

Elections to this body were held on 28 June. In October 1973, mainstream nationalist and unionist parties, along with the British and Irish governments, negotiated the Sunningdale Agreement , which was intended to produce a political settlement within Northern Ireland, but with a so-called "Irish dimension" involving the Republic. The agreement provided for "power-sharing" – the creation of an executive containing both unionists and nationalists; and a "Council of Ireland" – a body made up of ministers from Northern Ireland and the Republic that was designed to encourage cross-border co-operation.

Unionists were split over Sunningdale, which was also opposed by the IRA, whose goal remained nothing short of an end to the existence of Northern Ireland as part of the UK. Many unionists opposed the concept of power-sharing, arguing that it was not feasible to share power with nationalists who sought the destruction of the state. Perhaps more significant, however, was the unionist opposition to the "Irish dimension" and the Council of Ireland, which was perceived as being an all-Ireland parliament-in-waiting. Remarks by a young Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) councillor Hugh Logue to an audience at Trinity College Dublin that Sunningdale was the tool "by which the Unionists will be trundled off to a united Ireland" also damaged chances of significant unionist support for the agreement. In January 1974, Brian Faulkner was narrowly deposed as UUP leader and replaced by Harry West , although Faulkner retained his position as Chief Executive in the new government. A UK general election in February 1974 gave the anti-Sunningdale unionists the opportunity to test unionist opinion with the slogan "Dublin is only a Sunningdale away", and the result galvanised their support: they won 11 of the 12 seats, winning 58% of the vote with most of the rest going to nationalists and pro-Sunningdale unionists.

[ 58 ] [ 137 ] Ultimately, the Sunningdale Agreement was brought down by mass action on the part of loyalist paramilitaries and workers, who formed the Ulster Workers' Council . They organised a general strike , the Ulster Workers' Council strike . This severely curtailed business in Northern Ireland and cut off essential services such as water and electricity. Nationalists argue that the British Government did not do enough to break this strike and uphold the Sunningdale initiative. There is evidence that the strike was further encouraged by MI5 , a part of their campaign to 'disorientate' British prime minister Harold Wilson 's government [ 149 ] (see also Harold Wilson conspiracy theories ). Faced with such opposition, the pro-Sunningdale unionists resigned from the power-sharing government and the new regime collapsed. Three days into the UWC strike, on 17 May 1974, two UVF teams from the Belfast and Mid-Ulster brigades [ 76 ] detonated three no-warning car bombs in Dublin's city centre during the Friday evening rush hour, resulting in 26 deaths and close to 300 injuries. Ninety minutes later, a fourth car bomb exploded in Monaghan , killing seven additional people. Nobody has ever been convicted for these attacks [ 58 ] [ 137 ] and the bombings were the greatest loss of life in a single day during the Troubles.

[ 127 ] [ 150 ] Proposal of an independent Northern Ireland Even as his government deployed troops in August 1969, Wilson ordered a secret study of whether the British military could withdraw from Northern Ireland, including all 45 bases, such as the submarine school in Derry. The study concluded that the military could do so in three months, but if increased violence collapsed civil society, Britain would have to send in troops again. Without bases, to do so would be an invasion of Ireland; Wilson thus decided against a withdrawal.

[ 151 ] Wilson's cabinet discussed the more drastic step of complete British withdrawal from an independent Northern Ireland as early as February 1969, as one of various possibilities for the region including direct rule.

[ 152 ] He wrote in 1971 that Britain had "responsibility without power" there, [ 153 ] and secretly met with the IRA that year while leader of the opposition; his government in late 1974 and early 1975 again met with the IRA to negotiate a ceasefire. During the meetings, the parties discussed complete British withdrawal.

[ 154 ] Although the British government publicly stated that troops would stay as long as necessary, widespread fear from the Birmingham pub bombings and other IRA attacks in Britain itself increased support among MPs and the public for a military withdrawal.

[ 155 ] The failure of Sunningdale and the effectiveness of the UWC strike against British authority were more evidence to Wilson of his 1971 statement. They led to the serious consideration in London of independence until November 1975. Had the withdrawal occurred – which Wilson supported but others, including James Callaghan , opposed – the region would have become a separate dominion .

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] According to the secret plan, codenamed "Doomsday", [ 156 ] Britain would have had as little to do with the new "Ulster Dominion" as possible, with financial subsidies ending within five years. It would not have been an associated state , with Britain in control only of foreign relations, because a war between Ulster and the Republic would involve Britain.

[ 153 ] The dominion would also not have been a member of the British Commonwealth .

[ 156 ] The Northern Ireland Office cited the 1948 Newfoundland referendums – in which the island voluntarily joined Canada, its larger neighbor – as an example that divided Ireland might hopefully follow.

[ 153 ] The British negotiations with the IRA, an illegal organisation, angered the Republic's government. It did not know what was discussed but feared that the British were considering abandoning Northern Ireland. Irish Foreign Minister Garret FitzGerald discussed in a memorandum of June 1975 the possibilities of orderly withdrawal and independence, repartition of the island , or a collapse of Northern Ireland into civil war and anarchy. The memorandum preferred a negotiated independence as the best of the three "worst case scenarios", but concluded that the Irish government could do little.

[ 154 ] The Irish government had already failed to prevent a crowd from the burning of British Embassy, Dublin in 1972. It believed that Ireland could not enlarge the country's small army of 12,500 men without negative consequences. A civil war in Northern Ireland would cause many deaths there and severe consequences for the Republic, as the public would demand that it intervene to protect nationalists. FitzGerald warned Callaghan that the failure to intervene, despite Ireland's inability to do so, would "threaten democratic government in the Republic", which would jeopardise British and European security against Communist and other foreign nations.

[ 154 ] Wilson's aides had in 1969 come to a similar conclusion, telling him that removing Northern Ireland from the United Kingdom would cause violence and a military intervention by the Republic that would not allow the removal of British troops.

[ 152 ] Loyalist leader Glen Barr said in 2008 that a British withdrawal would have caused civil war, as Loyalists would have expected the Republic to invade Northern Ireland.

[ 156 ] Peter Ramsbotham , British Ambassador to the United States , warned of a hostile American reaction.

[ 153 ] Wilson's desire to extricate the British government from Northern Ireland was ultimately stymied by the fear that doing so might lead to catastrophe.

[ 153 ] The Irish government so dreaded the consequences that FitzGerald refused to ask Britain not to withdraw – as he feared that openly discussing the issue could permit the British to proceed – and other members of government opposed the Irish Cabinet even discussing what FitzGerald referred to as a "doomsday scenario". He wrote in 2006 that "Neither then nor since has public opinion in Ireland realised how close to disaster our whole island came during the last two years of Harold Wilson's premiership"; [ 154 ] in 2008, he said that the Republic "was more at risk then than at any time since our formation".

[ 156 ] Mid-1970s The Irish National Liberation Army began operations in the mid-1970s.

In February 1974, an IRA time bomb killed 12 people on a coach on the M62 in the West Riding of Yorkshire .

[ 157 ] Merlyn Rees , the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , lifted the proscription against the UVF in April 1974. In December, a month after the Birmingham pub bombings killed 21 people, the IRA declared a ceasefire; this would theoretically last throughout most of the following year. The ceasefire notwithstanding, sectarian killings escalated in 1975, along with internal feuding between rival paramilitary groups. This made 1975 one of the "bloodiest years of the conflict".

[ 76 ] On 7 August 1974, a 24 year old man from Limehill near Pomeroy, County Tyrone was shot in the back and killed by a member of the British Army (First Battalion, Royal Regiment of Wales). At the first inquest the soldier was cleared of all charges but in 2020 another inquest was ordered by the Attorney General. The inquest was the first in a series of coroners' inquiries into deaths associated with the Troubles.

[ 158 ] The Coroner ruled that the killing of Paddy McElhone was unjustified with a judge stating "an innocent man shot in cold blood without warning when he was no threat to anyone." The McElhone family issued a statement reading in part: "Our family always knew that Paddy was an innocent young man, taken from his home and shot by a British soldier for no reason". The statement also said that his parents "went to their graves broken-hearted knowing that their innocent son had been killed, without justification, explanation or apology".

[ 159 ] On 5 April 1975, Irish republican paramilitary members killed a UDA volunteer and four Protestant civilians in a gun and bomb attack at the Mountainview Tavern on the Shankill Road , Belfast . The attack was claimed by the Republican Action Force believed to be a covername used by Provisional IRA (IRA) volunteers .

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] On 31 July 1975 at Buskhill, outside Newry , popular Irish cabaret band the Miami Showband was returning home to Dublin after a gig in Banbridge when it was ambushed by gunmen from the UVF Mid-Ulster Brigade wearing British Army uniforms at a bogus military roadside checkpoint on the main A1 road . Three of the bandmembers, two Catholics and a Protestant, were shot dead, while two of the UVF men were killed when the bomb they had loaded onto the band's minibus detonated prematurely. The following January, eleven Protestant workers were gunned down in Kingsmill, South Armagh after having been ordered off their bus by an armed republican gang, which called itself the South Armagh Republican Action Force . This resulted in 10 fatalities, with one man surviving despite being shot 18 times. These killings were reportedly in retaliation to a loyalist double shooting attack against the Reavey and O'Dowd families the previous night.

[ 58 ] [ 118 ] [ 137 ] The violence continued through the rest of the 1970s. This included a series of attacks in Southern England in 1974 and 1975 by Provisional IRA active service unit the Balcombe Street Gang .

[ 162 ] The British Government reinstated the ban against the UVF in October 1975, making it once more an illegal organisation. The Provisional IRA's December 1974 ceasefire officially ended in January 1976, although it had carried out several attacks in 1975.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] The Provisional IRA had lost the hope it had felt in the early 1970s that it could force a rapid British withdrawal from Northern Ireland, and instead developed a strategy known as the " Long War ", which involved a less intense but more sustained campaign of violence that could continue indefinitely.

[ 165 ] The Official IRA ceasefire of 1972, however, became permanent, and the "Official" movement eventually evolved into the Workers' Party , which rejected violence completely. However, a splinter from the "Officials" – the Irish National Liberation Army – continued a campaign of violence beginning in 1974.

[ 137 ] Late 1970s By the late 1970s, war-weariness was visible in both communities. One sign of this was the formation of the Peace People , which won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1976. The Peace People organised large demonstrations calling for an end to paramilitary violence. Their campaign lost momentum, however, after they appealed to the nationalist community to provide information on the IRA to security forces.

[ 166 ] In February 1978, the IRA bombed La Mon , a hotel restaurant in Comber , County Down.

[ 167 ] The decade ended with a double attack by the IRA against the British. On 27 August 1979, Lord Mountbatten , while on holiday in Mullaghmore, County Sligo , was killed by a bomb planted on board his boat. Three other people were also killed: Lady Brabourne , the elderly mother of Mountbatten's son-in-law; and two teenagers, a grandson of Mountbatten and a local boatman.

[ 118 ] That same day, eighteen British soldiers, mostly members of the Parachute Regiment , were killed by two remote-controlled bombs in the Warrenpoint ambush at Narrow Water Castle, near Warrenpoint , County Down.

[ 76 ] It was the British Army's largest loss of life in a single incident in Operation Banner .

[ 168 ] Successive British Governments, having failed to achieve a political settlement, tried to "normalise" Northern Ireland. Aspects included the removal of internment without trial and the removal of political status for paramilitary prisoners. From 1972 onward, paramilitaries were tried in juryless Diplock courts to avoid intimidation of jurors. On conviction, they were to be treated as ordinary criminals. Resistance to this policy among republican prisoners led to more than 500 of them in the Maze prison initiating the "blanket" and "dirty" protests. Their protests culminated in hunger strikes in 1980 and 1981, aimed at the restoration of political status, as well as other concessions.

[ 58 ] [ 137 ] 1980s In the 1981 Irish hunger strike , ten republican prisoners (seven from the Provisional IRA and three from the INLA) died of starvation. The first hunger striker to die, Bobby Sands , was elected to Parliament on an Anti-H-Block ticket, as was his election agent Owen Carron following Sands's death. The hunger strikes resonated among many nationalists; over 100,000 people [ 169 ] attended Sands's funeral mass in West Belfast and thousands attended those of the other hunger strikers. From an Irish republican perspective, the significance of these events was to demonstrate potential for a political and electoral strategy.

[ 170 ] In the wake of the hunger strikes, Sinn Féin, which had become the Provisional IRA's political wing, [ 169 ] [ 171 ] [ 172 ] began to contest elections for the first time in both Northern Ireland (as abstentionists ) and in the Republic. In 1986, Sinn Féin recognised the legitimacy of the Irish Dáil , which caused a small group of members to break away and form Republican Sinn Féin .

[ 58 ] The IRA's "Long War" was boosted by large donations of arms from Libya in the 1980s (see Provisional IRA arms importation ) partly due to Muammar Gaddafi 's anger at British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 's government for assisting the Reagan government's 1986 bombing of Libya , which had allegedly killed one of Gaddafi's children. Additionally, it received funding from supporters in the Republic of Ireland and the United States and elsewhere throughout the Irish diaspora .

[ 173 ] Loyalist paramilitaries also received significant funding and arms from supporters in Canada and Scotland .

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] British troops in South Belfast, 1981 In July 1982, the IRA bombed military ceremonies in London's Hyde Park and Regent's Park , killing four soldiers, seven bandsmen, and seven horses.

[ 176 ] The INLA was highly active in the early and mid-1980s. In December 1982, it bombed a disco in Ballykelly, County Londonderry , frequented by off-duty British soldiers which killed 11 soldiers and six civilians.

[ 118 ] In December 1983, the IRA attacked Harrods using a car bomb, killing six people.

[ 177 ] One of the IRA's most high-profile actions in this period was the Brighton hotel bombing on 12 October 1984, when it set off a 100-pound time bomb in the Grand Brighton Hotel in Brighton , where politicians including Thatcher were staying for the Conservative Party conference. The bomb, which exploded in the early hours of the morning, killed five people, including Conservative MP Sir Anthony Berry , and injured 34 others.

[ 178 ] The Grand Brighton Hotel after the IRA bomb attack in October 1984 On 28 February 1985 in Newry, nine RUC officers were killed in a mortar attack on the police station.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] It was planned by the IRA's South Armagh Brigade and an IRA unit in Newry. Nine shells were fired from a mark 10 mortar which was bolted onto the back of a hijacked Ford van in Crossmaglen . Eight shells overshot the station; the ninth hit a portable cabin which was being used as a canteen. It was the RUC's largest loss of life during the Troubles.

[ 179 ] On 8 May 1987, eight IRA members attacked an RUC station in Loughgall , County Armagh, using a bomb and guns.

[ 181 ] All were killed by the SAS – the most IRA members killed in a single incident in the Troubles.

[ 181 ] On 8 November 1987 in Enniskillen , County Fermanagh, a Provisional IRA time bomb exploded during a Remembrance Sunday ceremony for UK Commonwealth war casualties. The bomb went off near a cenotaph that was at the heart of the parade. Eleven people (ten civilians and one serving member of the RUC) were killed and 63 were injured. Former school headmaster Ronnie Hill was seriously injured in the bombing and slipped into a coma two days later, remaining in this condition for more than a decade before his death in December 2000.

[ 182 ] The unit that carried out the bombing was disbanded.

[ when?

] Loyalist paramilitaries responded to the bombing with revenge attacks on Catholics, mostly civilians.

[ 183 ] Another bomb had been planted at nearby Tullyhommon at a parallel Remembrance Day commemoration but failed to detonate.

[ 137 ] In March 1988, three IRA volunteers who were planning a bombing were shot dead by the SAS at a Shell petrol station on Winston Churchill Avenue in Gibraltar , the British Overseas Territory attached to the south of Spain. This became known as Operation Flavius . Their funeral at Milltown Cemetery in Belfast was attacked by Michael Stone , a UDA member who threw grenades as the coffin was lowered and shot at people who chased him. Stone killed three people, including IRA volunteer Kevin Brady. Stone was jailed for life the following year, but was freed 11 years later under the Good Friday Agreement.

[ 184 ] Two British Army corporals, David Howes and Derek Wood, who were in plain clothes, drove their car into Brady's funeral cortege in Andersonstown . The crowd assumed the soldiers were loyalists intent on repeating Stone's attack; dozens of people surrounded and attacked their car. The soldiers were pulled out of their car, kidnapped and shot dead by the IRA. This became known as the Corporals killings .

[ 58 ] [ 137 ] In September 1989, the IRA used a time bomb to attack the Royal Marine Depot, Deal in Kent , killing 11 bandsmen.

[ 185 ] Towards the end of the decade, the British Army tried to soften its public appearance to residents in communities such as Derry in order to improve relations between the local community and the military. Soldiers were told not to use the telescopic sights on their rifles to scan the streets, as civilians believed they were being aimed at. Soldiers were also encouraged to wear berets when manning checkpoints (and later other situations) rather than helmets, which were perceived as militaristic and hostile. The system of complaints was overhauled – previously, if civilians believed they were being harassed or abused by soldiers in the streets or during searches and made a complaint, they would never find out what action (if any) was taken. The new regulations required an officer to visit the complainants house to inform them of the outcome of their complaint.

[ 186 ] In the 1980s, loyalist paramilitary groups—the Ulster Volunteer Force, the Ulster Defence Association, and Ulster Resistance —imported arms and explosives from South Africa .

[ 76 ] The weapons obtained were divided between the groups, although some of the weaponry (such as rocket-propelled grenades ) were hardly used. In 1987, the Irish People's Liberation Organisation (IPLO), a breakaway faction of the INLA, engaged in a bloody feud against the INLA which weakened the INLA's presence in some areas. By 1992, the IPLO was destroyed by the Provisionals for its involvement in drug dealing, thus ending the feud.

[ 58 ] 1990s Main article: Northern Ireland peace process Escalation in South Armagh The IRA's South Armagh Brigade had made the countryside village of Crossmaglen their stronghold since the 1970s. The surrounding villages of Silverbridge , Cullyhanna , Cullaville , Forkhill , Jonesborough , and Creggan were also IRA strongholds. In February 1978, a British Army Gazelle helicopter was shot down near Silverbridge , killing Lieutenant Colonel Ian Corden-Lloyd .

[ 187 ] 'Sniper at Work' sign in Crossmaglen In the 1990s, the IRA came up with a new plan to restrict British Army foot patrols near Crossmaglen. They developed two sniper teams to attack British Army and RUC patrols.

[ 188 ] They usually fired from an improvised armoured car using a .50 BMG calibre M82 sniper rifle . Signs were put up around South Armagh reading "Sniper at Work". The snipers killed a total of nine members of the security forces: seven soldiers and two constables. The last to be killed before the Good Friday Agreement was a British soldier, bombardier Steven Restorick.

The IRA had developed the capacity to attack helicopters in South Armagh and elsewhere since the 1980s, [ 189 ] including the 1990 shootdown of a Gazelle flying over the border between counties Tyrone and Monaghan by the East Tyrone Brigade; there were no fatalities in any of those incidents.

[ 190 ] Another incident involving British helicopters in South Armagh was the Battle of Newry Road in September 1993.

[ 191 ] Two other helicopters , a British Army Lynx and a Royal Air Force Puma were shot down by improvised mortar fire in 1994. The IRA set up checkpoints in South Armagh during this period, which were unchallenged by the security forces.

[ 189 ] [ 192 ] Downing Street mortar attack Police officers looking at a burned van used by the IRA in the 1991 mortar attack on 10 Downing Street On 7 February 1991, the IRA attempted to assassinate prime minister John Major and his war cabinet by firing a mortar at 10 Downing Street while they were gathered there to discuss the Gulf War .

[ 193 ] The shelling caused only four injuries, two of which were to police officers, while Major and the entire war cabinet were unharmed.

[ 193 ] First ceasefire After a prolonged period of background political manoeuvring, during which the 1992 Baltic Exchange and 1993 Bishopsgate bombings occurred in London, both loyalist and republican paramilitary groups declared ceasefires in 1994.
The year leading up to the ceasefires included a mass shooting in Castlerock , County Londonderry in which four people were killed . The IRA responded with the Shankill Road bombing in October 1993, which aimed to kill the UDA leadership, but instead killed eight Protestant civilian shoppers and a low-ranking UDA member, as well as one of the perpetrators, who was killed when the bomb detonated prematurely. The UDA responded with attacks in nationalist areas including a mass shooting in Greysteel , in which eight civilians were killed – six Catholics and two Protestants.

[ 58 ] On 16 June 1994, just before the ceasefires, the Irish National Liberation Army killed three UVF members in a gun attack on the Shankill Road . In revenge, three days later the UVF killed six civilians in a shooting at a pub in Loughinisland , County Down. The IRA, in the remaining month before its ceasefire, killed four senior loyalist paramilitaries, three from the UDA and one from the UVF. On 31 August 1994, the IRA declared a ceasefire . The loyalist paramilitaries, temporarily united in the " Combined Loyalist Military Command ", reciprocated six weeks later. Although these ceasefires failed in the short run, they marked an effective end to large-scale political violence, as they paved the way for the final ceasefires.

[ 58 ] [ 137 ] In 1995, the United States appointed George J. Mitchell as the United States Special Envoy for Northern Ireland . Mitchell was recognised as being more than a token envoy and as representing a President ( Bill Clinton ) with a deep interest in events.

[ 194 ] The British and Irish governments agreed that Mitchell would chair an international commission on disarmament of paramilitary groups.

[ 195 ] Second ceasefire On 9 February 1996, less than two years after the declaration of the ceasefire, the IRA revoked it with the Docklands bombing in the Canary Wharf area of London, killing two people, injuring 39 others, [ 196 ] and causing £85 million in damage to the city's financial centre. Sinn Féin blamed the failure of the ceasefire on the British Government's refusal to begin all-party negotiations until the IRA decommissioned its weapons.

[ 197 ] The destruction caused by the Docklands bombing in London, 1996 The attack was followed by several more, most notably the 1996 Manchester bombing , which destroyed a large area of the centre of the city on 15 June. It was the largest bomb attack in Britain since World War II . While the attack avoided any fatalities due to a telephone warning and the rapid response of the emergency services, over 200 people were injured in the attack, many of them outside the established cordon. The damage caused by the blast was estimated at £411 million.

Lance bombardier Stephen Restorick, the last British soldier killed during the Troubles, was shot dead at a checkpoint on the Green Rd near Bessbrook on 12 February 1997 by the IRA's South Armagh sniper .

[ 198 ] The IRA reinstated their ceasefire in July 1997, as negotiations for the document that became known as the Good Friday Agreement began without Sinn Féin. In September of the same year, Sinn Féin signed the Mitchell Principles and were admitted to the talks. The UVF was the first paramilitary grouping to split as a result of their ceasefire, spawning the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF) in 1996. In December 1997, the INLA assassinated LVF leader Billy Wright , leading to a series of revenge killings by loyalist groups. A group split from the Provisional IRA and formed the Real IRA (RIRA).

[ 199 ] In August 1998, a Real IRA bomb in Omagh killed 29 civilians, the most by a single bomb during the Troubles.

[ 127 ] This bombing discredited " dissident republicans " and their campaigns in the eyes of many who had previously supported the Provisionals' campaign. They became small groups with little influence, but still capable of violence.

[ 200 ] The INLA also declared a ceasefire after the Good Friday Agreement. Since then, most paramilitary violence has been directed at their "own" communities and at other factions within their organisations. The UDA, for example, has feuded with their fellow loyalists the UVF on two occasions since 2000. There have been internal struggles for power between "brigade commanders" and involvement in organised crime .

[ 201 ] Political process After the ceasefires, talks began between the main political parties in Northern Ireland to establish political agreement. These talks led to the Good Friday Agreement of 1998. This Agreement restored self-government to Northern Ireland on the basis of "power-sharing". In 1999, an executive was formed consisting of the four main parties, including Sinn Féin. Other important changes included the reform of the RUC, renamed as the Police Service of Northern Ireland , which was required to recruit at least a 50% quota of Catholics for ten years, and the removal of Diplock courts under the Justice and Security (Northern Ireland) Act 2007 .

[ 202 ] A security normalisation process also began as part of the treaty, which comprised the progressive closing of redundant British Army barracks, border observation towers, and the withdrawal of all forces taking part in Operation Banner – including the resident battalions of the Royal Irish Regiment – that would be replaced by an infantry brigade , deployed in ten sites around Northern Ireland but with no operative role in the province.

[ 8 ] The power-sharing Executive and Assembly were suspended in 2002, when unionists withdrew following " Stormontgate ", a controversy over allegations of an IRA spy ring operating at Stormont. There were ongoing tensions about the Provisional IRA's failure to disarm fully and sufficiently quickly. IRA decommissioning has since been completed (in September 2005) to the satisfaction of most parties.

[ 203 ] A feature of Northern Ireland politics since the Agreement has been eclipsed in electoral terms of parties such as the SDLP and Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) by rival parties such as Sinn Féin and the DUP. Similarly, although political violence is greatly reduced, sectarian animosity has not disappeared. Residential areas are more segregated between Catholic nationalists and Protestant unionists than ever.

[ 204 ] [ needs update?

] Thus, progress towards restoring the power-sharing institutions was slow and tortuous. On 8 May 2007, devolved government returned to Northern Ireland. DUP leader Ian Paisley and Sinn Féin's Martin McGuinness took office as First Minister and deputy First Minister, respectively.

[ 205 ] Support outside Northern Ireland Arms importation Further information: Provisional IRA in the Republic of Ireland , Provisional Irish Republican Army arms importation , Official Irish Republican Army § Support , and Irish National Liberation Army § Arms importation Both Republican and Loyalist paramilitaries sought to obtain weapons outside of Northern Ireland in order to achieve their objectives. Irish Republican paramilitaries received the vast majority of external support. Over the years, the Provisional IRA imported arms from external sources such as sympathisers in the Republic of Ireland , Irish diaspora communities within the Anglosphere , mainland Europe, the Palestine Liberation Organization , and Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi . The Soviet Union and North Korea supplied the Official IRA with 5,000 weapons, [ 206 ] and the INLA received considerable arms from overseas as well.

The IRA's primary external support was from the Republic of Ireland, whose safe haven allowed the group to raise legal and illegal funds, organise and train, and manufacture a large number of firearms and explosives with ease and then smuggled them into Northern Ireland and England.

[ 207 ] The IRA's primary weapon in the Republic was explosives (including gelignite and ANFO ), which were responsible for the vast majority of the bombings in Northern Ireland and England throughout the conflict.

[ 207 ] While the plastic explosive Semtex donated by Gaddafi was appreciated and infamous in IRA bombing campaigns, they were actually sparsely used. Notable events of IRA bombs of Irish origin included Bloody Friday, the Warrenpoint ambush, the assassination of Lord Mountbatten, and the Hyde Park and Regent's Park bombings.

Loyalist paramilitaries also received support, mainly from Protestant supporters in Canada, England, and Scotland (including members of the Orange Order). From 1979 to 1986, loyalist paramilitaries imported up to 100 machine guns and "as many rifles, grenade launchers, magnum revolvers and hundreds of thousands of rounds of ammunition from Canada." [ 208 ] Members of the Grand Orange Lodge of Scotland sent gelignite explosives to UDA and UVF members.

[ 209 ] [ 210 ] [ 211 ] British Army's Force Research Unit (FRU) agent Brian Nelson also secured a large amount of weaponry from the South African government to loyalists.

[ 212 ] Funding Further information: Paramilitary finances in the Troubles Irish Republican and Loyalist militants also received significant funding from groups, individuals, and state actors outside Northern Ireland. From the 1970s to the early 1990s, Libya gave the IRA over $12.5 million in cash (equivalent to $47.7 million in 2024).

[ 213 ] [ 214 ] [ 215 ] The IRA also received at least $2 million from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) in exchange for training them with bomb techniques, including shaped charges , propane bombs , landmines , and the construction of mortars (see also the Colombia Three ).

[ 216 ] On the Loyalist side, the Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee report of June 2002 stated that "in 1992 it was estimated that Scottish support for the UDA and UVF might amount to £100,000 a year." [ 217 ] In the Anglosphere outside Great Britain, Irish Americans , Irish Canadians , Irish Australians , and Irish New Zealanders provided considerable or substantial financial donations to the Republican movement, mostly the Provisionals.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] [ 220 ] The financial backbone of the Provisional cause in America was the Irish Northern Aid Committee ( NORAID ), which was estimated to have raised $3.6 million between 1970 and 1991, including for supporting families of dead or imprisoned IRA members, lobbying and propaganda efforts, and sometimes purchasing weapons for the Provisional IRA.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] [ 224 ] [ 225 ] [ 226 ] In Australia, officials estimated that by the 1990s, no more than A$20,000 were raised annually for the Provisionals.

[ 227 ] Canadian supporters raised money to secretly purchase weapons, notably detonators used for Canadian mining sites and smuggled to the IRA.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] However, nearly all or the vast majority of the funding for both Republican and Loyalist paramilitaries came from criminal and business activities within the island of Ireland and Great Britain.

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] [ 217 ] [ 207 ] The Northern Ireland Affairs Select Committee report of June 2002 stated that: Historically, the vast majority of paramilitary funds for both Republican and Loyalist groups have been generated within Northern Ireland. The primary reason for this is the relative ease of raising funds within these communities. Sympathy for the cause is greatest within the originating community. Those concerned also have the local knowledge which facilitates crime or the direct intimidation of individuals from whom money is sought. The fact that Northern Ireland remains predominantly a cash economy also encourages a local focus, as it facilitates money laundering and makes it difficult for the law enforcement agencies to trace transactions.

[ 217 ] Collusion between security forces and paramilitaries There were many incidents of collusion between the British state security forces (the British Army and RUC) and loyalist paramilitaries. This included soldiers and policemen taking part in loyalist attacks while off-duty, giving weapons and intelligence to loyalists, not taking action against loyalists, and hindering police investigations. The De Silva Report found that, during the 1980s, 85% of the intelligence loyalists used to target people came from the security forces, [ 233 ] who in turn also had double agents and informers within loyalist groups who organised attacks on the orders of or with the knowledge of their handlers . Of the 210 loyalists arrested by the Stevens Inquiries team, all but three were found to be state agents or informers.

[ 234 ] The British Army's locally recruited Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) was almost wholly Protestant.

[ 235 ] [ 236 ] Despite recruits being vetted, some loyalist militants managed to enlist, mainly to obtain weapons, training, and information.

[ 237 ] A 1973 British Government document (uncovered in 2004), Subversion in the UDR , suggested that 5–15% of UDR soldiers then were members of loyalist paramilitaries.

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] The report said the UDR was the main source of weapons for those groups, [ 237 ] although by 1973, UDR weapons losses had dropped significantly, partly due to stricter controls.

[ 237 ] In 1977, the Army investigated a UDR battalion based at Girdwood Barracks, Belfast. The investigation found that 70 soldiers had links to the UVF, that thirty soldiers had fraudulently diverted up to £47,000 to the UVF, and that UVF members socialised with soldiers in their mess. Following this, two UDR members were dismissed.

[ 239 ] The investigation was halted after a senior officer claimed it was harming morale.

[ 239 ] By 1990, at least 197 UDR soldiers had been convicted of loyalist terrorist offences and other serious crimes, including 19 convicted of murder.

[ 240 ] This was only a small fraction of those who served in the UDR, but the proportion was higher than the regular British Army, the RUC, and the civilian population.

[ 241 ] During the 1970s, the Glenanne gang – a secret alliance of loyalist militants, British soldiers, and RUC officers – carried out a string of gun and bomb attacks against nationalists in an area of Northern Ireland known as the "murder triangle".

[ 242 ] [ 243 ] It also carried out some attacks in the Republic, killing about 120 people in total, mostly uninvolved civilians.

[ 244 ] The Cassel Report investigated 76 murders attributed to the group and found evidence that soldiers and policemen were involved in 74 of those.

[ 245 ] One member, RUC officer John Weir , claimed his superiors knew of the collusion but allowed it to continue.

[ 246 ] The Cassel Report also stated some senior officers knew of the crimes but did nothing to prevent, investigate, or punish perpetrators.

[ 245 ] Attacks attributed to the group include the Dublin and Monaghan bombings (1974), the Miami Showband killings (1975), and the Reavey and O'Dowd killings (1976).

[ 247 ] The Stevens Inquiries found that elements of the security forces had used loyalists as "proxies" [ 248 ] who, via double-agents and informers, had helped loyalist groups to kill targeted individuals, usually suspected republicans but also civilians both intentionally and otherwise. The inquiries concluded this had intensified and prolonged the conflict.

[ 249 ] [ 250 ] The British Army's Force Research Unit (FRU) was the main agency involved.

[ 248 ] Brian Nelson, the UDA's chief 'intelligence officer', was a FRU agent.

[ 251 ] Through Nelson, FRU helped loyalists target people for assassination. FRU commanders say they helped loyalists target only suspected or known republican activists and prevented the killing of civilians.

[ 248 ] The Inquiries found evidence only two lives were saved and that Nelson/FRU was responsible for at least 30 murders and many other attacks, many on civilians.

[ 249 ] One victim was solicitor Pat Finucane . Nelson also supervised the shipping of weapons to loyalists in 1988.

[ 251 ] From 1992 to 1994, loyalists were responsible for more deaths than republicans, [ 252 ] partly due to FRU involvement.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] Members of the security forces tried to obstruct the Stevens investigation.

[ 250 ] [ 255 ] A Police Ombudsman report from 2007 revealed that UVF members had been allowed to commit a string of terrorist offences, including murder, while working as informers for RUC Special Branch. It found that Special Branch had given informers immunity by ensuring they were not caught or convicted and blocking weapons searches.

[ 256 ] Ombudsman Nuala O'Loan concluded that this had led to "hundreds" of deaths [ 234 ] and said senior British Government officials pressured her into halting her investigation.

[ 257 ] UVF member Robin Jackson has been linked to between 50 [ 258 ] [ 259 ] and 100 [ 243 ] killings in Northern Ireland, although he was never convicted for any.

[ 260 ] It is alleged by many, including members of the security forces, that Jackson was an RUC agent.

[ 260 ] The Irish Government's Barron Report alleged that Jackson also "had relationships with British Intelligence".

[ 261 ] In 2016, a new Ombudsman report concluded that there had been collusion between the police and the UVF in relation to the deaths of six Catholic men in the 1994 Loughinisland massacre and that the investigation was undermined by the wish to protect informers, but found no evidence police had foreknowledge of the attack.

[ 262 ] The Smithwick Tribunal concluded that a member of the Garda Síochána (the Republic of Ireland's police force) colluded with the IRA in the killing of two senior RUC officers in 1989 .

[ 263 ] [ 264 ] [ 265 ] [ 266 ] The two officers were ambushed by the IRA near Jonesborough, County Armagh , when returning from a cross-border security conference in Dundalk in the Republic of Ireland.

[ 264 ] The Disappeared Main article: Disappeared (Northern Ireland) During the 1970s and 1980s, republican and loyalist paramilitaries abducted a number of individuals, many alleged to have been informers, who were then secretly killed and buried.

[ 267 ] Eighteen people – two women and sixteen men – including one British Army officer, were kidnapped and killed during the Troubles. They are referred to informally as " The Disappeared ". All but one, Lisa Dorrian, were abducted and killed by republicans. Dorrian is believed to have been abducted by loyalists. The remains of all but four of "The Disappeared" have been recovered and turned over to their families.

[ 268 ] [ 269 ] [ 270 ] British Army attacks on civilians British government security forces, including the Military Reaction Force (MRF), carried out what have been described as " extrajudicial killings " of unarmed civilians.

[ 271 ] [ 272 ] [ 273 ] Their victims were often Catholic or suspected Catholic civilians unaffiliated with any paramilitaries, such as the Whiterock Road shooting of two unarmed Catholic civilians by British soldiers on 15 April 1972, and the Andersonstown shooting of seven unarmed Catholic civilians on 12 May that same year.

[ 274 ] A member of the MRF stated in 1978 that the Army often attempted false flag sectarian attacks, provoking sectarian conflict and "taking the heat off the Army".

[ 275 ] A former member stated: "[W]e were not there to act like an army unit, we were there to act like a terror group." [ 276 ] Shoot-to-kill allegations Main article: Shoot-to-kill policy in Northern Ireland Republicans allege that the security forces operated a shoot-to-kill policy rather than arresting IRA suspects. The security forces denied this and pointed out that six of the eight IRA men killed in the Loughgall ambush in 1987 were heavily armed. On the other hand, the shooting of three unarmed IRA members in Gibraltar by the Special Air Service ten months later appeared to confirm suspicions among republicans and in the British and Irish media of a tacit British shoot-to-kill policy of suspected IRA members.

[ 277 ] Parades issue Main articles: Parades in Northern Ireland , Drumcree conflict , and Quinn brothers' killings Orangemen marching in Bangor on the Twelfth of July 2010 Inter-communal tensions rise and violence often breaks out during the "marching season" when the Protestant Orange Order parades take place across Northern Ireland. The parades are held to commemorate William of Orange's victory in the Battle of the Boyne in 1690, which secured the Protestant Ascendancy and British rule in Ireland . One particular flashpoint which has caused continuous annual strife is the Garvaghy Road area in Portadown , where an Orange parade from Drumcree Church passes through a mainly nationalist estate off the Garvaghy Road. This parade has now been banned indefinitely, following nationalist riots against the parade and loyalist counter-riots against its banning.

In 1995, 1996, and 1997, there were several weeks of prolonged rioting throughout Northern Ireland over the impasse at Drumcree. A number of people died in this violence, including a Catholic taxi driver killed by the Loyalist Volunteer Force , and three (of four) nominally Catholic brothers (from a mixed-religion family) died when their house in Ballymoney was petrol-bombed .

[ 278 ] [ 279 ] [ 280 ] Social repercussions Further information: Paramilitary punishment attacks in Northern Ireland A watchtower at a heavily fortified RUC base in Crossmaglen A " peace line " at the back of a house on Bombay Street, Belfast A " peace line " in Belfast, 2010, built to separate nationalist and unionist neighbourhoods The impact of the Troubles on the ordinary people of Northern Ireland has been compared to that of the Blitz on the people of London.

[ 281 ] The stress resulting from bomb attacks, street disturbances, security checkpoints, and the constant military presence had the strongest effect on children and young adults.

[ 282 ] There was also the fear that local paramilitaries instilled in their respective communities with the punishment beatings , "romperings", and the occasional tarring and feathering meted out to individuals for various purported infractions.

[ 283 ] The legacy of the Troubles has been viewed by some, including researcher Rupert Taylor, as still persistent in Northern Ireland more than two decades after the Good Friday Agreement of 1998, as inequality and division between Catholics and Protestants continue.

[ 284 ] In addition to the violence and intimidation, there was chronic unemployment and a severe housing shortage. Many people were rendered homeless as a result of intimidation or having their houses burnt, and urban redevelopment played a role in the social upheaval. Belfast families faced being transferred to new, alien estates when older, decrepit districts such as Sailortown and the Pound Loney were being demolished. According to social worker and author Sarah Nelson, this problem of homelessness and disorientation contributed to the breakdown of the normal fabric of society, allowing for paramilitaries to exert a strong influence in certain districts.

[ 283 ] Vandalism was also a major problem. In the 1970s, there were 10,000 vandalised empty houses in Belfast alone. Most of the vandals were aged between eight and thirteen.

[ 285 ] According to one historian of the conflict, the stress of the Troubles engendered a breakdown in the previously strict sexual morality of Northern Ireland, resulting in a "confused hedonism " in respect of personal life.

[ 286 ] In Derry, illegitimate births and alcoholism increased for women and the divorce rate rose.

[ 287 ] Teenage alcoholism was also a problem, partly as a result of the drinking clubs established in both loyalist and republican areas. In many cases, there was little parental supervision of children in some of the poorer districts.

[ 288 ] The Department of Health has looked at a report written in 2007 by Mike Tomlinson of Queen's University , which asserted that the legacy of the Troubles has played a substantial role in the current rate of suicide in Northern Ireland.

[ 289 ] Further social issues arising from the Troubles include antisocial behavior and an aversion towards political participation. According to one historian, children raised during the Troubles were found to develop similar antisocial external behaviors as children similarly born in regions of conflict, notably those born and raised during World War II .

[ 290 ] Further studies into the impact of violence on the psychological development of children in Northern Ireland also found that those raised during the Troubles were more likely to be averse towards political participation, noting that while older generations still actively associated with their own social and political groups, younger generations became wary of such groups as social and political divisions continued to expand during the thirty years of the Troubles.

[ 291 ] Peace lines, which were built in Northern Ireland during the early years of the Troubles, remain in place.

[ 292 ] According to a 2022 poll, 69% of Irish nationalists polled believe there was no option but "violent resistance to British rule during the Troubles".

[ 293 ] Casualties Responsibility for Troubles-related deaths between 1969 and 2001 According to the Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN), 3,532 people were killed as a result of the conflict between 1969 and 2001.

[ 294 ] Of these, 3,489 were killed up to 1998.

[ 294 ] According to the book Lost Lives (2006 edition), 3,720 people were killed as a result of the conflict from 1966 to 2006. Of these, 3,635 were killed up to 1998.

[ 295 ] In The Politics of Antagonism: Understanding Northern Ireland , Brendan O'Leary and John McGarry point out that "nearly two per cent of the population of Northern Ireland have been killed or injured through political violence [...] If the equivalent ratio of victims to population had been produced in Great Britain in the same period some 100,000 people would have died, and if a similar level of political violence had taken place, the number of fatalities in the USA would have been over 500,000".

[ 296 ] Using this relative comparison to the US, analyst John M. Gates suggests that whatever one calls the conflict, it was "certainly not" a " low intensity conflict ".

[ 297 ] In 2010, it was estimated that 107,000 people in Northern Ireland suffered some physical injury as a result of the conflict. On the basis of data gathered by the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency , the Victims Commission estimated that the conflict resulted in 500,000 'victims' in Northern Ireland alone. It defines 'victims' are those who are directly affected by 'bereavement', 'physical injury', or 'trauma' as a result of the conflict.

[ 298 ] One statistical breakdown of Troubles deaths put the death toll at 3,466, with 3,218 lives lost in Northern Ireland, 125 in Great Britain, 105 in the Republic of Ireland, and 18 in the rest of Europe.

[ 299 ] Responsibility Republican paramilitaries were responsible for some 60% of all deaths, loyalists 30% and British security forces 10%.

[ 39 ] Responsibility for killing [ 39 ] Responsible party No.

% Republican paramilitary groups 2,058 60% Loyalist paramilitary groups 1,027 30% British security forces 365 10% Persons unknown 77 Irish security forces 5 Total 3,532 Loyalists killed 48% of the civilian casualties, republicans killed 39%, and the British security forces killed 10%.

[ 300 ] Most of the Catholic civilians were killed by loyalists, and most of the Protestant civilians were killed by republicans.

[ 301 ] Of those killed by republican paramilitaries: [ 302 ] 1,080 (~52.5%) were members/former members of the British security forces 722 (~35.1%) were civilians 188 (~9.2%) were members of republican paramilitaries 57 (~2.8%) were members of loyalist paramilitaries 11 (~0.5%) were members of the Irish security forces Of those killed by loyalist paramilitaries: [ 302 ] 878 (~85.5%) were civilians 94 (~9.2%) were members of loyalist paramilitaries 41 (~4.0%) were members of republican paramilitaries 14 (~1.4%) were members of the British security forces Of those killed by British security forces: [ 302 ] 188 (~51.5%) were civilians 146 (~40.2%) were members of republican paramilitaries 18 (~5.0%) were members of loyalist paramilitaries 13 (~3.6%) were fellow members of the British security forces Status Approximately 52% of the dead were civilians, 32% were members or former members of the British security forces, 11% were members of republican paramilitaries, and 5% were members of loyalist paramilitaries.

[ 39 ] About 60% of the civilian casualties were Catholics, 30% of the civilians were Protestants, and the rest were from outside Northern Ireland.

[ 303 ] About 257 of those killed were children under the age of seventeen, representing 7.2% of the total, [ 304 ] while 274 children under the age of eighteen were killed during the conflict.

[ 305 ] It has been the subject of dispute whether some individuals were members of paramilitary organisations. Several casualties that were listed as civilians were later claimed by the IRA as their members.

[ 306 ] One Ulster Defence Association (UDA) and three Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) members killed during the conflict were also Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) soldiers at the time of their deaths.

[ 307 ] At least one civilian victim was an off-duty member of the Territorial Army .

[ 308 ] Deaths by status of victim [ 9 ] Status No.

Civilians (inc. Civilian political activists) 1840 British security force personnel (serving and former members) 1114 British Army (inc.

UDR , RIR and TA ) 757 Royal Ulster Constabulary 319 Northern Ireland Prison Service 26 English police forces 6 Royal Air Force 4 Royal Navy 2 Irish security force personnel 11 Garda Síochána 9 Irish Army 1 Irish Prison Service 1 Republican paramilitaries 397 Loyalist paramilitaries 170 Location Troubles deaths by area Most killings took place within Northern Ireland, especially in Belfast and County Armagh. Most of the killings in Belfast took place in the west and north of the city.

Dublin , London and Birmingham were also affected, albeit to a lesser degree than Northern Ireland itself. Occasionally, the IRA attempted or carried out attacks on British targets in Gibraltar, Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands.

[ 309 ] [ 310 ] Conflict-related deaths by location [ 311 ] Location No.

Belfast 1,541 West Belfast 623 North Belfast 577 South Belfast 213 East Belfast 128 County Armagh 477 County Tyrone 340 County Down 243 Derry City 227 County Antrim 209 County Londonderry 123 County Fermanagh 112 Republic of Ireland 116 England 125 Continental Europe 18 Chronological listing Conflict-related deaths by year [ 294 ] Year No.

2001 16 2000 19 1999 8 1998 55 1997 22 1996 18 1995 9 1994 64 1993 88 1992 88 1991 97 1990 81 1989 76 1988 104 1987 98 1986 61 1985 57 1984 69 1983 84 1982 111 1981 114 1980 80 1979 121 1978 82 1977 110 1976 297 1975 260 1974 294 1973 255 1972 480 1971 171 1970 26 1969 16 Additional statistics Additional estimated statistics on the conflict [ 12 ] Incident No.

Injury 47,541 Shooting incident 36,923 Armed robbery 22,539 People charged with paramilitary offences 19,605 Bombing and attempted bombing 16,209 Arson 2,225 List of Deaths (1969) Main article: List of people killed during The Troubles (1969–1998) Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 Act of Parliament Parliament of the United Kingdom Long title An Act to address the legacy of the Northern Ireland Troubles and promote reconciliation by establishing an Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery, limiting criminal investigations, legal proceedings, inquests and police complaints, extending the prisoner release scheme in the Northern Ireland (Sentences) Act 1998, and providing for experiences to be recorded and preserved and for events to be studied and memorialised, and to provide for the validity of interim custody orders.

Citation 2023 c. 41 Introduced by Brandon Lewis MP, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland ( Commons ) Lord Caine ( Lords ) Territorial extent Northern Ireland England and Wales Scotland Dates Royal assent 18 September 2023 Commencement 18 September 2023 18 November 2023 1 May 2024 Other legislation Amends Northern Ireland (Sentences) Act 1998 Status: Current legislation History of passage through Parliament Text of statute as originally enacted Revised text of statute as amended Text of the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 as in force today (including any amendments) within the United Kingdom, from legislation.gov.uk .

On 18 September 2023, the Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023 (c. 41), also known as the Legacy Act received royal assent.

[ 312 ] The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission has raised concerns about the legislation's incompatibility with the Human Rights Act 1998 .

[ 313 ] The legislation exempts conduct related to the Troubles from prosecution and establishes the Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery.

[ 314 ] The legislation has been criticised by all major political parties in Northern Ireland , the Labour Party and the Irish government - the Irish government announced it was challenging the legislation through the European Court of Human Rights and Labour have pledged to repeal the legislation, but have stated they would keep the Independent Commission for Reconciliation and Information Recovery.

[ 315 ] See also Ireland portal Northern Ireland portal United Kingdom portal 2021 Northern Ireland riots Irish Children's Fund List of bombings during the Troubles List of Gardaí killed in the line of duty List of Irish uprisings Outline of the Troubles Segregation in Northern Ireland Timeline of Continuity IRA actions Timeline of Irish National Liberation Army actions Timeline of Provisional Irish Republican Army actions Timeline of Real Irish Republican Army actions Timeline of the Troubles Timeline of Ulster Defence Association actions Timeline of Ulster Volunteer Force actions In popular culture List of books about the Troubles List of The Troubles films Murals in Northern Ireland Similar conflicts Algerian War - Algeria, France Basque conflict – Basque Country, Spain Corsican conflict – Corsica, France Sri Lankan civil war – Sri Lanka Years of Lead - Italy Kurdistan Workers' Party insurgency - Turkey Explanatory notes ^ The exact starting date of the Troubles is disputed; the most common dates proposed include the formation of the modern Ulster Volunteer Force in 1966, [ 1 ] the civil rights march in Derry on 5 October 1968, the beginning of the ' Battle of the Bogside ' on 12 August 1969 or the deployment of British troops on 14 August 1969.

^ Violence occasionally spread to the Republic of Ireland , England and mainland Europe ^ Loyalist violence would persist in the Republic until 1976; thereafter, it occurred sporadically.

[ 115 ] References ^ a b "Beginning of the Troubles" . Cain.ulst.ac.uk – CAIN.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2010 . Retrieved 12 October 2009 .

^ Melaugh, Martin (3 February 2006).

"Frequently Asked Questions – The Northern Ireland Conflict" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Ulster University .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 .

^ a b Aughey, Arthur (2005).

The Politics of Northern Ireland: Beyond the Belfast Agreement . London / New York: Routledge. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-415-32788-6 .

OCLC 55962335 .

^ a b c Holland, Jack (1999).

Hope Against History: The Course of Terrorist trouble in Northern Ireland .

Henry Holt and Company . p.

221 .

ISBN 978-0-8050-6087-4 .

The troubles were over, but the killing continued. Some of the heirs to Ireland's violent traditions refused to give up their inheritance.

^ Gillespie, Gordon (2008).

Historical Dictionary of the Northern Ireland Conflict .

Scarecrow Press . p. 250.

ISBN 978-0-8108-5583-0 .

^ Taylor, Peter (1997). "Chapter 21: Stalemate".

Behind the Mask: The IRA and Sinn Féin . New York: TV Books. pp.

246– 261.

ISBN 978-1-57500-061-9 .

OCLC 38012191 .

^ Cox, Michael ; Guelke, Adrian ; Stephen, Fiona (2006).

A Farewell to Arms? Beyond the Good Friday Agreement .

Manchester University Press . p. 213.

ISBN 978-0-7190-7115-7 .

^ a b Ministry of Defence Annual Report and Accounts 2006–2007 (PDF) (Report).

Ministry of Defence . 23 July 2007. HC 697.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 August 2012 . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g Sutton, Malcolm.

"Sutton Index of Deaths" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 18 May 2017 .

^ Melaugh, Martin.

"CAIN: Abstracts of Organisations – 'U' " .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Ulster University .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2019 . Retrieved 20 February 2019 .

^ a b Sutton, Malcolm.

"Sutton Index of Deaths – Status Summary" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 24 August 2015 . Retrieved 31 August 2012 .

^ a b Melaugh, Mertin; Lynn, Brendan; McKenna, F.

"Northern Ireland Society – Security and Defence" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Ulster University .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2019 . Retrieved 20 February 2019 .

^ Kelters, Seamus (February 2013).

"Violence in the Troubles" .

BBC History . Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 17 November 2024 .

^ a b Mitchell, Claire (2013).

Religion, Identity and Politics in Northern Ireland . Ashgate Publishing. p. 5.

The most popular school of thought on religion is encapsulated in McGarry and O'Leary's Explaining Northern Ireland (1995) and it is echoed by Coulter (1999) and Clayton (1998). The central argument is that religion is an ethnic marker but that it is not generally politically relevant in and of itself. Instead, ethnonationalism lies at the root of the conflict. Hayes and McAllister (1999a) point out that this represents something of an academic consensus.

^ McGarry, John; O'Leary, Brendan (1995).

Explaining Northern Ireland . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-631-18349-5 .

^ Keogh, Dermot, ed. (1994).

Northern Ireland and the Politics of Reconciliation . Cambridge University Press. pp.

55–59 .

ISBN 978-0-521-45933-4 .

^ Coakley, John.

"Ethnic Conflict and the Two-State Solution: The Irish Experience of Partition" . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 February 2012 . Retrieved 15 February 2009 .

... these attitudes are not rooted particularly in religious belief, but rather in underlying ethnonational identity patterns.

^ "What You Need to Know About The Troubles" .

Imperial War Museums .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2021 . Retrieved 31 December 2020 .

^ Melaugh, Martin; Lynn, Brendan.

"Glossary of Terms on Northern Ireland Conflict" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Ulster University .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2019 . Retrieved 19 February 2019 .

The term 'the Troubles' is a euphemism used by people in Ireland for the present conflict. The term has been used before to describe other periods of Irish history. On the CAIN web site the terms 'Northern Ireland conflict' and 'the Troubles', are used interchangeably.

^ McEvoy, Joanne (2008).

The politics of Northern Ireland . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-7486-2501-7 .

OCLC 232570935 .

The Northern Ireland conflict, known locally as 'the Troubles', endured for three decades and claimed the lives of more than 3,500 people.

^ McKittrick, David; McVea, David (2001).

Making Sense of the Troubles: A History of the Northern Ireland Conflict (Rdevised ed.).

Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-0-14-100305-4 .

^ Edwards, Aaron; McGrattan, Cillian (2012).

The Northern Ireland Conflict: A Beginner's Guide .

Oneworld Publications .

ISBN 978-1-78074-171-0 .

^ Gillespie, Gordon (2007).

Historical Dictionary of the Northern Ireland Conflict . Scarecrow Press. p. 250.

ISBN 978-0-8108-5583-0 .

^ a b Elliott, Marianne (2007).

The Long Road to Peace in Northern Ireland: Peace Lectures from the Institute of Irish Studies at Liverpool University (2 ed.).

Liverpool University Press . pp. 2, 188.

ISBN 978-1-84631-065-2 .

^ Goodspeed, Michael (2002).

When Reason Fails: Portraits of Armies at War : America, Britain, Israel, and the Future .

Greenwood Publishing Group . pp. 44, 61.

ISBN 0-275-97378-6 .

^ Lesley-Dixon, Kenneth (2018).

Northern Ireland: The Troubles: From The Provos to The Det .

Pen and Sword Books . p. 13.

^ Schaeffer, Robert (1999).

Severed States: Dilemmas of Democracy in a Divided World . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 152.

^ Rainey, Mark (12 November 2016).

"Special Branch officer's insider view of Northern Ireland's 'secret war' " .

The News Letter . Johnston Publishing (NI).

Archived from the original on 21 February 2019 . Retrieved 20 February 2019 .

^ Taylor, Peter (26 September 2014).

"Who Won The War? Revisiting NI on 20th anniversary of ceasefires" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2014 .

^ "Troubles 'not war' motion passed" . BBC News. 18 February 2008.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2008 . Retrieved 3 March 2015 .

^ Hennessey, Thomas (2001).

The Northern Ireland peace process: ending the troubles?

. Palgrave Macmillan. p.

48 .

ISBN 978-0-312-23949-7 .

^ English, Richard (2005).

Armed Struggle: The History of the IRA .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-517753-4 .

^ Storey, Michael L. (2004).

Representing the Troubles in Irish Short Fiction . The Catholic University of America Press. p. 149.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1366-8 .

^ Jenkins, Richard (1997).

Rethinking Ethnicity: Arguments and Explorations . SAGE Publications. p. 120.

It should, I think, be apparent that the Northern Irish conflict is not a religious conflict ... Although religion has a place – and indeed an important one – in the repertoire of conflict in Northern Ireland, the majority of participants see the situation as primarily concerned with matters of politics and nationalism, not religion. And there is no reason to disagree with them.

^ English, Richard; Townshend, Charles (1998).

The State: Historical and Political Dimensions . Routledge. p. 96.

ISBN 0-415-15477-4 .

.

^ Bryan, Dominic (2000).

Orange Parades: The Politics of Ritual, Tradition and Control . Pluto Press. p. 94.

ISBN 0-7453-1413-9 .

.

^ "The Troubles: How 1969 violence led to Army's longest campaign" . BBC News. 14 August 2019. Archived from the original on 1 October 2019.

^ Operation Banner , alphahistory.com Retrieved 18 June 2016.

^ a b c d "Sutton Index of Deaths: Summary of Organisation responsible" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN) .

Ulster University .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2015 . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ "Sutton Index of Deaths: Crosstabulations (two-way tables)" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2020 .

(choose "organization summary" and "status" as the variables) ^ Moriarty, Gerry (5 August 2019).

"Northern Ireland: Eighty-one 'punishment attacks' in past year" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2019 . Retrieved 28 November 2019 .

^ "South East Antrim UDA: 'A criminal cartel wrapped in a flag' " . BBC News. 21 March 2021.

^ "Drugs and cash seized in raids linked to South East Antrim UDA" .

Belfast Telegraph .

^ Earwin, Alan (25 March 2021).

"Surveillance recorded 'South East Antrim UDA drugs conversation', court is told" .

News Letter . Retrieved 9 January 2023 .

^ "Police seize suspected drugs in operation linked to the South East Antrim UDA" . 14 October 2022.

^ "Drugs seized in searches linked to South East Antrim UDA" . BBC News. 4 September 2018.

^ "Loyalist terror groups UVF and UDA on collision course over 'drug deal turned sour' " . 16 May 2023.

^ "Draft List of Deaths Related to the Conflict (2003–present)" .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2013 . Retrieved 31 July 2008 .

^ Peter Cottrell (2006).

The Anglo-Irish War: The Troubles of 1913–1922 . Osprey Publishing. p. 7.

ISBN 978-1-84603-023-9 . Retrieved 23 January 2015 .

^ Michael L. Storey (2004).

Representing the Troubles in Irish Short Fiction . CUA Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1366-8 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2017 . Retrieved 23 January 2015 .

^ Peter Rose (2001), How the Troubles Came to Northern Ireland . p. 94.

ISBN 978-0333753460 .

^ Anisseh Van Engeland & Rachael M. Rudolph.

From Terrorism to Politics (2008), Aldershot, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate. p, 59.

ISBN 978-0754649908 .

^ Ryan Hackney and Amy Blackwell Hackney.

The Everything Irish History & Heritage Book (2004). p. 200 ^ "Out of trouble: How diplomacy brought peace to Northern Ireland" .

CNN . 17 March 2008.

Archived from the original on 19 July 2008 . Retrieved 2 November 2008 .

^ a b Frank Wright.

Ulster: Two Lands, One Soil , 1996, p. 17.

^ "Profile: The Orange Order" . BBC News. 4 July 2001.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2008 . Retrieved 2 November 2008 .

^ English, Richard (2006).

Irish Freedom: The History of Nationalism in Ireland . Pan Books. pp.

200– 231.

ISBN 978-0-330-42759-3 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Coogan, Tim Pat (2002).

The Troubles: Ireland's Ordeal and the Search for Peace . Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Parliamentary debate Archived 10 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine : "The British government agree that it is for the people of the island of Ireland alone, by agreement between the two parts respectively, to exercise their right of self-determination on the basis of consent , freely and concurrently given, North and South, to bring about a united Ireland, if that is their wish." ^ Crowley, John; Ó Drisceoil, Donal; Murphy, Michael; Borgonovo, John; Hogan, Nick, eds. (2017).

Atlas of the Irish Revolution . New York: NYU Press. p. 830.

ISBN 978-1-4798-3428-0 .

OCLC 1001466881 .

^ Peter Taylor (1989).

Families at War . BBC. p.

10 .

ISBN 978-0-563-20787-0 .

^ English, Richard (2003).

Armed Struggle: The History of the IRA . Oxford University Press. pp.

39– 40.

ISBN 978-0-19-517753-4 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2016 .

^ "CRESC Working Paper Series : Working Paper No. 122" (PDF) .

Cresc.ac.uk . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 January 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2016 .

^ Meehan, Niall (1 January 1970).

"Facts and Figures of the Belfast Pogroms G.B. Kenna 1922 | Niall Meehan" .

Academia.edu . Retrieved 3 October 2016 .

^ "History Ireland" . History Ireland. 4 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 3 October 2016 .

^ Peter Hart (2003).

The I.R.A. at war, 1916–1923 . Oxford University Press. pp. 247, 251.

ISBN 978-0-19-925258-9 .

^ Laura K. Dohonue. "Regulating Northern Ireland: The Special Powers Acts, 1922–1972", The Historical Journal (1998), vol 41, no. 4.

^ Feldman, Allen (1991).

Formations of Violence: The Narrative of the Body and Political Terror in Northern Ireland (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

40– 41.

^ McKittrick, David; McVea, David (2012).

Making Sense of the Troubles: A History of the Northern Ireland . London: Viking. pp.

8– 10.

^ "Revisiting the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Movement: 1968–69 – The Irish Story" . 3 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2020 . Retrieved 17 April 2020 .

^ "Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023: Section 1" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , 18 September 2023, 2023 c. 41  (s. 1) , retrieved 17 July 2024 ^ a b c d e f Chronology of Key Events in Irish History: 1800 to 1967 Archived 3 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine , cain.ulst.ac.uk. Retrieved 12 June 2013.

^ Loyalists , pp. 37–40.

^ Andrew Boyd.

Holy War in Belfast .

"Chapter 11: The Tricolour Riots" Archived 27 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Anvil Books, 1969; reproduced here Archived 30 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Hugh Jordan.

Milestones in Murder: Defining moments in Ulster's terror war . Random House, 2011. Chapter 3.

^ a b c d e f Peter Taylor .

Loyalists (1990). London: Bloomsbury Publishing Plc. pp. 41–44, 125, 143, 163, 188–90 ^ "Proscribed terrorist groups or organisations" .

GOV.UK .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2021 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 .

^ "We Shall Overcome ... The History of the Struggle for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland 1968–1978" . cain.ulst.ac.uk.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2011 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

^ Northern Ireland: The Plain Truth (second edition) Archived 14 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Campaign for Social Justice in Northern Ireland, 15 June 1969. Retrieved 12 June 2013.

^ Jonathan Tonge (2002).

Northern Ireland: Conflict and Change . Longman. pp.

37– 38.

ISBN 978-0-582-42400-5 .

^ Various (2006).

Politics UK . Longman. p. 770.

ISBN 978-1-4058-2411-8 .

^ Joint Committee on Human Rights , Parliament of the United Kingdom (2005).

Counter-Terrorism Policy And Human Rights: Terrorism Bill and related matters: Oral and Written Evidence . Vol. 2.

The Stationery Office . p. 110.

ISBN 978-0-10-400766-2 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 October 2015 .

^ English (2003), pp. 91, 94, 98 ^ Lord Cameron, Disturbances in Northern Ireland: Report of the Commission appointed by the Governor of Northern Ireland (Belfast, 1969).

Chapter 16 Archived 1 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine . Quote: "While there is evidence that members of the I.R.A. are active in the organisation, there is no sign that they are in any sense dominant or in a position to control or direct policy of the Civil Rights Association." ^ M. L. R. Smith (2002).

Fighting for Ireland?: The Military Strategy of the Irish Republican Movement . Routledge. p. 81.

Republicans were instrumental in setting up NICRA itself, though they did not control the Association and remained a minority faction within it.

^ Bob Purdie. "Chapter 4: The Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association".

Politics in the Streets: The origins of the civil rights movement in Northern Ireland . Blackstaff Press.

There is also clear evidence that the republicans were not actually in control of NICRA in the period up to and including the 5 October march.

^ a b c d Chronology of the Conflict: 1968 Archived 6 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine , cain.ulst.ac.uk. Retrieved 12 June 2013.

^ "Sixteen of us in one small house" (Audio) (Interview). Interviewed by Proinsias Ó Conluain. RTÉ Archives. 27 August 1969.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2013 .

^ "Caledon Housing Protest" . Campaign for Civil Rights. Archived from the original on 28 August 2013 . Retrieved 23 July 2013 .

^ "Submission to the Independent Commission into Policing" . Serve.com. Archived from the original on 22 November 2008 . Retrieved 2 November 2008 .

^ a b c Martin Melaugh.

"The Derry March: Main events of the day" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN) .

Ulster University .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2007 . Retrieved 16 February 2008 .

^ Rex Cathcart (1984).

The Most Contrary Region . The Blackstaff Press. p. 208.

ISBN 978-0-85640-323-1 .

^ a b Bowes Egan and Vincent McCormack.

Burntollet Archived 20 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine . L.R.S. Publishers, 1969; reproduced on CAIN. Retrieved 12 June 2013.

^ Taylor, Peter (1997).

Provos The IRA & Sinn Féin .

Bloomsbury Publishing . p. 43.

ISBN 0-7475-3818-2 .

^ a b Taylor, Peter (2001).

Brits: The War Against the IRA . Bloomsbury Publishing. p.

82 .

ISBN 978-0-7475-5806-4 .

^ a b c d e "Chronology of the Conflict: 1969" . cain.ulst.ac.uk.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2010 . Retrieved 12 June 2013 .

^ Jim Cusack & Henry McDonald.

UVF . Poolbeg, 1997. p. 28 ^ Peter Taylor (1999).

Loyalists .

Bloomsbury Publishing . pp.

59– 60.

ISBN 978-0-7475-4519-4 .

^ Police Ombudsman statement on Devenny investigation Archived 6 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine , cain.ulst.ac.uk. Retrieved 4 October 2001.

^ Russell Stetler.

Extract from The Battle of Bogside (1970) Archived 20 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine , cain.ulst.ac.uk. Retrieved 17 March 2015.

^ Staunton, Enda (2001).

The Nationalists of Northern Ireland 1918-1973 . Dublin: The Columba Press. p. 263.

ISBN 1 85607 328 9 .

^ Richard Aldous (2007).

Great Irish Speeches . 21 Bloomsbury Square, London, WC1A 2NS: Quercus Publishing PLC . pp.

133– 6.

ISBN 978-1-84724-195-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) "A broadcast by An Taoiseach Mr. Jack Lynch T.D." (Live television broadcast).

Dublin , Ireland: Telefís Éireann . 13 August 1969 . Retrieved 14 January 2024 .

The Irish Government can no longer stand by and see innocent people injured and perhaps worse.

The Troubles: Ireland's Ordeal and the Search for Peace , p. 89 ^ John Ranelagh (1994).

A Short History of Ireland (2, illustrated, revised ed.).

Cambridge University Press . p. 272.

ISBN 978-0-521-46944-9 .

^ Downey, James (2 January 2001).

"Army on Armageddon alert" .

Irish Independent .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 December 2015 .

^ Michael McKernan (2005).

Northern Ireland Yearbook 2005 . Stationery Office. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-9546284-2-0 .

^ McKittrick, David (2004).

Lost Lives: The Stories of the Men, Women and Children Who Died as a Result of the Northern Ireland Troubles . Mainstream Publishing. p. 31.

ISBN 978-1-84018-504-1 .

^ Sutton, Malcolm (1994).

Bear in Mind These Dead . Beyond the Pale Publications.

ISBN 0-9514229-4-4 .

^ a b McKittrick, David (2004).

Lost Lives: The Stories of the Men, Women and Children Who Died as a Result of the Northern Ireland Troubles . Mainstream Publishing. p. 41.

ISBN 978-1-84018-504-1 .

^ The Troubles: Ireland's Ordeal and the Search for Peace , p. 91 ^ Rudolph, Joseph R Jr. (2013).

From Mediation to Nation-Building: Third Parties and the Management of Communal Conflict .

Lexington Books . p. 310.

ISBN 978-0-7391-7694-8 .

^ "Conclusions of a meeting of the Joint Security Committee held on Tuesday, 9th September, 1969, at Stormont Castle [PRONI Public Records HA/32/3/2]" (PDF) .

CAIN .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 February 2019 . Retrieved 13 April 2019 .

^ McCluskey, Conn (1969).

Up off their knees: a commentary on the civil rights movement in Northern Ireland . Conn McCluskey and Associates. p. 173.

ISBN 0-9514837-0-6 .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2021 . Retrieved 13 April 2019 .

^ "Interfaces" .

Peacewall Archive .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2019 . Retrieved 13 April 2019 .

^ David McKittrick .

Lost Lives: The Stories of the Men, Women and Children who Died as a Result of the Northern Ireland Troubles . Random House, 2001. p. 42 ^ Pankhurst, Dale William Henry (2025).

"Power, Perception, Group Relationships, and Conflict Dynamics: Loyalist Paramilitary Violence and Its Effects Within the Republic of Ireland During the Troubles, 1969–1998" .

Terrorism and Political Violence : 1– 20.

doi : 10.1080/09546553.2025.2482553 .

ISSN 0954-6553 .

^ English, Richard (2004).

Armed Struggle: The History of the IRA . Oxford University Press. p. 136.

ISBN 978-0-19-517753-4 .

^ "McGurk's bar bombing – A dark night in the darkest times" . BBC News. 21 February 2011.

Archived from the original on 31 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2020 .

^ a b c d e Sutton, Malcolm.

"Sutton Index of Deaths" .

CAIN – Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2019 . Retrieved 3 March 2015 .

^ Patrick Bishop & Eamonn Mallie (1987).

The Provisional IRA . Corgi Books. pp.

52– 54.

ISBN 978-0-552-13337-1 .

^ English (2003), pp. 134–135 ^ R.K. Walker (2006).

The Hunger Strikes . Lagan Books. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1-904684-18-3 .

^ David Bonner (2007).

Executive Measures, Terrorism and National Security: Have the Rules of the Game Changed?

. Ashgate. p. 89.

ISBN 978-0-7546-4756-0 .

^ "10 people shot dead in Ballymurphy were innocent, inquest finds" .

The Guardian . 11 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 .

^ Melaugh, Dr Martin.

"CAIN: Events: 'Bloody Sunday' – Names of Dead and Injured" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2011 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ Walsh, Dermot (2000).

Bloody Sunday and the Rule of Law in Northern Ireland . Gill & Macmillan. p. 88.

ISBN 978-0-7171-3085-6 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2015 .

^ Melaugh, Dr Martin.

"CAIN: [Widgery Report] Report of the Tribunal appointed to inquire into events on Sunday 30 January 1972" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2011 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ a b c Melaugh, Dr Martin.

"CAIN: Violence: List of Significant Violent Incidents" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 2 May 2017 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ Those Are Real Bullets, Aren't They?

. London: Fourth Estate: Peter Pringle and Phillip Jacobson. 2000. p. 293.

ISBN 978-1-84115-316-2 .

^ "Internment – Summary of Main Events" . Cain.ulst.ac.uk.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2011 . Retrieved 3 March 2015 .

^ Oren Gross & Fionnuala Ní Aoláin . Law in Times of Crisis: Emergency Powers in Theory and Practice , p. 188; ISBN 978-0-521-83351-6 .

^ Anthony Stuart Mathews.

Freedom, state security and the rule of law: Dilemmas of the apartheid society , p. 246; ISBN 978-0-702-11812-8 .

^ Mireille Delmas-Marty.

The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights: International Protection Versus National Restrictions , pp. 261–262; ISBN 978-0-792-31283-3 .

^ Ed Moloney .

A Secret History of the IRA , pp. 89–90; ISBN 0-14-101041-X .

^ Peter Taylor .

Provos: The IRA and Sinn Féin , pp. 75–79; ISBN 978-0-7475-3818-9 .

^ a b English (2003), p. 137 ^ Brendan O'Brien (1995).

The Long War – The IRA and Sinn Féin . O'Brien Press, Ltd. p. 119.

ISBN 978-0-86278-425-6 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j J. Bowyer Bell (1997).

The Secret Army: The IRA . Transaction Publishers. p.

381 .

ISBN 978-1-56000-901-6 .

^ "Bloody Friday: What happened" . BBC News. 16 July 2002.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2008 . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ Sutton, Malcolm.

"Index of deaths from the conflict in Ireland: 1972" .

CAIN archive .

Archived from the original on 8 July 2020 . Retrieved 4 July 2020 .

^ McKittrick, David (2004).

Lost Lives: The Stories of the Men, Women and Children Who Died as a Result of the Northern Ireland Troubles . Mainstream Publishing. p. 237.

ISBN 978-1-84018-504-1 .

^ "CAIN: Victims: Memorials: Claudy Bomb Memorial" .

cain.ulster.ac.uk .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2020 . Retrieved 12 July 2020 .

^ "New investigation into Claudy bombing" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ "IRA bomb in Claudy was indefensible, says Martin McGuinness" .

The Guardian . 31 July 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ a b Sanders, Andrew (2012).

Inside The IRA: Dissident Republicans And The War For Legitimacy .

Edinburgh University Press . p. 70.

ISBN 978-0-7486-4696-8 .

^ Moloney, Ed (2002).

A Secret History of the IRA .

Penguin Books . p. 111.

ISBN 978-0-14-101041-0 .

^ "1972: Official IRA declares ceasefire" . BBC News. 30 May 1981.

Archived from the original on 2 January 2008 . Retrieved 6 April 2009 .

^ Moore, Riley M. (1 October 2013). "Counterinsurgency force ratio: strategic utility or nominal necessity".

Small Wars & Insurgencies .

24 (5): 857– 878.

doi : 10.1080/09592318.2013.866423 .

S2CID 143467248 .

^ a b c Melaugh, Dr Martin.

"CAIN: Chronology of the Conflict 1972" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2011 . Retrieved 26 November 2016 .

^ Keeping Secrets , London Review of Books , April 1987.

^ "UK urged to Release Dublin and Monaghan Bombing Files" .

The Irish Times . 17 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 7 January 2019 . Retrieved 18 September 2019 .

^ Ryder, Chris (12 August 2019).

"Britain's secret plan to pull the Army out of Northern Ireland" .

Belfast Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 .

^ a b Donnelly, Rachel (3 January 2000).

"Wilson weighed up direct rule in North" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 25 May 2022 .

^ a b c d e f Bourke, Richard (3 January 2005).

"Wilson clearly wanted to disengage from the North" .

The Irish Times . Retrieved 25 May 2022 .

^ a b c d e Garret FitzGerald (2006).

"The 1974–5 Threat of a British Withdrawal from Northern Ireland" (PDF) .

Irish Studies in International Affairs .

17 (–1): 141– 150.

doi : 10.3318/ISIA.2006.17.1.141 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007.

^ "Every Briton Now a Target for Death" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 1 December 1974 . Retrieved 15 June 2016 .

^ a b c d "Wilson had NI 'doomsday' plan" . BBC News. 11 September 2008 . Retrieved 25 May 2022 .

^ "M62 bomb blast memorial unveiled" . 4 February 2009.

Archived from the original on 10 February 2009 . Retrieved 31 August 2021 .

^ "Shooting of Co Tyrone farmer by British soldier in 1974 'unjustified' " .

RTE . 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 30 June 2024 .

^ "Paddy McElhone: Farmer shooting by Army unjustified, inquest rules" .

BBC . 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 30 June 2024 .

^ "Man released over 1975 Shankill pub bombing" . BBC News. 2 March 2012 . Retrieved 6 April 2022 .

^ "Mountainview Bar Plaque" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Ulster University . Retrieved 6 April 2022 .

^ Mullin, John (10 April 1999).

"Balcombe Street Gang to be freed" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2021 . Retrieved 24 April 2020 .

^ "CAIN: Events: IRA Truce – 9 Feb 1975 to 23 Jan 1976 – A Chronology of Main Events" .

cain.ulster.ac.uk .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2020 . Retrieved 26 April 2020 .

^ Peter Taylor .

Provos: The IRA and Sinn Féin , p. 197; ISBN 978-0-7475-3818-9 .

^ Ed Moloney .

A Secret History of the IRA , pp. 149–150; ISBN 0-14-101041-X .

^ Brian Dooley.

Black and Green: Fight for Civil Rights in Northern Ireland and Black America , p. 129; ISBN 978-0-74531-295-8 .

^ "1978 La Mon bombing commemorated in Belfast" .

RTÉ.ie . 16 February 2003.

Archived from the original on 26 May 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2021 .

^ "1979: Soldiers die in Warrenpoint massacre" . BBC News. 27 August 1979.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 7 August 2020 .

^ a b "The Hunger Strike of 1981 – A Chronology of Main Events" . CAIN.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2010 . Retrieved 26 May 2007 .

^ English (2003), p. 200 ^ Peter Taylor.

Behind the Mask: The IRA and Sinn Féin , TV books, Inc., New York, 1997; ISBN 1-57500-061-X .

^ Kevin Toolis.

Rebel Hearts: Journeys Within the IRA's Soul , Picador 2000; ISBN 978-0-330-34648-1 .

^ Bell, J. Bowyer (1997).

The Secret Army: The IRA . Transaction Publishers. pp.

556–571 .

ISBN 1-56000-901-2 .

^ Andrew Sanders and F. Stuart Ross (January 2020).

"The Canadian Dimension to the Northern Ireland Conflict" .

The Canadian Journal of Irish Studies .

43 : 192– 218.

JSTOR 27041321 .

^ Cusack & McDonald, pp. 198–199 ^ "1982: IRA bombs cause carnage in London" . BBC News. 20 July 1982.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2014 . Retrieved 17 April 2020 .

^ "Harrods bomb blast kills six people, 1983" .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ "On This Day: 12 October 1984" . BBC News. 12 October 2000.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2017 . Retrieved 26 May 2013 .

^ a b "RUC and IRA chiefs' lives feature in national biography" . BBC News. 5 January 2012.

Archived from the original on 31 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ "CAIN: Victims: Memorials: Search Results Page" .

cain.ulster.ac.uk .

Archived from the original on 25 July 2020 . Retrieved 25 July 2020 .

^ a b "IRA men shot dead at Loughgall had been under surveillance for weeks, court told" .

Belfast Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ "Northern Ireland | IRA bomb victim buried" . BBC News. 30 December 2000 . Retrieved 3 October 2016 .

^ McKittrick, David.

Lost Lives: The stories of the men, women and children who died as a result of the Northern Ireland Troubles . Random House, 2001. pp. 1094–1099 ^ On this day: Loyalist killer Michael Stone freed from Maze Archived 7 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine , BBC ^ "Deal bombing 25th anniversary remembered" . BBC News. 13 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 7 March 2021 .

^ Moloney, Ed.

A Secret History of the IRA . Penguin UK, 2007.

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ "A Chronology of the Conflict, 1978" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN) .

Archived from the original on 27 August 2011 . Retrieved 3 November 2014 .

^ General Sir Michael Jackson.

Operation Banner: An Analysis of Military Operations in Northern Ireland (2006) Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , MoD , Army Code 71842. Chapter 2, p. 16, item 247.

^ a b Toby Harnden (2000).

Bandit Country:The IRA and South Armagh . London: Coronet Books. pp.

358–359 .

ISBN 978-0-340-71737-0 .

^ "Soldiers hurt in IRA attack on helicopter" .

Glasgow Herald . 12 February 1990.

Archived from the original on 9 March 2021 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

^ Michael Ashcroft (2012).

Heroes of the Skies . Hachette UK. pp.

355– 56.

ISBN 978-0-7553-6391-9 .

^ Department of the Official Report (Hansard), House of Commons, Westminster (8 June 1993).

"House of Commons Hansard Debates for 8 Jun 1993" . Parliament of the United Kingdom.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 October 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b "Terror plot reminiscent of IRA attacks" . 7 December 2017.

^ "US policy and Northern Ireland" . BBC News. 8 April 2003.

Archived from the original on 22 May 2004 . Retrieved 24 May 2009 .

^ "A Break in the Irish Impasse" .

The New York Times . 30 November 1995.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2020 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 .

^ "BBC On This Day 1996: Docklands bomb ends IRA ceasefire" . BBC News. 10 February 1996.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2012 . Retrieved 3 October 2016 .

^ "IRA claims responsibility for London bombing" . CNN. Archived from the original on 5 August 2009 . Retrieved 25 May 2010 .

^ Bingham, John (9 March 2009).

"Northern Ireland shootings: The last soldier murdered" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2017 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ "Explainer: Real IRA and Continuity IRA" .

The Guardian . London. 10 March 2009.

Archived from the original on 25 December 2018 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ "HC 502 Cover" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 26 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 November 2008 .

^ Henry McDonald (30 July 2006).

"New feud rips apart the UDA" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2018 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ Northern Ireland becoming a more normalised society Archived 8 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine – Northern Ireland Office, 27 November 2006.

^ "IRA 'has destroyed all its arms' " . BBC. 26 September 2005.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2007 . Retrieved 6 April 2007 .

^ Margaret Scanlan.

Culture and Customs of Ireland , Greenwood Publishing Group, p. 51, 2006, ISBN 978-0-313-33162-6 .

^ "BBC" .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 February 2016 .

^ "Official IRA "doomsday" bunkers may still contain thousands of weapons" Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

Belfast Telegraph . 31 May 2015.

^ a b c John Manley (6 April 2019).

"Support in Republic during Troubles 'key for IRA', book claims" .

The Irish News .

^ Henry McDonald and Jim Cusack (1997).

UVF – The Endgame .

Poolbeg Press . p. 119.

^ "Revealed: how Scots loyalists sent gelignite to paramilitaries. Secret memo says explosives were shipped in small boats" .

The Herald . 30 December 2005.

^ Neil Mackay (12 October 2019).

"Inside story: Why the IRA never attacked Scotland" .

The Herald .

^ Bernard Weinraub (5 February 1976).

"Arms Smuggling Is Said to Aid Protestants Less Than the I.R.A." The New York Times .

^ Michael Quilligan (2013).

Understanding Shadows: The Corrupt Use of Intelligence . Clarity Press. pp.

330– 331.

ISBN 9-7809-8603-6286 .

^ Paddy Clancy (31 December 2021).

"Libyan leader Gaddafi's IRA support revealed in secret Irish State Papers" . Irish Central.

^ David McCullagh, Conor McMorrow and Justin McCarthy (28 December 2021).

"Extent of Libyan backing for IRA 'shocked' British" .

RTÉ .

^ "Libya: Extent of Gaddafi's financial support for IRA stunned British intelligence" .

Middle East Eye . 28 December 2021.

^ Paul Hosford (11 March 2015).

"The IRA, the US and Colombia's 50 years of violence" .

TheJournal.ie .

^ a b c Select Committee on Northern Ireland Affairs – Part One: The continuing threat from paramilitary organisations .

UK Parliament (Report). 26 June 2002.

^ "The army's secret opinion" (PDF) .

New Statesman . 13 July 1979. p. 2.

^ Andrew Sanders (2011).

Inside the IRA: Dissident Republicans and the War for Legitimacy .

Edinburgh University Press . p. 105.

ISBN 978-0-7486-8812-8 .

The [British] FCO noted [in the 1970s] that 'the IRA has also looked to Irish communities elsewhere to obtain cash for its terror campaign of the past four years', also noting the presence of fundraising organisations in Canada and Australia, and an attempt to establish connections in New Zealand.

^ Andrew Mitrovica (13 October 2001).

"Canada let IRA members slip through, sources say" .

The Globe and Mail .

^ Andrew Mumford (2012).

The Counter-Insurgency Myth: The British Experience of Irregular Warfare .

Taylor & Francis . p. 119.

ISBN 9-7811-3664-9387 .

^ Nicholas Sambanis and Paul Collier (2005).

Understanding Civil War: Evidence and Analysis · Volume 2 .

World Bank . p. 171.

ISBN 9-7808-2136-0507 .

Estimated to have sent at total of $3.6 million to Ireland from 1970 to 1991, NORAID's contributions represented a small, but not [politically] insignificant, part of the IRA's income, which is estimated to have amounted to approximately $10 million a year.

^ T. Wittig (2011).

Understanding Terrorist Finance .

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

154– 155.

ISBN 9-7802-3031-6935 .

From its founding in 1969 until 1991, NORAID raised approximately $3.6 million for Irish republican causes, through a combination of testimonial fundraising dinners and an extensive campaign to solicit donations through direct mail, dinner-dance benefits, and "passing the hat" in Irish American-owned businesses (such as bars) in major US cities.' This money was ostensibly to provide support for any number of causes related to Ireland and Irish republicanism, ranging from political activities to support to the families of imprisoned PIRA members ^ Pamela Duncan and Simon Carswell (5 March 2015).

"Sinn Féin raised $12 million in the United States" .

The Irish Times .

(subscription required) ^ Lessons of Case Studies for Strengthening International Mediation and Arbitration to Prevent Deadly Conflict . 1997. p. 31.

[T]he Irish Northern Aid Committee (NORAID) which was established in the early 1970s to raise money for the republican cause, is reported to have collected and sent at least $3 million to Ireland by 1986.

^ Christopher P. Cunningham (April 2013).

Diasporas, Ethnic Conflict, and Traumatic Events (PDF) (Thesis). Northeastern University Department of Political Science. p. 196.

^ Jesser, P.; Young, P. (1997).

The Media and the Military .

Palgrave Macmillan . p. 65.

ISBN 9-7802-3037-6809 .

^ Terrorism in Ireland (RLE: Terrorism & Insurgency) .

Taylor & Francis . 2015. p. 20.

ISBN 9-7813-1744-8945 .

The only other source of arms outside the United States that warrants inclusion here is Canada, because of several attempts in that country to supply arms and finance to both Loyalist and Republican paramilitary organisations in Northern Ireland. The first evidence of this supportive activity was seen in August 1969 with an announcement by some 150 Toronto Irish-Canadians that they intended sending money, which could be used to buy guns if necessary, to the women and children of the (Catholic) Bogside in Derry . Thereafter the networks of the US-based Irish Northern Aid Committee (NORAID) and the Irish Republican Clubs were extended to Canada.

^ Dennis G. Molinaro (2021).

Bridge in the Parks: The Five Eyes and Cold War Counter-Intelligence .

University of Toronto Press . p. 229.

ISBN 9-7814-8752-3718 .

Supporters of the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) smuggled detonators from Canadian mining operations for use in the indiscriminate bombings that wracked Northern Ireland for years.

^ Stewart Bell (2008).

Cold Terror: How Canada Nurtures and Exports Terrorism Around the World .

Wiley . pp.

31– 32.

ISBN 9-7804-7015-6223 .

[T]he RCMP found that the Irish Republican Army (IRA) was also fundraising in Canada, but authorities at first did nothing because collecting cash was considered a nonviolent pursuit that was not a threat to Canada. The British government, however, put pressure on Ottawa to take action, since the money raised in Canada was financing the purchase of weapons. Canadian-made detonators were turning up inside IRA bombs.

^ Isabel Woodford and M.L.R. Smith (2018).

"The Political Economy of the Provos: Inside the Finances of the Provisional IRA – A Revision" .

Studies in Conflict & Terrorism .

41 (3).

Taylor & Francis : 3.

doi : 10.1080/1057610X.2017.1283195 .

^ Laura K. Donohue (2006).

"Anti-Terrorist Finance in the United Kingdom and United States" .

Michigan Journal of International Law .

27 (2). Stanford University Center for International Security and Cooperation: 8.

^ "Pat Finucane murder: 'Shocking state collusion', says PM" Archived 25 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News. Retrieved 11 March 2015.

^ a b "UK agents 'worked with NI paramilitary killers'" Archived 24 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News, 28 May 2015. Retrieved 15 June 2015.

^ Thomas G. Mitchell, Native Vs. Settler: Ethnic Conflict in Israel/Palestine, Northern Ireland Archived 20 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine , p. 55.

^ Brett Bowden, Michael T. Davis (eds).

Terror: From Tyrannicide to Terrorism Archived 19 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine , p. 234 ^ a b c d "Subversion in the UDR" Archived 7 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine , cain.ulst.ac.uk. Retrieved 11 March 2015.

^ "Collusion – Subversion in the UDR" Archived 10 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine .

Irish News , 3 May 2006.

^ a b "British army 'covered up' UDR units links to UVF" Archived 4 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine .

The Detail , 31 July 2011.

^ John Eldridge.

Getting the Message: News, Truth, and Power . Routledge, 2003. p. 79.

^ Brendan O'Leary and John McGarry.

The Politics of Antagonism: Understanding Northern Ireland . Athlone Press, 1996. pp. 268–269.

^ The Cassel Report (2006) Archived 20 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 8, 14, 21, 25, 51, 56, 58–65.

^ a b Collusion in the South Armagh/Mid Ulster Area in the mid-1970s Archived 26 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine , patfinucanecentre.org. Retrieved 2 January 2011.

^ Lethal Allies: British Collusion in Ireland – Conclusions Archived 22 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine , patfinucanecentre.org. Retrieved 6 March 2015.

^ a b The Cassel Report (2006), p. 4 Archived 20 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine , cain.ulst.ac.uk. Retrieved 17 March 2015.

^ The Cassel Report (2006) Archived 20 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 63 ^ The Cassel Report (2006), p. 8 Archived 20 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine , cain.ulst.ac.uk. Retrieved 17 March 2015.

^ a b c "Stevens Inquiry: Key people" . BBC News. 17 April 2003.

Archived from the original on 14 September 2007 . Retrieved 27 September 2013 .

^ a b "Scandal of Ulster's secret war" Archived 1 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine , The Guardian , 17 April 2003. Retrieved 27 September 2013.

^ a b "Security forces aided loyalist murders" Archived 13 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News, 17 April 2003. Retrieved 27 September 2013.

^ a b "Obituary: Brian Nelson" .

The Guardian . London, UK. 17 April 2003.

Archived from the original on 18 September 2019 . Retrieved 27 September 2013 .

^ Clayton, Pamela (1996).

Enemies and Passing Friends: Settler ideologies in twentieth-century Ulster . Pluto Press. p. 156.

More recently, the resurgence in loyalist violence that led to their carrying out more killings than republicans from the beginning of 1992 until their ceasefire (a fact widely reported in Northern Ireland) was still described as following 'the IRA's well-tested tactic of trying to usurp the political process by violence' ...

^ "Deadly Intelligence: State Involvement in Loyalist Murder in Northern Ireland – Summary" Archived 19 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine , cain.ulst.ac.uk. Retrieved 17 March 2015.

^ Human Rights in Northern Ireland: Hearing before the Committee on International Relations of the United States House of Representatives , 24 June 1997. US Government Printing Office, 1997.

^ Stevens Enquiry 3: Overview & Recommendations Archived 10 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine , madden-finucane.com, 17 April 2003. Retrieved 27 September 2013.

^ "NI police colluded with killers" Archived 30 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine . BBC News, 22 January 2007.

^ "Bombshell documentary uncovers Government collusion with loyalist paramilitaries" Archived 23 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Belfast Telegraph , 12 June 2015. Retrieved 15 June 2015.

^ David McKittrick .

Lost Lives . Mainstream Publishing, 1999. p. 724.

^ Stephen Howe, "Killing Fields", New Statesman , 14 February 2000. Retrieved 2 February 2011.

^ a b The Cassel Report (2006) Archived 20 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 68. Retrieved 17 March 2015.

^ Houses of the Oireachtas, Joint Committee on Justice, Equality, Defence and Women's Rights (2003).

"The Barron Report" (PDF) . Oireachtas. p. 135.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 June 2011 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Loughinisland: Ombudsman confirms collusion between police and loyalist killers" Archived 2 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine . BBC News, 9 June 2016. Retrieved 15 June 2016.

^ "Smithwick Report" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 October 2015 . Retrieved 5 March 2018 .

^ a b "Irish police colluded in IRA murders" . BBC News. 3 December 2013.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2019 . Retrieved 13 August 2018 .

^ Agencies (3 December 2013).

"Irish police colluded in murders of RUC officers Harry Breen and Bob Buchanan, report finds" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .

^ BBC report on Smithwick Tribunal report Archived 29 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine , 4 December 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2013.

^ "Who were the 'Disappeared'?" Archived 14 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News. Retrieved 4 July 2015.

^ Northern Ireland Disappeared Archived 19 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Reuters. Retrieved 7 September 2015.

^ "The Disappeared" . Independent Commission for the Location of Victims' Remains.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2014 . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ "Disappeared issue 'a festering wound' says McGuinness" . BBC News. 5 November 2013.

Archived from the original on 25 March 2014 . Retrieved 10 April 2014 .

^ "Undercover soldiers 'killed unarmed civilians in Belfast' " . BBC. 21 November 2014.

Archived from the original on 3 January 2015 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 .

^ Michael McHugh.

"Amnesty wants probe into British army 'death squad' " .

Irish Independent .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2014 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 .

^ "Book reveals Adams, McGuinness were on British Army death squad hit list" . IrishCentral.com. 18 November 2013.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2014 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 .

^ McKittrick.

Lost Lives: The Stories of the Men, Women and Children who Died as a Result of the Northern Ireland Troubles , p. 182.

^ Raymond Murray.

The SAS in Ireland . Mercier Press, 1990. pp. 44–45.

^ Owen Bowcott (21 November 2013).

"Undercover Northern Ireland soldiers accused of killing unarmed civilians" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2014 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 .

^ Maxine Williams.

Murder on the Rock Archived 4 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine , rcgfrfi.easynet.co.uk. Retrieved 17 March 2015. The article includes a list of suspected shoot-to-kill victims between 1982 and 1986.

^ "Michael McGoldrick, 64, Activist in Ulster, Dies" .

The New York Times . 6 April 2006.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2018 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 .

^ Angelique Chrisafis (5 August 2005).

"Police hold six over loyalist turf war deaths" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2018 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ "1998: Children die in Drumcree protests" . BBC News. 12 July 1986.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 27 May 2008 .

^ Dervla Murphy.

A Place Apart . Penguin Books, 1978, p. 134.

^ Murphy, p. 209.

^ a b Sarah Nelson.

Ulster's Uncertain Defenders: Protestant Political, Paramilitary and Community Groups and the Northern Ireland Conflict , 1984, Belfast: Appletree Press. p. 126.

^ Taylor, Rupert (29 November 2024).

"Systemic sectarianism in Northern Ireland" .

Race & Class .

66 (4): 55– 70.

doi : 10.1177/03063968241300088 .

ISSN 0306-3968 .

^ Murphy, p. 210.

^ Jack Holland .

Hope Against History: The Course of Conflict in Northern Ireland , 1999, pp. 12–13.

^ Murphy, p. 80.

^ Murphy, pp. 279–282.

^ BBC News, 4 July 2007. Retrieved 29 September 2008.

^ Muldoon, Children of the Troubles: The Impact of Political Violence in Northern Ireland , p. 461 ^ Muldoon, Children of the Troubles: The Impact of Political Violence in Northern Ireland , p. 464 ^ "Northern Ireland still divided by peace walls 20 years after conflict" .

The World from PRX . 13 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ Breen, Suzanne (19 August 2022).

"Seven in 10 nationalists agree with Michelle O'Neill that there was 'no alternative' to IRA's campaign of violence, new poll reveals" .

Belfast Telegraph .

^ a b c "Sutton Index of Deaths: Year of the death" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN) .

Ulster University .

Archived from the original on 14 July 2015 . Retrieved 25 February 2016 .

^ David McKittrick et al.

Lost Lives: The Stories of the Men, Women and Children who Died as a Result of the Northern Ireland Troubles . Random House, 2006. pp. 1551–1554 ^ Brendan O'Leary and John McGarry.

The Politics of Antagonism: Understanding Northern Ireland . London: The Athlone Press, 2nd edition, 1996. pp. 12–13.

^ "John M. Gates, Ch. 11, The Continuing Problem of Conceptual Confusion – Title" . 3 January 2007. Archived from the original on 3 January 2007.

^ Simon Cunningham. "Troubles created 500 000 victims says official body", The Irish News , 27 September 2011.

^ "Statistical breakdown of deaths in the 'Troubles' " .

www.wesleyjohnston.com .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2002 . Retrieved 28 April 2024 .

^ "Sutton Index of Deaths: Crosstabulations (two-way tables)" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2020 .

(choose "organization summary" and "status" as the variables) ^ Rogelio Sáenz, David G. Embrick, Néstor P. Rodríguez (editors).

The International Handbook of the Demography of Race and Ethnicity . Springer, 2015. p. 518 ^ a b c "Sutton Index of Deaths: Crosstabulations (two-way tables)" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 September 2014 .

(choose "organization summary" and "status summary" as the variables) ^ "Sutton Index of Deaths: Crosstabulations (two-way tables)" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 September 2014 .

(choose "status summary" and "religion summary" as the variables) ^ Muldoon, Orla T.

(2004). "Children of the Troubles:The Impact of Political Violence in Northern Ireland".

Journal of Social Issues .

60 (3): 453– 468.

doi : 10.1111/j.0022-4537.2004.00366.x .

^ Browne, Brendan (2014).

"Navigating Risk: Understanding the Impact of the Conflict on Children and Young People in Northern Ireland" (PDF) .

Studies in Conflict and Terrorism .

37 (9): 792– 805.

doi : 10.1080/1057610X.2014.931213 .

S2CID 111038600 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 July 2018 . Retrieved 16 August 2019 .

^ "Bloody Sunday victim did volunteer for us, says IRA" , The Guardian , 19 May 2002.

^ "Sutton Index of Deaths: 1975" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN) .

Ulster University .

Archived from the original on 14 May 2011 . Retrieved 1 September 2014 .

^ Robert Dunseath, killed in the Teebane massacre was a member of the Royal Irish Rangers : Royal Irish Rangers roll of honour Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine , royalirishrangers.co.uk. Retrieved 11 March 2015.

^ "Two Suspected IRA members Arrested in Belgium, Netherlands" .

AP NEWS .

Archived from the original on 23 June 2019 . Retrieved 20 October 2019 .

^ "I.r.a. Sets Off Bomb at Belgian Concert" .

The New York Times . 29 August 1979.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2020 . Retrieved 22 October 2019 .

^ "Sutton Index of Deaths: Geographical Location of the death" .

Conflict Archive on the Internet .

Archived from the original on 8 June 2011 . Retrieved 1 September 2014 .

^ "Northern Ireland Troubles (Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2023" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , 18 September 2023, 2023 c. 41 , retrieved 17 July 2024 ^ Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission (28 February 2024).

"Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission responds to Legacy Judgment" .

Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission . Retrieved 17 July 2024 .

The Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission notes today's significant judgment. The Commission has continually made clear its concerns about the failure of this legislation to comply with the law, in particular that which was incorporated into UK law by the Human Rights Act 1998.

^ O’Toole, Fintan (11 May 2024).

"On an island still tormented by the Troubles, Britain's Legacy Act is making things worse" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 17 July 2024 .

^ Crozier, Raymona (5 July 2024).

"Hilary Benn is new Northern Ireland secretary" .

BBC . London . Retrieved 17 July 2024 .

Further reading Main article: List of books about the Troubles Bew, Paul ; Gillespie, Gordon (1993).

Northern Ireland: a chronology of the troubles, 1968–1993 . Dublin: Gill & Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-7171-2081-9 .

Bourke, Richard (2003).

Peace in Ireland: the war of ideas . Pimlico. London: Pimlico Books .

ISBN 978-1-84413-316-1 .

Coogan, Tim Pat (2003).

Ireland in the twentieth century . London: Arrow Books .

ISBN 978-0-09-941522-0 .

Curtis, Edmund ; McDowell, R. B.

, eds. (1977) [1943].

"The Act of Settlement, 1662" .

Irish historical documents, 1172–1922 . Methuen Library Reprints. London: Methuen Publishing. pp.

158– 169.

ISBN 978-0-416-85930-0 .

OCLC 2866114 .

English, Richard (2003).

Armed struggle: the history of the IRA . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-516605-7 .

English, Richard Ludlow (2009). "The Interplay of Non-violent and Violent Action in Northern Ireland, 1967–72". In Roberts, Adam ; Ash, Timothy Garton (eds.).

Civil resistance and power politics: the experience of non-violent action from Gandhi to the present . London: Oxford University Press . pp.

75– 90.

ISBN 978-0-19-955201-6 .

Ingram, Martin ; Harkin, Greg (2004).

Stakeknife: Britain's secret agents in Ireland . Dublin: O'Brien.

ISBN 978-0-86278-843-8 .

Kelly, Stephen (2022).

Margaret Thatcher, the Conservative Party and the Northern Ireland Conflict, 1975–1990 . London: Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-350-11538-5 .

McKittrick, David; McVea, David (2002).

Making sense of the Troubles: the story of the conflict in Northern Ireland . Penguin Books (Revised ed.). Chicago: New Amsterdam Books.

ISBN 978-1-56131-070-8 .

McKittrick, David ; Kelters, Seamus; Feeney, Brian; Thornton, Chris; McVea, David (2008).

Lost lives: the stories of the men, women, and children who died as a result of the Northern Ireland troubles (Revised and updated ed.). Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84018-504-1 .

OCLC 41503120 .

Myers, Kevin (2006).

Watching the door: a memoir, 1971–1978 . Dublin, Ireland: Lilliput Press .

ISBN 978-1-84351-085-7 .

Potter, John (2001).

A testimony to courage: the regimental history of the Ulster Defence Regiment . London: Leo Cooper.

ISBN 978-0-85052-819-0 .

Ryder, Chris (1991).

The Ulster Defence Regiment: an instrument of peace?

. London: Methuen Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-413-64800-6 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Northern Ireland Troubles .

Wikiquote has quotations related to The Troubles .

Northern Ireland Elections Archive Northern Ireland Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN Project) BBC Northern Ireland: The Troubles The Troubles – Statistical Analysis Peacewall Archive – An archive of photos, maps, texts and links relating to Belfast's Peace lines – a legacy of 'The Troubles' British Army Historical Document Linen Hall Library Northern Ireland Political Collection Booknotes interview with J. Bowyer Bell on The Irish Troubles: A Generation of Violence, 1967–1992 , 6 June 1993.

The short film Ulster (1970) is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive .

The Irish Story archive on the Troubles The Conflict in Ireland – 1991 Sinn Féin document Interview with undercover soldiers by BBC dated 21 November 2013 Belfast: No Way Out (1970) on BFI Player ; Archived 12 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine Timeline of events v t e The Troubles Participants State security forces United Kingdom British Army ( Ulster Defence Regiment Force Research Unit ) Royal Ulster Constabulary ( Ulster Special Constabulary ) Ireland Defence Forces Garda Síochána Irish republican paramilitaries Provisional IRA Official IRA INLA Irish People's Liberation Organisation Continuity IRA Real IRA Republican Action Force Saor Éire Irish Revolutionary Brigade Vigilantes Direct Action Against Drugs Ulster loyalist paramilitaries Ulster Volunteer Force Ulster Defence Association Red Hand Commando Ulster Resistance Loyalist Volunteer Force Ulster Protestant Volunteers Ulster Third Force Ulster Volunteer Service Corps Down Orange Welfare Protestant Action Force Woodvale Defence Association Vigilantes Ulster Protestant Action Ulster Service Corps Orange Volunteers Major events 1967–1972 Northern Ireland civil rights movement 1969 NI riots 1970 Falls Curfew 1971 Operation Demetrius Ballymurphy massacre McGurk's Bar bombing Balmoral showroom bombing 1972 Bloody Sunday Abercorn Restaurant bombing Donegall Street bombing Beginning of direct rule Bloody Friday Operation Motorman Old Bailey bombing Sunningdale Agreement 1974 M62 coach bombing Ulster Workers' Council strike Dublin & Monaghan bombings Guildford pub bombings Birmingham pub bombings 1975 Miami Showband killings Bayardo Bar attack Tullyvallen massacre Balcombe Street siege 1976 Reavey and O'Dowd killings Kingsmill massacre 1978 La Mon restaurant bombing Jonesborough Gazelle downing 1979 Warrenpoint ambush 1981 Republican hunger strike 1982 Droppin Well bombing 1983 Maze Prison escape 1984 Brighton hotel bombing 1985 Newry mortar attack Anglo-Irish Agreement 1987 Loughgall ambush Remembrance Day bombing 1988 Start of peace process Operation Flavius Milltown Cemetery attack Corporals killings IRA attacks in the Netherlands Aughanduff Lynx shootdown Ballygawley bus bombing 1989 Deal barracks bombing Attack on Derryard checkpoint 1990–1997 South Armagh sniper campaign 1990 Augher Lynx shootdown Proxy bombings 1991 Downing Street mortar attack Cappagh killings 1992 Teebane bombing Sinn Féin Headquarters shooting Sean Graham bookmakers' shooting 1993 Warrington bombings Bishopsgate bombing Shankill Road bombing Greysteel massacre Downing Street Declaration 1994 Crossmaglen Lynx downing Loughinisland massacre Ceasefires of the Provisional IRA, UVF, UDA and RHC 1996 Docklands bombing Manchester bombing 1997 NI riots Second IRA ceasefire 1998 Good Friday Agreement Omagh bombing Political parties Irish republican parties Sinn Féin Official Sinn Féin Republican Sinn Féin Irish Republican Socialist Party Communist Party of Ireland Irish Independence Party Republican Socialist Collective Unity Ulster loyalist parties Ulster Unionist Party Democratic Unionist Party Progressive Unionist Party Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party UK Unionist Party Ulster Democratic Party Other parties Alliance Party of Northern Ireland Social Democratic and Labour Party Segregation ( peace lines ) Irish republicanism Irish nationalism Unionism Ulster loyalism United Ireland Free Derry Films Flags Murals Parades Punishment attacks Finances Special Category Status Shoot-to-kill policy HM Prison Maze Five techniques Category v t e Post– Cold War conflicts in Europe Eastern Europe Nagorno-Karabakh conflict (1988–2024) First War 2016 conflict Second War Gagauzia conflict (1989–1995) Transnistria conflict (1990–present) Transnistria War (1990–1992) Georgian Civil War (1991–1993) South Ossetia War (1991–92) War in Abkhazia (1992–1993) East Prigorodny conflict (1992) Russian constitutional crisis (1993) First Chechen War (1994–1996) War in Abkhazia (1998) Second Chechen War (1999–2009) Tuzla Island conflict (2003) Russo-Georgian War (2008) Maidan Uprising (2013) Revolution of Dignity (2014) Russo-Ukrainian War (2014–present) Russian annexation of Crimea (2014) War in Donbas Russian invasion of Ukraine Wagner Group rebellion (2023) Armenia–Azerbaijan border crisis (2021–present) Southern Europe Slovenian War of Independence (1991) Croatian War of Independence (1991–1995) Bosnian War (1992–1995) Croat–Bosniak War (1992–1994) Albanian Civil War (1997) Kosovo War (1998–1999) Insurgency in the Preševo Valley (1999–2001) Insurgency in Macedonia (2001) Related topics European re-armament in the 2020s List of Post-Soviet conflicts List of ongoing armed conflicts List of proxy wars List of frozen conflicts War on terror v t e Ireland topics Republic of Ireland topics Northern Ireland topics History Timeline Prehistory Protohistory Early history Gaelic Ireland / Lordship of Ireland 800–1169 1169–1536 Kingdom of Ireland 1536–1691 1691–1800 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland 1801–1923 Irish Republic Southern Ireland (1921–1922) Northern Ireland (1921–present) United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland since 1922 Irish Free State (1922–1937) Ireland (since 1922) Events Battles of Tara / Glenmama / Clontarf Norman invasion Bruce campaign Black Death Tudor conquest Desmond Rebellions Spanish Armada Tyrone's Rebellion Flight of the Earls Plantation of Ulster 1641 Rebellion / Confederate War Cromwellian conquest / Settlement of 1652 Williamite War Penal Laws First Great Famine 1798 Rebellion Act of Union (1800) 1803 Rebellion Tithe War Second Great Famine Land War Fenian Rising Dublin lock-out Home Rule crisis Easter Rising War of Independence Anglo-Irish Treaty Civil War The Emergency IRA Northern Campaign IRA Border Campaign The Troubles Peace process Economy of the Republic of Ireland Celtic Tiger Post-2008 Irish economic downturn Post-2008 Irish banking crisis Other topics List of conflicts in Ireland List of Irish tribes List of Irish kingdoms List of High Kings Gaelic clothing and fashion List of World Heritage Sites in the Republic of Ireland Geography Natural Climate Climate change Coastline Extreme points Fauna Islands Loughs Mountains Rivers list List of national parks of the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland Human Architecture Notable buildings Tallest buildings and structures Cities Counties Demographics of the Republic of Ireland / of Northern Ireland Ports Provinces ROI–UK border Towns Tourism in the Republic of Ireland Tourist attractions Transport Politics Ideologies Nationalism Republicanism Ulster loyalism Unionism Republic of Ireland Constitution Economy Education Foreign relations Government local Law LGBT rights Oireachtas parliament Dáil Éireann (lower house) Seanad Éireann (upper house) President Taxation Northern Ireland Assembly D'Hondt method Economy Education Government local LGBT rights Peace process Culture Cuisine Food List of dishes Barmbrack Bacon and cabbage Boxty Champ Coddle Colcannon Drisheen Irish fry Skirts and kidneys Soda bread Spice Bag Stew Three-in-One Drinks Coffee Cream Guinness Mist Poitín Tea Whiskey Dance Jig Sean-nós Set dancing Stepdance Festivals Imbolc Saint Patrick's Day Bealtaine The Twelfth Lúnasa Rose of Tralee Samhain / Halloween Wren Day Languages Hiberno-English Irish Shelta Ulster Scots Literature Annals Fiction Gaeilge Poetry Theatre Triads Music Ballads Céilí Folk music session Instruments Rock music Traditional singing Mythology Cycles Mythological Fenian Ulster Kings Aos Sí Echtrai Immrama Tuatha Dé Danann Firbolg Fomorians Legendary creatures People Irish people List of Irish people Irish diaspora Anglo-Irish Gaels Gaelic Ireland Hiberno-Normans Travellers Ulster Scots v t e Immigration to the Republic of Ireland Groups Americans Brazilians Chinese Filipinos Lithuanians Nigerians South Asians Poles Romani Turks Related topics Demographics of the Republic of Ireland Department of Justice, Home Affairs and Migration Stamp 4 Sport Association football in the Republic of Ireland Association football in Northern Ireland Camogie Gaelic football Gaelic handball Hurling Martial arts Road bowling Rounders Rugby union Symbols Brighid's Cross Cláirseach County coats of arms Flags Northern Ireland flags issue Irish Wolfhound National coat of arms Red Hand Shamrock Other Calendar Castles Cinema Heritage Sites Historic houses Homelessness Mass media (Republic) Monastic Names Place names / outside Ireland Prostitution (Republic) / in Northern Ireland Public holidays in the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland Public houses Squatting Ireland portal v t e Protests of 1968 Movements 1968–69 Japanese university protests Zenkyōtō 1968 movement in Italy 1968 movement in Pakistan Civil Rights Movement Anti-nuclear movement Black Consciousness Movement Black power movement Black Power Revolution Chicano Movement Cultural Revolution Gay liberation Hippie movement Human rights movement in the Soviet Union Mexican Movement of 1968 Movement of 22 March Northern Ireland civil rights movement Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War Red Power movement Sexual revolution The Troubles West German student movement Women's liberation movement Events 1968 Democratic National Convention protests " The whole world is watching " 1968 Polish political crisis 1968 protests in Egypt 1968 student demonstrations in Yugoslavia 1968 Miami riot 1968 Red Square demonstration 1968 uprising in Senegal Båstad riots Battle of Valle Giulia Ceaușescu's speech of 21 August 1968 Central Park be-ins Columbia University protests of 1968 Delano grape strike East L.A. walkouts King assassination riots Mafeje affair March of the One Hundred Thousand May 1968 in France Memphis sanitation strike Miss America protest Occupation of the Student Union Building Poor People's Campaign Prague Spring Presidio mutiny Rodney riots Shinjuku riot Silence March Takeover of Vanha Third World Liberation Front strikes of 1968 Tlatelolco massacre Related 1968 Summer Olympics Anti-capitalism Black power Counterculture of the 1960s Flower power Free love Hippie Antisemitism in Poland Hot Autumn New Left New social movements Racism in the United States School discipline Second-wave feminism Years of Lead (Italy) Morocco Segregation in Northern Ireland Student activism Vietnam War Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia Paramilitaries of The Troubles v t e Provisional Irish Republican Army General Anti-Treaty IRA Sinn Féin Republican News An Phoblacht The Green Book The Troubles ( Timeline ) Haughey arms crisis IRA campaign Chronology of Provisional IRA actions Arms importation Weaponry Barrack buster Improvised tactical vehicles Mountjoy Prison helicopter escape Blanket protest Dirty protest HM Prison Maze Anti H-Block 1981 Irish hunger strike Maze Prison escape Armalite and ballot box strategy Punishment attacks Disappeared Smithwick Tribunal Northern Ireland peace process Good Friday Agreement Organisation Chief of Staff IRA Army Council IRA Northern Command IRA Southern Command Internal Security Unit Active service unit Belfast Brigade Derry Brigade South Armagh Brigade East Tyrone Brigade Balcombe Street Gang Actions 1970–1979 Battle of St Matthew's Falls Curfew 1970 Crossmaglen bombing Scottish soldiers' killings Red Lion bombing Balmoral showroom bombing Abercorn bombing Donegall Street bombing Battle at Springmartin Battle of Lenadoon Bloody Friday Claudy bombing Newry customs bombing Old Bailey bombing Honey Trap killings King's Cross & Euston bombings Coleraine bombings 1973 Westminster bombing M62 bombing Clogher attack Houses of Parliament bombing Tower of London bombing Guildford pub bombings Harrow School bombing Brooks's Club bombing Woolwich pub bombing British Airways bombing attempt Birmingham pub bombings London pillar box bombings Talbot Arms bombing Bristol bombing Telephone exchange bombings 1974 Oxford Street bombing Carlton Tower & Portman Hotel shootings Mountainview attack Bayardo Bar attack Forkhill attack Caterham Arms bombing Tullyvallen massacre London Hilton bombing Piccadilly bombing Trattoria Fiore bombing Scott's Oyster Bar bombing Walton's Restaurant bombing Drummuckavall ambush Balcombe Street siege Kingsmill massacre West Ham station attack Olympia bombing Walker's Bar attack Stag Inn attack Garryhinch ambush Jonesborough Gazelle downing La Mon restaurant bombing Crossmaglen ambush Warrenpoint ambush Brussels bombing Dungannon attack 1980–1989 Dunmurry train bombing Lough Foyle attacks Glasdrumman ambush 1981 Bessbrook attack Chelsea Barracks bombing Hyde Park & Regent's Park bombings Harrods bombing Royal Artillery Barracks bombing Brighton hotel bombing Ballygawley land mine attack Newry mortar attack Ballygawley attack Enniskillen mortar attack RUC Birches barracks attack Rheindahlen bombing Loughgall ambush Operation Flavius Corporals killings Lisburn bombing Aughanduff Lynx shootdown 1988 Netherlands attacks Glamorgan barracks bombing Inglis Barracks bombing Ballygawley bus bombing Jonesborough ambush Clive Barracks bombing Deal barracks bombing Mayobridge attack Derryard attack 1990–1991 Derrygorry Gazelle downing South Armagh sniper Downpatrick roadside bomb Operation Conservation 1990 Wembley bombing Carlton Club bombing London Stock Exchange bombing Honourable Artillery Company bombing Lichfield gun attack RFA Fort Victoria bombing Proxy bombings Downing Street mortar attack Paddington & Victoria station bombings Mullacreevie ambush Glenanne barracks bombing Coagh ambush Musgrave Park Hospital bombing Crumlin Road Prison bombing 1992–1997 Teebane bombing Clonoe ambush London Bridge bombing Staples Cnr bombing Baltic Exchange bombing Sussex Arms bombing Cloghoge attack Coalisland riots Forensic Science Laboratory bombing Stoke Newington Road bomb 1992 Manchester bombing Night of the Long Knives 1993 Harrods bombing Warrington bombings Cullaville occupation Camden bombing Bishopsgate bombing Finchley Road bombings Battle of Newry Road Shankill Road bombing 1993 Fivemiletown ambush Heathrow attacks Crossmaglen Lynx downing Drumcree conflict Docklands bombing Aldwych bus bombing 1996 Manchester bombing Hammersmith Bridge bombing Osnabrück mortar attack Thiepval barracks bombing Coalisland attack 1997 Northern Ireland riots Personalities (Volunteers) Paddy Agnew Martina Anderson Declan Arthurs Thomas Begley Ivor Bell Patricia Black Charles Breslin Edward Butler Paul Butler Joe Cahill Liam Campbell Fergal Caraher Malachy Carey Owen Carron Gerard Casey Carál Ní Chuilín Gabriel Cleary Peter Cleary Eamon Collins Eddie Copeland Marion Coyle Gerard Davison Matt Devlin Hugh Doherty Joe Doherty Kieran Doherty Martin Doherty Pat Doherty Colin Duffy Rose Dugdale Dessie Ellis Mairéad Farrell William Fleming Kieran Fleming Bernard Fox Angelo Fusco Michael Gaughan John Francis Green Dessie Grew George Harrison Brendan Hughes Francis Hughes Martin Hurson Pearse Jordan Brian Keenan Gerry Kelly John Kelly Patrick Joseph Kelly Sean Kelly Jim Lynagh Proinsias Mac Airt Breandán Mac Cionnaith Antoine Mac Giolla Bhrighde Joseph MacManus Seán Mac Stíofáin Patrick Magee Paul Magee Donna Maguire Larry Marley Paul Marlowe Leo Martin Alex Maskey Pearse McAuley Daniel McCann Fra McCann Jennifer McCann Raymond McCartney Martin McCaughey Raymond McCreesh Joe McDonnell Séamus McElwain Thomas McElwee Brendan McFarlane Tom McFeely Gerry McGeough Pat McGeown John Joe McGirl Martin McGuinness Pádraig McKearney Tommy McKearney Billy McKee Kevin McKenna Laurence McKeown Michael McKevitt Thomas McMahon Jackie McMullan Martin Meehan Ian Milne Arthur Morgan Danny Morrison Conor Murphy Thomas "Slab" Murphy Kieran Nugent Ruairí Ó Brádaigh Ed O'Brien Dáithí Ó Conaill Éamonn O'Doherty Joe B. O'Hagan Siobhán O'Hanlon Rita O'Hare Diarmuid O'Neill Dolours Price Marian Price Liam Quinn Paddy Quinn Billy Reid Bobby Sands Seán Savage Pat Sheehan Frank Stagg Jimmy Steele Bobby Storey Gerard Tuite Seamus Twomey Roy Walsh Séanna Walsh Espionage and Supergrasses Eamon Collins Denis Donaldson Joseph Fenton Kevin Fulton Raymond Gilmour Martin McGartland Sean O'Callaghan Freddie Scappaticci (allegedly " Stakeknife ") Associates Cumann na mBan Fianna Éireann South Armagh Republican Action Force Direct Action Against Drugs NORAID Clan na Gael Troops Out Movement Derivatives Continuity Irish Republican Army Real Irish Republican Army Prominent killings Jeffery Stanford Agate Johnathan Ball Anthony Berry Robert Bradford Joe Bratty Matthew Burns Martin Cahill Eamon Collins Raymond Elder Gerard Evans Christopher Ewart-Biggs Joseph Fenton Billy Fox Maurice Gibson Ian Gow Heidi Hazell Donald Kaberry Andrew Kearney Baroness Brabourne William "Frenchie" Marchant Martin McBirney Jerry McCabe Robert McConnell Jean McConville Columba McVeigh Ross McWhirter Stephen Melrose Lord Mountbatten Lenny Murphy Robert Nairac Thomas Oliver Tim Parry Paul Quinn Robert Seymour Robert McCartney (allegedly) Joseph Rafferty (allegedly) Ray Smallwoods Sammy Smyth Nick Spanos James Stronge Norman Stronge Richard Sykes Stephen Tibble Sammy Ward Michael Willetts v t e Official IRA and the Workers' Party General Anti-Treaty IRA Sinn Féin The Troubles ( Timeline ) Marxism–Leninism Popular front Two-stage theory Anti-sectarianism Officials-Provisionals split Free Derry United Irishman The Irish People Official IRA Belfast Brigade Actions Timeline of Official Irish Republican Army actions 1969 Northern Ireland riots Falls curfew Aldershot bombing Personalities Cathal Goulding Seán Garland Roy Johnston C. Desmond Greaves Joe McCann Ronnie Bunting Thomas "Ta" Power Des O'Hagan Leo Martin Malachy McGurran Billy McMillen Jim Sullivan Kenneth Littlejohn Seamus Costello Eoin Ó Murchú Tomás Mac Giolla Francis Hughes Paddy O'Callaghan Mickey Devine Michael Gaughan Henry McDonald Johnnie White Seán Ó Cionnaith Máirín de Burca Hugh Torney Dominic Behan Martin O'Hagan Eoghan Harris Eamonn Melaugh Proinsias De Rossa Eric Byrne Pat McCartan Joe Sherlock Liz McManus Pat Rabbitte Seamus Lynch Michael Enright Eamon Gilmore Catherine Murphy Marian Donnelly Francie Donnelly Tom French Patrick Gallagher John Halligan Linda Kavanagh Kathleen Lynch Des Geraghty Mick Finnegan Ted Tynan Michael Donnelly John Lowry Gerry Grainger Associates Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association Connolly Association ( Communist Party of Great Britain ) Peace Train Organisation IMCWP INITIATIVE Clann na hÉireann Derivatives Irish National Liberation Army Irish Republican Socialist Party Democratic Left Official Republican Movement Prominent killings Seamus Costello John Barnhill Gerard Weston v t e INLA and the IRSP General The Troubles Official Sinn Féin Official IRA Irish Republican Socialist Movement The Starry Plough Marxism–Leninism Blanket protest Dirty protest HM Prison Maze Anti H-Block 1981 Irish hunger strike July 1997 riots Northern Ireland peace process Good Friday Agreement Organized crime INLA Belfast Brigade Attacks Central Bar bombing Assassination of Airey Neave 1982 Divis Flats bombing Droppin Well bombing Darkley killings (denied) 1994 Shankill Road killings Newtownhamilton bombing Personalities Jimmy Brown Ronnie Bunting Patrick Campbell Seamus Costello Miriam Daly Mickey Devine Bernadette Devlin Gino Gallagher Raymond Gilmour Tony Gregory Dessie Grew Seamus Grew Stephen King Harry Kirkpatrick Kevin Lynch Dominic McGlinchey Christopher "Crip" McWilliams Colm Murphy Patsy O'Hara Dessie O'Hare Martin "Rook" O'Prey Michael Plunkett Thomas "Ta" Power Mary Reid Gerard Steenson Hugh Torney Sammy Ward Johnnie White Associates Irish Republican Socialist Committees of North America Derivatives Independent Socialist Party Irish People's Liberation Organisation Republican Socialist Collective Prominent killings Billy McMillen Henry Byrne John Morley William McCullough John McKeague Patrick Joseph Morrissey Trevor King Billy Wright v t e Continuity IRA and Republican Sinn Féin General The Troubles 1986 Sinn Féin Ardfheis Abstentionism Irish republican legitimatism Éire Nua Saoirse Irish Freedom Dissident republican Dissident Irish republican campaign CIRA actions Personalities Ruairí Ó Brádaigh Dáithí Ó Conaill Éamonn O'Doherty Billy McKee Seán Ó Brádaigh George Harrison Dan Keating Joe Stynes Seán Cunningham Seán Keenan Seosamh Ó Mhaoileoin Des Dalton Josephine Hayden Martin Corey Associates Cumann na mBan Fianna Éireann Republican Clan na Gael National Irish Freedom Committee Cabhair National Commemoration Committee v t e Real Irish Republican Army and the 32 County Sovereignty Movement General The Troubles Northern Ireland peace process Mitchell Principles Good Friday Agreement Dissident republican Dissident Irish republican campaign Attacks 1998 Banbridge bombing Omagh bombing 2000 MI6 attack 2001 BBC bombing 2001 Ealing bombing 2001 Birmingham bombing Massereene Barracks shooting 2010 Newry car bombing Killing of Lyra McKee Personalities Bernadette Sands McKevitt Michael McKevitt Liam Campbell Seamus Daly Colm Murphy Gareth O'Connor Andrew Burns Gary Donnelly Marian Price Colin Duffy Associates Republican Action Against Drugs Derivatives Óglaigh na hÉireann (Real IRA splinter group) v t e Ulster Defence Association during the Troubles Chairmen of the UDA Charles Harding Smith (1971-1973) Andy Tyrie (1973-1988) position abolished (1988) East Belfast Brigade Albert "Ginger" Baker Jimmy Birch Billy Elliot Jim "Doris Day" Gray Tommy Herron Sammy McCormick Ned McCreery Michael Stone North Belfast Brigade John Boreland John Bunting Sammy Duddy Tommy English Davy Payne Andre & Ihab Shoukri Jimbo Simpson South Belfast Brigade David Adams Joe Bratty James Craig Raymond Elder Alex Kerr Jackie McDonald John McMichael Ray Smallwoods Michael Stone West Belfast Brigade Johnny Adair Ken Barrett Jackie Coulter Mo Courtney James Craig Frankie Curry William "Winkie" Dodds Hester Dunn Ernie Elliott Davy Fogel Donald Hodgen Billy Hull Matt Kincaid Tommy Lyttle Kenny McClinton Sam McCrory Alan McCullough William "Bucky" McCullough Stephen "Top Gun" McKeag Billy "Twister" McQuiston James "Sham" Millar Wendy Millar Brian Nelson Charles Harding Smith Gary "Smickers" Smyth Sammy Smyth Jim Spence William Stobie "Fat" Jackie Thompson Andy Tyrie John White South East Antrim Brigade Joe English John Gregg North Antrim & Londonderry Brigade Glenn Barr Ken Kerr Torrens Knight Billy McFarland Andy Robinson Mid-Ulster Brigade Robert John Kerr Eddie Sayers Michael Stone Actions Benny's Bar bombing (1972) Top of the Hill bar shooting (1972) New Lodge Six shooting (1973) Paddy Wilson and Irene Andrews killings (1973) Murder of Ann Ogilby (1974) Dublin Airport bombing (1975) Biddy Mulligan's pub bombing (1975) Milltown Cemetery attack (1988) Sean Graham bookmakers' shooting (1992) Attack on James Murray's bookmakers (1992) Castlerock killings (1993) Greysteel massacre (1993) Prominent victims Paddy Wilson (1973) John Turnley (1980) Miriam Daly (1980) Ronnie Bunting (1980) James Craig (1988) Pat Finucane (1989) Gerard Casey (1989) Eddie Fullerton (1991) Ned McCreery (1992) Frankie Curry (1999) Related articles Combined Loyalist Military Command Loyalist Association of Workers Loyalist feud Quis separabit?

Real Ulster Freedom Fighters Red Hand Defenders Shankill Defence Association Ulster Army Council Ulster Democratic Party Ulster loyalism Ulster Loyalist Central Co-ordinating Committee Ulster nationalism Ulster Political Research Group Ulster Workers' Council strike Ulster Young Militants Volunteer (Ulster loyalist) Woodvale Defence Association bold indicates brigadiers v t e Ulster Volunteer Force During the Troubles Chiefs of Staff Gusty Spence (1966) Samuel McClelland (1966–1973) Jim Hanna (1973–1974) Ken Gibson (1974) Unnamed Chief of Staff (1974–1975) Tommy West (1975–1976) John "Bunter" Graham (1976-date) Belfast Brigade members Robert Bates John Bingham Frankie Curry David Ervine Billy Giles Mark Haddock Billy Hutchinson Trevor King Bobby McKee Jackie Mahood William "Frenchie" Marchant Billy Mitchell William Moore John Murphy Lenny Murphy Clifford Peeples Brian Robinson George Seawright Robert "Squeak" Seymour William Smith Billy Spence Harry "Harmless" Stockman James "Tonto" Watt Mid-Ulster Brigade members Harris Boyle Mark "Swinger" Fulton William James Fulton Billy Hanna Robin Jackson Richard Jameson Robin King Billy McCaughey Robert McConnell David Alexander Mulholland Lindsay Robb Wesley Somerville John Weir Billy Wright Red Hand Commando members Frankie Curry Billy Elliot John McKeague Winston Churchill Rea Wiliam Smith Michael Stone Units and groups Glenanne gang Shankill Butchers Protestant Action Force Young Citizen Volunteers Actions RTÉ Studio bombing (1969) Battle of St Matthew's (1970) McGurk's Bar bombing (1971) Battle at Springmartin (1972) Imperial Hotel bombing (1972) Belturbet bombing (1972) 1972 and 1973 Dublin bombings Rose & Crown Bar bombing (1974) Dublin and Monaghan bombings (1974) 1975 Conway's Bar attack (1975) Bleary Darts Club shooting (1975) Strand Bar bombing (1975) Miami Showband killings (1975) Donnelly's Bar and Kay's Tavern attacks (1975) October 1975 Northern Ireland attacks Reavey and O'Dowd killings (1976) Hillcrest Bar bombing (1976) Charlemont pub attacks (1976) Chlorane Bar attack (1976) Ramble Inn attack (1976) Glasgow pub bombings (1979) Avenue Bar shooting (1988) 1991 Cappagh killings (1991) 1991 Drumbeg killings 1991 Craigavon killings Loughinisland massacre (1994) 1994 Dublin-Belfast train bombing (1994) Quinn brothers' killings (1998) Murders of Andrew Robb and David McIlwaine (2000) Prominent victims Jim Hanna (1974) John Francis Green (1975) Billy Hanna (1975) The Miami Showband (1975) Maire Drumm (1976) Larry Marley (1987) Martin Doherty (1994) Jackie Coulter (2000) Tommy English (2000) Related articles Combined Loyalist Military Command Loyalist feud Loyalist Volunteer Force Progressive Unionist Party Tara Ulster Army Council Ulster Constitution Defence Committee Ulster loyalism Ulster Loyalist Central Co-ordinating Committee Ulster Volunteers Ulster Workers' Council strike Volunteer (Ulster loyalist) Volunteer Political Party bold indicates brigadiers and commanders v t e Loyalist Volunteer Force during the Troubles Leaders Billy Wright (1996-1997) Mark "Swinger" Fulton (1997-2002) Robin "Billy" King (2002-2005?) Northern Ireland portal Members and spokesmen William James Fulton Muriel Gibson Alex Kerr Kenny McClinton Jackie Mahood Clifford Peeples Lindsay Robb Related articles Drumcree conflict Richard Jameson Loyalist feud Red Hand Defenders UDA West Belfast Brigade Ulster loyalism UVF Mid-Ulster Brigade Volunteer (Ulster loyalist) Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Troubles&oldid=1306212805 " Categories : The Troubles (Northern Ireland) 1960s in Irish politics 1969 in Northern Ireland 1970s conflicts 1970s in Irish politics 1970s in Northern Ireland 1980s conflicts 1980s in Irish politics 1980s in Northern Ireland 1990s conflicts 1990s in Irish politics 1990s in Northern Ireland 20th-century military history of the United Kingdom Catholic–Protestant sectarian violence Conflicts in 1969 Dirty wars Ethnicity-based civil wars Guerrilla wars Insurgencies in Europe Ireland–United Kingdom relations Irish republicanism Political history of Northern Ireland Rebellions in the United Kingdom and Ireland Religion-based civil wars Separatist rebellion-based civil wars Terrorism in Northern Ireland Wars involving Ireland Wars involving the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2023 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use Hiberno-English from December 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in Hiberno-English Use dmy dates from February 2024 Articles containing Irish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2020 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 14:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Troubles 58 languages Add topic

