Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Legal status 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Natural heritage 26 languages العربية Bikol Central Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Jawa Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Shqip Српски / srpski Svenska Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Elements of biodiversity, including flora and fauna, ecosystems and geological structures This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Natural heritage" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Natural heritage refers to the sum total of the elements of biodiversity, includes flora and fauna, ecosystems and geological structures. It forms part of our natural resources .

Definition [ edit ] Definitions: Natural heritage refers to natural features, geological and physiographical formations and delineated areas that constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and plants and natural sites of value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty.

Heritage is that which is inherited from past generations, maintained in the present, and bestowed to future generations .

[ 1 ] The term "natural heritage", derived from "natural inheritance", pre-dates the term " biodiversity ". It is a less scientific term and more easily comprehended in some ways by the wider audience interested in conservation .

The term was used in this context in the US when Jimmy Carter set up the Georgia Heritage Trust [ 2 ] while he was governor of Georgia ; [ 3 ] Carter's trust dealt with both natural and cultural heritage.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] It would appear that Carter picked the term up from Lyndon Johnson , [ 6 ] who used it in a 1966 Message to Congress .  (He may have gotten the term from his wife Lady Bird Johnson who was personally interested in conservation.)  President Johnson signed the Wilderness Act of 1964 .

The term "Natural Heritage" was picked up by the Science Division of The Nature Conservancy (TNC) when, under Robert E. Jenkins, Jr., it launched in 1974 what ultimately became the network of state natural heritage programs—one in each state, all using the same methodology and all supported permanently by state governments because they scientifically document conservation priorities and facilitate science-based environmental reviews.

[ 7 ] When this network was extended outside the United States, the term "Conservation Data Center (or Centre)" was suggested by Guillermo Mann and came to be preferred for programs outside the US [ citation needed ] .  Despite the name difference, these programs, too, use the same core methodology as the 50 state natural heritage programs. In 1994 The network of natural heritage programs formed a membership association to work together on projects of common interest: the Association for Biodiversity Information (ABI). In 1999, Through an agreement with The Nature Conservancy, ABI expanded and assumed responsibility for the scientific databases, information, and tools developed by TNC in support of the network of natural heritage programs. In 2001, ABI changed its name to NatureServe .

[ 8 ] NatureServe continues to serve as the hub of the NatureServe Network, a collaboration of 86 governmental and non-governmental programs including natural heritage programs and conservation data centers located in the United States, Canada, and Latin America.

[ 9 ] Legal status [ edit ] An important site of natural heritage or cultural heritage can be listed as a World Heritage Site by the World Heritage Committee of UNESCO .  The UNESCO programme, catalogues, names, and conserves sites of outstanding cultural or natural importance to the common heritage of humanity.  As of July 2023, there are 257 natural World Heritage sites (including 39 mixed sites) in 111 countries. This represents a total of more than 3,500,000 km 2 (1,400,000 sq mi) of protected areas, 60% of which are marine.

[ 10 ] The 1972 UNESCO World Heritage Convention established that biological resources, such as plants, were the common heritage of mankind or as was expressed in the preamble: "need to be preserved as part of the world heritage of mankind as a whole". These rules probably inspired the creation of great public banks of genetic resources , located outside the source-countries.

New global agreements (e.g., the Convention on Biological Diversity ), national rights over biological resources (not property). The idea of static  conservation of biodiversity is disappearing and being replaced by the idea of dynamic conservation, through the notion of resource and  innovation.

The new agreements commit countries to conserve biodiversity, develop resources for sustainability and share the benefits resulting from their use. Under new rules, it is expected  that bioprospecting or collection of natural products has to be allowed by  the biodiversity-rich country, in exchange for a share of the  benefits.

In 2005, the World Heritage Marine Programme was established to protect marine areas with Outstanding Universal Values.

See also [ edit ] Geoheritage References [ edit ] ^ Ann Marie Sullivan, Cultural Heritage & New Media: A Future for the Past, 15 J. MARSHALL REV. INTELL. PROP. L. 604 (2016) https://repository.jmls.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1392&context=ripl ^ http://maps.csc.noaa.gov/RoisDatabaseEntry/lawDetails.jsp?lawID=107 [ permanent dead link ] The creation of the Heritage Trust Commission, Georgia Heritage Trust Act, Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A.) Section 12-3-70 ^ President Jimmy Carter Archived 2007-10-30 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Tennessee Alumnus Magazine - Spring 2007" . Archived from the original on 2008-08-07 . Retrieved 2008-06-25 .

Paul Pritchard, founder and president of the National Park Trust ^ p. 311, The Governors of Georgia, 1754-2004
 By James F. Cook, ISBN 0-86554-954-0 , 2005 Mercer University Press ^ Kiely, Kathy (2009-01-22).

"Lady Bird Johnson dies at 94" .

USA Today . Archived from the original on Jan 27, 2011 . Retrieved 2010-05-20 .

^ Adams (2006).

The Future of the Wild: Radical Conservation for a Crowded World . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 0-8070-8510-3 .

OCLC 58563371 .

^ "Our History" .

NatureServe . Archived from the original on Jul 30, 2021.

^ "NatureServe Network" .

NatureServe . Archived from the original on Oct 22, 2023.

^ "Natural World Heritage" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 2023-07-06 .

Links to related articles v t e Lists of World Heritage Sites Locations Africa Americas North America Central America Caribbean South America Asia Eastern Northern and Central Southeast Southern Western Europe Eastern Northern Southern Western Oceania Related World Heritage in Danger Former sites By country By year of inscription World portal v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Natural_heritage&oldid=1301148310 " Categories : Natural resources Cultural heritage Biodiversity Environmental conservation Environmental science Environmental education Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2008 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 09:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Natural heritage 26 languages Add topic

