Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fetal circulation 2 Closure 3 Recanalization 4 Catheterization 5 Additional images 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Umbilical vein 14 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Hrvatski Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vein running from the placenta to the fetus Blood vessel Umbilical vein Fetal circulation ; the umbilical vein is the large, red vessel at the far left.

Human embryo.

Brain and heart represented from right side.

Digestive tube and yolk sac in median section. (Umbilical vein labeled at bottom left.) Details Drains to Inferior vena cava Artery Umbilical artery Identifiers Latin vena umbilicalis MeSH D014471 TA98 A12.3.12.010 TA2 5103 FMA 70317 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] The umbilical vein is a vein present during fetal development that carries oxygenated blood from the placenta into the growing fetus . The umbilical vein provides convenient access to the central circulation of a neonate for restoration of blood volume and for administration of glucose and drugs.

[ 1 ] The blood pressure inside the umbilical vein is approximately 20 mmHg .

[ 2 ] Fetal circulation [ edit ] The unpaired umbilical vein carries oxygen and nutrient rich blood derived from fetal-maternal blood exchange at the chorionic villi . More than two-thirds of fetal hepatic circulation is via the main portal vein , while the remainder is shunted from the left portal vein via the ductus venosus to the inferior vena cava , eventually being delivered to the fetal right atrium .

Closure [ edit ] Closure of the umbilical vein usually occurs after the umbilical arteries have closed. This prolongs the communication between the placenta and fetal heart, allowing for a sort of autotransfusion of remaining blood from the placenta to the fetus.

Within a week of birth, the neonate's umbilical vein is obliterated and is replaced by a fibrous cord called the round ligament of the liver (also called ligamentum teres hepatis ). It extends from the umbilicus to the transverse fissure, where it joins with the falciform ligament of the liver to separate segment 4 from segments 2 and 3 of the left hepatic lobe .

Recanalization [ edit ] Under extreme pressure , the round ligament may reopen to allow the passage of blood. Such recanalization may be evident in patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension . Patients with cirrhosis experience rapid growth of scar tissue in and around the liver, often functionally obstructing nearby vessels.

Vessel occlusion increases vascular resistance and therefore leads to hypertension. In portal hypertension, the vessels surrounding the liver are subjected to abnormally high blood pressure—so high, in fact, that the force of the blood pressing against the round ligament is sufficient to recanalize the structure. This leads to a condition called caput medusae .

[ citation needed ] Catheterization [ edit ] A newborn baby has a patent umbilical vein for at least a week after birth. This umbilical vein may be catheterised for ready intravenous access. It may be used as a site for regular transfusion in cases of erythroblastosis or hemolytic disease . It also provides a route for measuring central venous pressure.

[ 1 ] Additional images [ edit ] Model of human embryo, 1.3 mm. long.

Scheme of placental circulation.

Diagram of the vascular channels in a human embryo of the second week.

Human embryo with heart and anterior body-wall removed to show the sinus venosus and its tributaries.

Schematic figure of the lesser sac , etc. Human embryo of eight weeks.

Liver with the septum transversum . Human embryo, 3 mm. long.

Sketch of the vessels in a human embryo of the third week.

Tail end of human embryo, twenty-five to twenty-nine days old.

Umbilical vein Human embryo, 38 mm, 8–9 weeks.

See also [ edit ] Human umbilical vein graft Ductus venosus References [ edit ] ^ a b Coté, Charles J.; Lerman, Jerrold; Todres, I. David (2009).

A Practice of Anesthesia for Infants and Children . Elsevier Health Sciences.

ISBN 978-1416031345 .

^ Wang, Y. Vascular biology of the placenta. in Colloquium Series on Integrated Systems Physiology: from Molecule to Function. 2010. Morgan & Claypool Life Sciences.

External links [ edit ] Embryology at Temple Heart98/heart97a/sld020 v t e Veins of the abdomen and pelvis To azygos system ascending lumbar subcostal IVC ( Systemic ) To IVC or left renal vein inferior phrenic hepatic central veins of liver liver sinusoid suprarenal renal gonadal ovarian ♀ / testicular ♂ pampiniform plexus ♂ lumbar common iliac Common iliac Unpaired median sacral vein Internal iliac posterior: iliolumbar superior gluteal lateral sacral anterior: inferior gluteal obturator uterine ♀ uterine plexus ♀ vesical vesical plexus prostatic plexus  ♂ deep of penis  ♂ / clitoris ♀ posterior scrotal ♂ / labial ♀ vaginal plexus/vein ♀ middle rectal internal pudendal inferior rectal bulb of penis  ♂ / vestibule ♀ rectal plexus External iliac inferior epigastric deep circumflex iliac vein Portal vein ( Portal ) Splenic short gastric left gastroepiploic pancreatic inferior mesenteric superior rectal left colic Superior mesenteric right gastroepiploic pancreaticoduodenal jejunal ileal middle colic right colic ileocolic appendicular Direct cystic left gastric / esophageal right gastric paraumbilical v t e Membranes of the fetus and embryo Embryo Trophoblast Cytotrophoblast Syncytiotrophoblast Intermediate trophoblast Allantois Decidua Decidual cells Chorionic villi / Intervillous space Amnion sac cavity Fetus Umbilical cord Umbilical artery Umbilical vein Wharton's jelly Circulatory Placenta Chorion Other Blastocoel Heuser's membrane Reichert's membrane Vitelline duct Gestational sac v t e Development of the circulatory system Heart Tubular heart Truncus arteriosus Bulbus cordis Primitive ventricle Primitive atrium Sinus venosus Chamber formation Atrioventricular Primary interventricular foramen Endocardial cushions Septum intermedium Atrioventricular canal Atrial Septum primum Foramen secundum Primary interatrial foramen Septum secundum Foramen ovale Other Aorticopulmonary septum Protein signalling in heart development Vessels Arteries Dorsal aorta Aortic arches Aortic sac Veins Anterior cardinal vein Posterior cardinal vein Common cardinal veins Lymph vessels Lymph sacs Other Vascular remodelling in the embryo Extraembryonic hemangiogenesis Blood islands Chorion Connecting stalk Yolk sac Placenta Fetal circulation umbilical cord : Umbilical vein → Ductus venosus → Inferior vena cava → Heart → Pulmonary artery → Ductus arteriosus → Aorta → Umbilical artery yolk sac : Vitelline veins Vitelline arteries Authority control databases Terminologia Anatomica Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Umbilical_vein&oldid=1263527264 " Categories : Embryology of cardiovascular system Veins Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata Anatomy NAV infobox with use of other NAV parameters Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 This page was last edited on 17 December 2024, at 04:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Umbilical vein 14 languages Add topic

