Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Features 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Common charts 2.2 Less-common charts 2.3 Field-specific charts 2.4 Well-known named charts 2.5 Other charts 2.6 Common plots 3 Chart software 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Chart 30 languages العربية Avañe'ẽ 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Cymraeg Dansk Español Euskara Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша Kiswahili Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oromoo Polski Português Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Tagalog தமிழ் Українська 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Graphical representation of data For other uses, see Chart (disambiguation) , Graph (disambiguation) , and Diagram .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chart" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A pie chart showing the composition of the 38th Parliament of Canada A chart (sometimes known as a graph ) is a graphical representation for data visualization , in which "the data is represented by symbols , such as bars in a bar chart , lines in a line chart , or slices in a pie chart ".

[ 1 ] A chart can represent tabular numeric data, functions or some kinds of quality structure and provides different info.

The term "chart" as a graphical representation of data has multiple meanings: A data chart is a type of diagram or graph , that organizes and represents a set of numerical or qualitative data.

Maps that are adorned with extra information ( map surround ) for a specific purpose are often known as charts, such as a nautical chart or aeronautical chart , typically spread over several map sheets .

Other domain-specific constructs are sometimes called charts, such as the chord chart in music notation or a record chart for album popularity.

Charts are often used to ease understanding of large quantities of data and the relationships between parts of the data. Charts can usually be read more quickly than the raw data. They are used in a wide variety of fields, and can be created by hand (often on graph paper ) or by computer using a charting application . Certain types of charts are more useful for presenting a given data set than others. For example, data that presents percentages in different groups (such as "satisfied, not satisfied, unsure") are often displayed in a pie chart , but maybe more easily understood when presented in a horizontal bar chart .

[ 2 ] On the other hand, data that represents numbers that change over a period of time (such as "annual revenue from 1990 to 2000") might be best shown as a line chart .

Features [ edit ] A chart can take a large variety of forms. However, there are common features that provide the chart with its ability to extract meaning from data.

Typically the data in a chart is represented graphically since humans can infer meaning from pictures more quickly than from text. Thus, the text is generally used only to annotate the data.

One of the most important uses of text in a graph is the title . A graph's title usually appears above the main graphic and provides a succinct description of what the data in the graph refers to.

Dimensions in the data are often displayed on axes . If a horizontal and a vertical axis are used, they are usually referred to as the x-axis and y-axis. Each axis will have a scale , denoted by periodic graduations and usually accompanied by numerical or categorical indications. Each axis will typically also have a label displayed outside or beside it, briefly describing the dimension represented. If the scale is numerical, the label will often be suffixed with the unit of that scale in parentheses. For example, "Distance traveled (m)" is a typical x-axis label and would mean that the distance traveled, in units of meters, is related to the horizontal position of the data within the chart.

Within the graph, a grid of lines may appear to aid in the visual alignment of data. The grid can be enhanced by visually emphasizing the lines at regular or significant graduations. The emphasized lines are then called major gridlines, and the remainder is minor grid lines.

A chart's data can appear in all manner of formats and may include individual textual labels describing the datum associated with the indicated position in the chart. The data may appear as dots or shapes, connected or unconnected, and in any combination of colors and patterns. In addition, inferences or points of interest can be overlaid directly on the graph to further aid information extraction.

When the data appearing in a chart contains multiple variables, the chart may include a legend (also known as a key ). A legend contains a list of the variables appearing in the chart and an example of their appearance. This information allows the data from each variable to be identified in the chart.

Types [ edit ] This article's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Common charts [ edit ] Four of the most common charts are: Histogram Bar chart Pie chart Line chart This gallery shows: A histogram consists of tabular frequencies, shown as adjacent rectangles, erected over discrete intervals (bins), with an area equal to the frequency of the observations in the interval; first introduced by Karl Pearson.

[ 3 ] A bar chart is a chart with rectangular bars with lengths proportional to the values that they represent. The bars can be plotted vertically or horizontally. The first known bar charts are usually attributed to Nicole Oresme, Joseph Priestley, and William Playfair.

[ 4 ] A pie chart shows percentage values as a slice of a pie; first introduced by William Playfair.

[ 5 ] A line chart is a two-dimensional scatterplot of ordered observations where the observations are connected following their order. The first known line charts are usually credited to Francis Hauksbee, Nicolaus Samuel Cruquius, Johann Heinrich Lambert and William Playfair.

[ 6 ] Other common charts are: Timeline chart Organizational chart Tree chart Flow chart Area chart Cartogram Pedigree chart Radial tree Less-common charts [ edit ] Examples of less common charts are: Bubble chart Polar area diagram Waterfall chart Radar chart Tree map Streamgraph GapChart This gallery shows: A bubble chart is a two-dimensional scatterplot where a third variable is represented by the size of the points.

A polar area diagram , sometimes called a Coxcomb chart, is an enhanced form of pie chart developed by Florence Nightingale .

A radar chart or "spider chart" or "doi" is a two-dimensional chart of three or more quantitative variables represented on axes starting from the same point.

A waterfall chart also known as a "Walk" chart, is a special type of floating-column chart.

A tree map where the areas of the rectangles correspond to values.  Other dimensions can be represented with color or hue. Smaller areas go to the bottom right corner.

A streamgraph , a stacked, curvilinear area graph displaced around a central axis A GapChart, a time series chart showing evolving gaps and equalities between series. Other dimensions can be represented with color or hue.

Field-specific charts [ edit ] Some types of charts have specific uses in a certain field Open-high-low-close chart Candlestick chart Kagi chart Sparkline This gallery shows: Stock market prices are often depicted with an open-high-low-close chart with a traditional bar chart of volume at the bottom.

Candlestick charts are another type of bar chart used to describe price movements of an equity over time.

A Kagi chart is a time-independent stock tracking chart that attempts to minimise noise.

Alternatively, where less detail is required, and chart size is paramount, a Sparkline may be used.

Other examples: Interest rates, temperatures, etc., at the close of the period are plotted with a line chart.

Project planners use a Gantt chart to show the timing of tasks as they occur over time.

Well-known named charts [ edit ] Some of the better-known named charts are: Gantt chart Nolan chart PERT chart Smith chart Some specific charts have become well known by effectively explaining a phenomenon or idea.

An Allele chart is a chart originating from the study of genetics to show the interaction of two data points in a grid.

A Gantt chart helps in scheduling complex projects.

The Nolan chart and the Pournelle chart classify political philosophies according to two axes of variation.

A PERT chart is often used in project management .

The Smith chart serves in radio electronics .

Other charts [ edit ] There are dozens of other types of charts. Here are some of them: Control chart Greninger chart Heatmap Natal chart Nomogram Pareto chart Run chart Strip chart Structure chart Vowel chart One more example: Bernal chart Common plots [ edit ] Main article: Plot (graphics) Box plot Dot plot (statistics) Probability plot Scatterplot Biplot Chart software [ edit ] While charts can be drawn by hand, computer software is often used to automatically produce a chart based on entered data. For examples of commonly used software tools, see List of charting software .

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chart .

Diagram Table (information) Drakon-chart Exploratory data analysis Graphic organizer Information graphics Mathematical diagram Official statistics Plot (graphics) Edward Tufte Misleading graph References [ edit ] ^ Cary Jensen, Loy Anderson (1992).

Harvard graphics 3: the complete reference . Osborne McGraw-Hill ISBN 0-07-881749-8 p.413 ^ Howard Wainer (1997) Visual revelations: graphical tales of fate and Deception from Napoleon Bonaparte to Ross Perot , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

ISBN 0-8058-3878-3 p.87-90.

^ Pearson, K.

(1895).

"Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Evolution. II. Skew Variation in Homogeneous Material" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences .

186 : 343– 414.

Bibcode : 1895RSPTA.186..343P .

doi : 10.1098/rsta.1895.0010 .

^ "First Ever Bar Charts Created in 14th Century" . AnyChart. 2 June 2015 . Retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ "History of Pie Charts" . JPowered. Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ Michael Friendly (2008).

"Milestones in the history of thematic cartography, statistical graphics, and data visualization" (PDF) . pp.

13– 14.

Further reading [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Chart .

Brinton, Willard Cope .

Graphic methods for presenting facts . The Engineering magazine company, 1914.

Karsten, Karl G.

Charts and graphs: An introduction to graphic methods in the control and analysis of statistics .

Prentice-Hall, 1923, 1925.

v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases : National Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐mqd7l
Cached time: 20250812015733
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.427 seconds
Real time usage: 0.556 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1172/1000000
Revision size: 13594/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 55264/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 914/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72027/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.255/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6409604/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  470.950      1 -total
 23.91%  112.620      1 Template:Reflist
 16.70%   78.639      2 Template:Navbox
 16.64%   78.371      1 Template:Visualization
 12.29%   57.898      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.06%   56.800      2 Template:Ambox
 12.02%   56.623      2 Template:ISBN
 11.92%   56.133      1 Template:Short_description
  7.23%   34.043      2 Template:Sister_project
  7.17%   33.779      1 Template:Commons Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:164460:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015733 and revision id 1305436029. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chart&oldid=1305436029 " Categories : Infographics Diagrams Charts Modeling languages Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2011 All articles needing additional references Accuracy disputes from October 2019 All accuracy disputes Commons link from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2024 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 01:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chart 30 languages Add topic

