Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 Urelements in set theory 3 Quine atoms 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Urelement 9 languages Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano 日本語 Português Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in set theory In set theory , a branch of mathematics , an urelement or ur-element (from the German prefix ur- , 'primordial') is an object that is not a set (has no elements), but that may be an element of a set. It is also referred to as an atom or individual . Ur-elements are also not identical with the empty set.

Theory [ edit ] There are several different but essentially equivalent ways to treat urelements in a first-order theory .

One way is to work in a first-order theory with two sorts, sets and urelements, with a ∈ b only defined when b is a set. 
In this case, if U is an urelement, it makes no sense to say X ∈ ∈ U {\displaystyle X\in U} , although U ∈ ∈ X {\displaystyle U\in X} is perfectly legitimate.

Another way is to work in a one-sorted theory with a unary relation used to distinguish sets and urelements. As non-empty sets contain members while urelements do not, the unary relation is only needed to distinguish the empty set from urelements. Note that in this case, the axiom of extensionality must be formulated to apply only to objects that are not urelements.

This situation is analogous to the treatments of theories of sets and classes . Indeed, urelements are in some sense dual to proper classes : urelements cannot have members whereas proper classes cannot be members. Put differently, urelements are minimal objects while proper classes are maximal objects by the membership relation (which, of course, is not an order relation, so this analogy is not to be taken literally).

Urelements in set theory [ edit ] The Zermelo set theory of 1908 included urelements, and hence is a version now called ZFA or ZFCA (i.e. ZFA with axiom of choice ).

[ 1 ] It was soon realized that in the context of this and closely related axiomatic set theories , the urelements were not needed because they can easily be modeled in a set theory without urelements.

[ 2 ] Thus, standard expositions of the canonical axiomatic set theories ZF and ZFC do not mention urelements (for an exception, see Suppes [ 3 ] ).

Axiomatizations of set theory that do invoke urelements include Kripke–Platek set theory with urelements and the variant of Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory described by Mendelson.

[ 4 ] In type theory , an object of type 0 can be called an urelement; hence the name "atom".

Adding urelements to the system New Foundations (NF) to produce NFU has surprising consequences. In particular, Jensen proved [ 5 ] the consistency of NFU relative to Peano arithmetic ; meanwhile, the consistency of NF relative to anything remains an open problem, pending verification of Holmes's proof of its consistency relative to ZF. Moreover, NFU remains relatively consistent when augmented with an axiom of infinity and the axiom of choice . Meanwhile, the negation of the axiom of choice is, curiously, an NF theorem. Holmes (1998) takes these facts as evidence that NFU is a more successful foundation for mathematics than NF. Holmes further argues that set theory is more natural with than without urelements, since we may take as urelements the objects of any theory or of the physical universe .

[ 6 ] In finitist set theory , urelements are mapped to the lowest-level components of the target phenomenon, such as atomic constituents of a physical object or members of an organisation.

Quine atoms [ edit ] An alternative approach to urelements is to consider them, instead of as a type of object other than sets, as a particular type of set.

Quine atoms (named after Willard Van Orman Quine ) are sets that only contain themselves, that is, sets that satisfy the formula x = { x }.

[ 7 ] Quine atoms cannot exist in systems of set theory that include the axiom of regularity , but they can exist in non-well-founded set theory . ZF set theory with the axiom of regularity removed cannot prove that any non-well-founded sets exist (unless it is inconsistent, in which case it will prove any arbitrary statement ), but it is compatible with the existence of Quine atoms.

Aczel's anti-foundation axiom implies that there is a unique Quine atom. Other non-well-founded theories may admit many distinct Quine atoms; at the opposite end of the spectrum lies Boffa's axiom of superuniversality , which implies that the distinct Quine atoms form a proper class .

[ 8 ] Quine atoms also appear in Quine's New Foundations , which allows more than one such set to exist.

[ 9 ] Quine atoms are the only sets called reflexive sets by Peter Aczel , [ 8 ] although other authors, e.g.

Jon Barwise and Lawrence Moss, use the latter term to denote the larger class of sets with the property x ∈ x .

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Dexter Chua et al.: ZFA: Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with atoms , on: ncatlab.org: nLab, revised on July 16, 2016.

^ Jech, Thomas J.

(1973).

The Axiom of Choice . Mineola, New York: Dover Publ. p.

45 .

ISBN 0486466248 .

^ Suppes, Patrick (1972).

Axiomatic Set Theory ([Éd. corr. et augm. du texte paru en 1960] ed.). New York: Dover Publ.

ISBN 0486616304 . Retrieved 17 September 2012 .

^ Mendelson, Elliott (1997).

Introduction to Mathematical Logic (4th ed.). London: Chapman & Hall. pp.

297– 304.

ISBN 978-0412808302 . Retrieved 17 September 2012 .

^ Jensen, Ronald Björn (December 1968). "On the Consistency of a Slight (?) Modification of Quine's 'New Foundations' ".

Synthese .

19 (1/2). Springer: 250– 264.

doi : 10.1007/bf00568059 .

ISSN 0039-7857 .

JSTOR 20114640 .

S2CID 46960777 .

^ Holmes, Randall, 1998.

Elementary Set Theory with a Universal Set . Academia-Bruylant.

^ Thomas Forster (2003).

Logic, Induction and Sets . Cambridge University Press. p. 199.

ISBN 978-0-521-53361-4 .

^ a b Aczel, Peter (1988), Non-well-founded sets , CSLI Lecture Notes, vol. 14, Stanford University, Center for the Study of Language and Information, p.

57 , ISBN 0-937073-22-9 , MR 0940014 , retrieved 2016-10-17 .

^ Barwise, Jon; Moss, Lawrence S. (1996), Vicious circles. On the mathematics of non-wellfounded phenomena , CSLI Lecture Notes, vol. 60, CSLI Publications, p. 306, ISBN 1575860090 .

^ Barwise, Jon; Moss, Lawrence S. (1996), Vicious circles. On the mathematics of non-wellfounded phenomena , CSLI Lecture Notes, vol. 60, CSLI Publications, p. 57, ISBN 1575860090 .

External links [ edit ] Weisstein, Eric W.

"Urelement" .

MathWorld .

v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urelement&oldid=1258657818 " Category : Urelements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 November 2024, at 22:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Urelement 9 languages Add topic

