Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 See also 3 References 4 Related literatures 5 External links Toggle the table of contents GADV-protein world hypothesis 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A hypothetical stage of abiogenesis This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article has been translated from the article GADV仮説 in the Japanese Wikipedia, and requires proofreading .

If you are confident enough in your fluency of English and Japanese, please proofread it.

( August 2022 ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "GADV-protein world hypothesis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2022 ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "GADV-protein world hypothesis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Glycine (G) Alanine (A) Aspartic acid (D) Valine (V) The four amino acids GADV-protein world is a hypothetical stage of abiogenesis . GADV stands for the one letter codes of four amino acids , namely, glycine (G), alanine (A), aspartic acid (D) and valine (V), the main components of GADV proteins . In the GADV-protein world hypothesis, it is argued that the prebiotic chemistry before the emergence of genes involved a stage where GADV-proteins were able to pseudo-replicate. This hypothesis is contrary to the RNA world hypothesis.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] The GADV-protein world hypothesis was first proposed by Kenji Ikehara at Nara Women's University . It is supported by GNC-SNS primitive gene code hypothesis ( GNC hypothesis ) also formulated by him. In the GNC hypothesis, the origin of the present standard genetic code is considered to be the GNC genetic code that includes the codons G G C, G C C, G A C, G U C, respectively coding glycine , alanine , aspartic acid , and valine ; it also follows the SNS primitive genetic code that codes ten amino acids, where N denotes arbitrary four RNA bases and S denotes guanine (G) and cytosine (C).

The GADV hypothesis proposes these mechanisms: Analysis on present proteins and simulation using chemical factors of amino acid shows GADV-proteins that contains almost the same amount of the four amino acids can form four basic structures of protein, namely, hydrophobic and hydrophilic structures, α-helices and β-sheets .

Therefore, GADV-proteins polymerized from randomly chosen amino acids from the four choices, probably becoming globular and water-soluble like some present proteins.

Proteins generated like this have different primary structures . However, their simple composition leads to the formation of similar spherical and water-soluble proteins that have bulky and hydrophobic valines inside and hydrophilic aspartic acids outside.

GADV-peptides can polymerize by simple cycles of evaporation and hydration. This gives a rationale for the production of GADV-peptides in tide pools on the early Earth . Moreover, GADV-peptides randomly polymerized as above have the catalytic activity to hydrolyze peptide bonds in bovine serum albumin . Therefore, they can catalyze the formation of peptide bonds as the reverse reaction.

GADV-proteins can multiply by pseudo-replication in the absence of genes, considering the features above.

See also [ edit ] Alternative abiogenesis scenarios References [ edit ] ^ Ikehara 2005 .

Related literatures [ edit ] Ikehara, Kenji (2005). "Possible steps to the emergence of life: The [GADV]-protein world hypothesis".

The Chemical Record .

5 (2). Wiley Subscription Services, Inc., A Wiley Company: 107– 118.

doi : 10.1002/tcr.20037 .

ISSN 1528-0691 .

PMID 15828060 .

Ikehara, Kenji (2014).

"[GADV]-Protein World Hypothesis on the Origin of Life" .

Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres .

44 (4). Netherlands: Springer: 299– 302.

Bibcode : 2014OLEB...44..299I .

doi : 10.1007/s11084-014-9383-4 .

ISSN 0169-6149 .

PMC 4428654 .

PMID 25592392 .

External links [ edit ] Kenji Ikehara's GADV-protein world laboratory (only in Japanese) v t e Origin of life History of research Panspermia (5th century BC) Spontaneous generation (4th century BC) Primordial soup (19th century) Prebiotic synthesis Pseudo-panspermia Miller–Urey experiment Formamide-based prebiotic chemistry Alternative abiogenesis scenarios Protocells GADV-protein world Clay hypothesis Iron–sulfur world Primordial sandwich PAH world Peptide-RNA world Quasispecies model RNA world Earliest organisms Earliest known life forms Last universal common ancestor (LUCA) Research Astrobiology Paleobiology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=GADV-protein_world_hypothesis&oldid=1248063527 " Categories : Origin of life Amino acids Prebiotic chemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing cleanup after translation from August 2022 Wikipedia articles needing cleanup after translation from Japanese Articles needing additional references from June 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with topics of unclear notability from June 2022 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 27 September 2024, at 12:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents GADV-protein world hypothesis 1 language Add topic

