Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Linguistics views 3 Epistemological views 4 Defense against Buddhism 5 Legendary life 6 Works 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Kumārila Bhaṭṭa 28 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Galego हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 日本語 ଓଡ଼ିଆ Polski Русский संस्कृतम् Српски / srpski தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hindu 8th century philosopher and scholar Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Born est. 700 AD Philosophical work Era Hindu Indian philosophy Main interests Mimansa Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e Kumarila Bhatta ( IAST : Kumārila Bhaṭṭa; fl.

roughly 7th century CE) was a Hindu philosopher and a scholar of Mimamsa school of philosophy from early medieval India . He is famous for many of his various theses on Mimamsa, such as Mimamsaslokavarttika . Bhaṭṭa was a staunch believer in the supreme validity of Vedic injunction, a champion of Pūrva-Mīmāṃsā and a confirmed ritualist.

[ 1 ] The Varttika is mainly written as a subcommentary of Sabara's commentary on Jaimini's Purva Mimamsa Sutras . His philosophy is classified by some scholars as existential realism.

[ 2 ] Scholars differ as regards Kumārila Bhaṭṭa's views on a personal God . For example, Manikka Vachakar believed that Bhaṭṭa promoted a personal God [ 3 ] ( saguna brahman ), which conflicts with the Mīmāṃsā school. In his Varttika , Kumārila Bhaṭṭa goes to great lengths to argue against the theory of a creator God [ 4 ] and held that the actions enjoined in the Veda had definite results without an external interference of Deity.

Kumārila is also credited with the logical formulation of the Mimamsic belief that the Vedas are unauthored ( apauruṣeyā ). In particular, he is known for his defense of Vedic ritualism against medieval Buddhist idealism.

[ 5 ] His work strongly influenced other schools of Indian philosophy, [ 6 ] with the exception that while Mimamsa considers the Upanishads to be subservient to the Vedas, the Vedanta school does not think so.

Early life [ edit ] The birthplace of Kumārila Bhatta is uncertain. According to the 16th-century Buddhist scholar Taranatha , Kumārila was a native of South India . However, Anandagiri's Shankara-Vijaya states that Kumarila came from "the North" ( udagdeśāt ), and debated the Buddhists and the Jains in the South.

[ 7 ] Another theory is that he came from eastern India, specifically Kamarupa (present-day Assam ). Sesa's Sarvasiddhanta-rahasya uses the eastern title Bhattacharya for him. His writings indicate that he was familiar with the production of silk , which was common in present-day Assam.

[ 8 ] Yet another theory is that he comes from Mithila , which has similar culture to  Assam, and produced another scholar on the subject Mandana Misra . According to legend in Mithila, the Kumarila Bhatta Dih at Bhatsimar or Bhatpura in the Mithila region is believed to be the birthplace of Kumarila Bhatta.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Linguistics views [ edit ] Kumārila Bhaṭṭa and his followers in the Mīmāṃsā tradition known as Bhāṭṭas argued for a strongly Compositional view of semantics called abhihitānvaya or "designation of what has been denoted." In this view, the meaning of a sentence was understood only after understanding first the meanings of individual words.  Word referents were independent, complete objects, a view that is close to the Fodorian view of language, according to philosopher Daniel Arnold.

[ 13 ] He also used several Tamil words in his works, including one of the earliest mention of the name Dravida in North Indian sources, found in his Tantravārttika .

[ 14 ] The above-mentioned view of sentence meaning was debated over some seven or eight centuries by the followers of the Prabhākara school within Mīmāṃsā, who argued that words do not directly designate meaning. Rather, word meanings are understood as already connected with other words ( anvitābhidhāna , anvita = connected; abhidhāna = denotation).  This view was influenced by the holistic arguments of Bhartṛhari 's sphoṭa theory.

[ 15 ] Essentially the Prābhākaras argued that sentence meanings are grasped directly, from perceptual and contextual cues, skipping the stage of grasping singly the individual word meanings, [ 16 ] similar to the modern view of linguistic underspecification , which relates to the Dynamic Turn in Semantics [ broken anchor ] , that also opposes purely compositional approaches to sentence meaning.

Epistemological views [ edit ] In his text Slokavarttika, Kumārila Bhatta argues that cognitions are intrinsically valid ( svatah pramanya ): [ 15 ] It should be understood that all pramanas' have the property of being pramanas intrinsically; for a capacity not already existing by itself (svatah) cannot be produced by anything else.

Kumārila argues against the need for second-order justification before accepting cognitions as valid.

[ 15 ] Defense against Buddhism [ edit ] Kumārila Bhaṭṭa is known for his defense of Vedic ritualism against medieval Buddhist idealism.

[ 5 ] With the aim to prove the superiority of Vedic scripture, Kumārila Bhaṭṭa presented several novel arguments: 1.

"Buddhist (or Jain) scripture could not be correct because it had several grammatical lapses." He specifically takes the Buddhist verse: 'ime samkhada dhamma sambhavanti sakarana akarana vinassanti' (These phenomena arise when the cause is present and perish when the cause is absent). Thus he presents his argument: [ 17 ] The scriptures of Buddhists and Jains are composed in overwhelmingly incorrect (asadhu) language, words of the Magadha or Dakshinatya languages, or even their dialects (tadopabhramsa). Therefore false compositions (asannibandhana), they cannot possibly be true knowledge (shastra) ... By contrast, the very form itself (the well-assembled language) of the Veda proves its authority to be independent and absolute.

2. Every extant school held some scripture to be correct. To show that the Veda was the only correct scripture, Kumārila said that "the absence of an author would safeguard the Veda against all reproach" ( apaurusheya ).

[ 18 ] There was "no way to prove any of the contents of Buddhist scriptures directly as wrong in spirit..." , unless one challenges the legitimacy and eternal nature of the scripture itself. It is well known that the Pali Canon was composed after the Buddha 's parinirvana . Further, even if they were the Buddha's words, they were not eternal or unauthored like the Vedas.

3. The Sautrantika Buddhist school believed that the universe was momentary (kshanika). Kumārila said that this was absurd, given that the universe does not disappear every moment. No matter how small one would define the duration of a moment, one could divide the moment into infinitely further parts. Kumārila argues: "if the universe does not exist between moments, then in which of these moments does it exist?" Because a moment could be infinitesimally small, Bhaṭṭa argued that the Buddhist was claiming that the universe was non-existent.

4. The Determination of perception (pratyaksha pariccheda).

[ 19 ] Some scholars believe that Kumārila's understanding of Buddhist philosophy was far greater than that of any other non-Buddhist philosopher of his time.

[ 20 ] However, see Taber 2010 for an alternate view.

[ 21 ] According to Buton Rinchen Drub , Kumārila spoke abusively towards his nephew, Dharmakīrti , as he was taking his brahminical garments. This drove Dharmakīrti away, and resolving to vanquish all non-Buddhist heretics he took the robes of the Buddhist order instead.

[ 22 ] Legendary life [ edit ] According to legend, Kumārila went to study Buddhism at Nalanda (the largest 4th-century university in the world), with the aim of refuting Buddhist doctrine in favour of Vedic religion .

[ 23 ] He was expelled from the university when he protested against his teacher ( Dharmakirti ) ridiculing the Vedic rituals. Legend has it that even though he was thrown off of the university's tower, he survived with an eye injury by claiming "if the Vedas are the ultimate then I will be spared from Death". Modern Mimamsa scholars and followers of Vedanta believe that this was because he imposed a condition on the infallibility of the Vedas thus encouraging the Hindu belief that one should not even doubt the infallibility of the Vedas.

The Madhaviya Sankara Digvijayam , a 14th-century hagiographic work on the life of Sankara , claims that Sankara challenged Bhaṭṭa to a debate on his deathbed.

[ 24 ] Kumārila Bhaṭṭa could not debate Sankara  as he was punishing himself to have disrespected his Buddhist teacher by defeating him in a debate using the Vedas by self-immolation at the banks of Ganga at Prayagraj [ citation needed ] and instead directed him to argue with his student Mandana Misra in Mahiṣmati . He said: You will find a home at whose gates there are a number of caged parrots discussing abstract topics like — 'Do the Vedas have self-validity or do they depend on some external authority for their validity? Are karmas capable of yielding their fruits directly, or do they require the intervention of God to do so? Is the world eternal, or is it a mere appearance?' Where you find the caged parrots discussing such abstruse philosophical problems, you will know that you have reached Maṇḍana's place.

Kumarila's importance in the history of Indian philosophy comes to light in view of how his work has been extensively quoted.

[ 25 ] Works [ edit ] Shlokavartika ("Exposition on the Verses", commentary on Shabara 's Commentary on Jaimini's Mimamsa Sutras, Bk. 1, Ch. 1) [1] written in the first half of the 7th century [ 26 ] Tantravartika ("Exposition on the Sacred Sciences", commentary on Shabara's Commentary on Jaimini's Mimamsa Sutras, Bk. 1, Ch. 2–4 and Bks. 2–3) [2] Tuptika ("Full Exposition" commentary on Shabara's Commentary on Jaimini's Mimamsa Sutras, Bks. 4–9) [3] Kataoka, Kei, Kumarila on Truth, Omniscience and Killing. Part 1: A Critical Edition of Mimamasa-Slokavarttika ad 1.1.2 (Codanasutra). Part 2: An Annotated Translation of Mimamsa-Slokavarttika ad 1.1.2 (Codanasutra) (Wien, 2011) (Sitzungsberichte der philosophisch-historischen Klasse, 814; Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, 68).

References [ edit ] ^ Sharma 1980 , p. 3–6.

^ Bhatt, p. 6.

^ A History of Indian Philosophy By Surendranath Dasgupta. p. 156.

^ Bales, p. 198.

^ a b Sheridan 1995 , p. 200.

^ Bhatt, p. 3.

^ Kumārila Bhaṭṭa; Peri Sarveswara Sharma (1980).

Anthology of Kumārilabhaṭṭa's Works . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 11.

ISBN 978-81-208-2084-5 .

^ Biswanarayan Shastri (1995).

Mīmāṁsā philosophy & Kumārila Bhaṭṭa . Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan. p. 76.

^ "कुमारिल भट्ट डीह को मिलेगा पर्यटन केंद्र का दर्जा - Kumaril Bhatt Dih will get tourism center status - Bihar Madhubani General News" .

Jagran (in Hindi) . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ "दर्शन शास्त्र की जननी है मिथिला -" .

Jagran (in Hindi) . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ "सनातन धर्म के सच्चे सिपाही थे दार्शनिक कुमारिल भट्ट, तीन ग्रंथों के थे रचयिता" .

News18 हिंदी (in Hindi). 3 July 2024 . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ "कुमारिल भट्ट भटपुरा से महिषी तक निकलेगी रथ यात्रा" .

Dainik Bhaskar .

^ Arnold, Daniel (2005).

Buddhists, Brahmins, and Belief: Epistemology in South Asian Philosophy of Religion . New York: Columbia University Press.

^ Krishnamurti, Bhadriraju (2003).

The Dravidian languages . Cambridge language surveys. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-521-77111-5 .

OCLC 50525804 .

^ a b c Arnold, Daniel (2020), "Kumārila" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 7 February 2024 ^ Matilal, p. 108.

^ Pollock, p. 55.

^ Jha, p. 31.

^ Taber, p??

^ Rani, p??

^ Taber, John (2010). "Kumārila's Buddhist".

Journal of Indian Philosophy .

38 (3): 279– 296.

doi : 10.1007/s10781-010-9093-9 .

S2CID 170490847 .

^ Buton, Rinchen drub (1931).

The History of Buddhism in India and Tibet . Translated by E. Obermiller. Heidelberg: Harrossowitz. p. 152.

^ Long 2011 , p. 175.

^ 'Madhaviya Sankara Digvijayam' by medieval Vijayanagara biographer Madhava, Sringeri Sharada Press ^ Kataoka, Kei; Kumārila Bhaṭṭa (2011).

Kumārila on truth, omniscience, and killing . Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. pp. xvii.

ISBN 978-3-7001-7001-3 .

OCLC 741557941 .

^ Taber, John; Kumārila (2005).

A Hindu critique of Buddhist epistemology: Kumārila on perception ; the 'Determination of perception' chapter of Kumārila Bhaṭṭa's Ślokavārttika . RoutledgeCurzon Hindu studies series (1. publ ed.). London: RoutledgeCurzon. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-415-33602-4 .

Sources [ edit ] Arnold, Daniel Anderson.

Buddhists, Brahmins, and Belief: Epistemology in South Asian Philosophy of Religion . Columbia University Press, 2005.

ISBN 978-0-231-13281-7 .

Bales, Eugene (1987).

A Ready Reference to Philosophy East and West . University Press of America. p.

201 .

ISBN 9780819166401 .

Buddhist philosophy as presented in Mimamsa Sloka Vartika.

Bhatt, Govardhan P.

The Basic Ways of Knowing: An In-depth Study of Kumārila's Contribution to Indian Epistemology . Delhi: Motilal Banarasidass, 1989.

ISBN 81-208-0580-1 .

Kumarila Bhatta, Translated by Ganganatha Jha (1985).

Slokavarttika . The Asiatic Society, Calcutta.

Bimal Krishna Matilal (1990).

The word and the world: India's contribution to the study of language . Oxford.

Long, Jeffery D. (2011), Historical Dictionary of Hinduism , Scarecrow Press Vijaya Rani (1982).

Buddhist Philosophy as Presented in Mimamsa Sloka Varttika. 1st Ed . Parimal Publications, Delhi ASIN B0006ECAEO.

Sheldon Pollock (2006).

The Language of the Gods in the World of Men – Sanskrit, Culture and Power in Premodern India . University of California Press.

Sharma, Peri Sarveswara (1980).

Anthology of Kumārilabhaṭṭa's Works . Delhi, Motilal Banarsidass.

Sheridan, Daniel P. (1995), "Kumarila Bhatta", in McGready, Ian (ed.), Great Thinkers of the Eastern World , New York: Harper Collins, ISBN 0-06-270085-5 Translated and commentary by John Taber (January 2005).

A Hindu Critique of Buddhist Epistemology . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-33602-4 .

External links [ edit ] Text of Mimamsalokavarttika Chapter 5, by Kumarila Bhatta (in transliterated Sanskrit) Shankara v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

Portals : Hinduism Religion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kumārila_Bhaṭṭa&oldid=1287847028 " Categories : 8th-century Indian philosophers Atheist philosophers Critics of Buddhism Hindu philosophers and theologians Indian Sanskrit scholars Medieval linguists from India Medieval Sanskrit grammarians Scholars from Assam Hidden categories: CS1 Hindi-language sources (hi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 Articles with hCards Pages with broken anchors Pages containing broken anchor template with unsupported parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 This page was last edited on 28 April 2025, at 20:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kumārila Bhaṭṭa 28 languages Add topic

