Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Terminology 3 Origins 4 Impure abjads Toggle Impure abjads subsection 4.1 Addition of vowels 5 Abjads and the structure of Semitic languages 6 Adaptation for use as true alphabets 7 Comparative chart of abjads, extinct and extant 8 See also 9 References 10 Sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Abjad 72 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaelg Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latviešu Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Picard Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Sunda Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Writing system where each symbol stands for a consonant For the traditional ordering of the letters of the Arabic alphabet, see Abjad numerals .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Abjad" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An abjad ( / ˈ æ b dʒ æ d / ⓘ [ 1 ] or abgad [ 2 ] [ 3 ] ) is a writing system in which only consonants are represented, leaving the vowel sounds to be inferred by the reader. This contrasts with alphabets , which provide graphemes for both consonants and vowels. The term was introduced in 1990 by Peter T. Daniels .

[ 4 ] Other terms for the same concept include partial phonemic script , segmentally linear defective phonographic script , consonantary , consonant writing , and consonantal alphabet .

[ 5 ] Impure abjads represent vowels with either optional diacritics , a limited number of distinct vowel glyphs, or both.

Etymology [ edit ] The name abjad is based on the Arabic alphabet 's first (in its original order ) four letters — corresponding to a , b , j , and d — to replace the more common terms "consonantary" and "consonantal alphabet" in describing the family of scripts classified as " West Semitic ". It is similar to other Semitic languages such as Phoenician , Hebrew and Semitic proto-alphabets: specifically, aleph , bet , gimel , dalet .

Terminology [ edit ] According to the formulations of Peter T. Daniels , [ 6 ] abjads differ from alphabets in that only consonants, not vowels, are represented among the basic graphemes . Abjads differ from abugidas , another category defined by Daniels, in that in abjads, the vowel sound is implied by phonology , and where vowel marks exist for the system, such as niqqud for Hebrew and ḥarakāt for Arabic , their use is optional and not the dominant (or literate) form. Abugidas mark all vowels (other than the "inherent" vowel ) with a diacritic , a minor attachment to the letter, a standalone glyph , or (in Canadian Aboriginal syllabics ) by rotation of the letter. Some abugidas use a special symbol to suppress the inherent vowel so that the consonant alone can be properly represented. In a syllabary , a grapheme denotes a complete syllable, that is, either a lone vowel sound or a combination of a vowel sound with one or more consonant sounds.

The contrast of abjad versus alphabet has been rejected by other scholars because abjad is also used as a term for the Arabic numeral system. Also, it may be taken as suggesting that consonantal alphabets, in contrast to e.g. the Greek alphabet , were not yet true alphabets.

[ 7 ] Florian Coulmas , a critic of Daniels and of the abjad terminology, argues that this terminology can confuse alphabets with "transcription systems", and that there is no reason to relegate the Hebrew, Aramaic or Phoenician alphabets to second-class status as an "incomplete alphabet".

[ 8 ] However, Daniels's terminology has found acceptance in the linguistic community.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Origins [ edit ] A specimen of Proto-Sinaitic script containing a phrase which may mean 'to Baalat '. The line running from the upper left to lower right reads mt l b c lt .

See also: History of the alphabet § Descendants of the Aramaic abjad The first abjad to gain widespread usage was the Phoenician abjad . Unlike other contemporary scripts, such as cuneiform and Egyptian hieroglyphs , the Phoenician script consisted of only a few dozen symbols. This made the script easy to learn, and seafaring Phoenician merchants took the script throughout the then-known world.

The Phoenician abjad was a radical simplification of phonetic writing, since hieroglyphics required the writer to pick a hieroglyph starting with the same sound that the writer wanted to write in order to write phonetically, much as man'yōgana ( kanji used solely for phonetic use) was used to represent Japanese phonetically before the invention of kana .

Phoenician gave rise to a number of new writing systems, including the widely used Aramaic abjad and the Greek alphabet . The Greek alphabet evolved into the modern western alphabets, such as Latin and Cyrillic , while Aramaic became the ancestor of many modern abjads and abugidas of Asia.

Other sister scripts to Phoenician, that branched from Proto-Sinaitic script are the South Semitic scripts with its two main branches; the Ancient North Arabian scripts that were used in north and central Arabia, until it was displaced by the Arabic alphabet .

[ 12 ] and Ancient South Arabian , which evolved later into the Geʽez script , still being used in Eritrea and Ethiopia.

Impure abjads [ edit ] Al-ʻArabiyya , meaning "Arabic": an example of the Arabic script, which is an impure abjad Impure abjads have characters for some vowels, optional vowel diacritics, or both. The term pure abjad refers to scripts entirely lacking in vowel indicators.

[ 13 ] However, most modern abjads, such as Arabic , Hebrew , Aramaic , and Pahlavi , are "impure" abjads – that is, they also contain symbols for some of the vowel phonemes, although the said non-diacritic vowel letters are also used to write certain consonants, particularly approximants that sound similar to long vowels. A "pure" abjad is exemplified (perhaps) by very early forms of ancient Phoenician , though at some point (at least by the 9th century BC) it and most of the contemporary Semitic abjads had begun to overload a few of the consonant symbols with a secondary function as vowel markers, called matres lectionis .

[ 14 ] This practice was at first rare and limited in scope but became increasingly common and more developed in later times.

Addition of vowels [ edit ] Main article: Greek alphabet In the 9th century BC the Greeks adapted the Phoenician script for use in their own language. The phonetic structure of the Greek language created too many ambiguities when vowels went unrepresented, so the script was modified. They did not need letters for the guttural sounds represented by aleph , he , heth or ayin , so these symbols were assigned vocalic values. The letters waw and yod were also adapted into vowel signs; along with he , these were already used as matres lectionis in Phoenician. The major innovation of Greek was to dedicate these symbols exclusively and unambiguously to vowel sounds that could be combined arbitrarily with consonants (as opposed to syllabaries such as Linear B which usually have vowel symbols but cannot combine them with consonants to form arbitrary syllables).

Abugidas developed along a slightly different route. The basic consonantal symbol was considered to have an inherent "a" vowel sound. Hooks or short lines attached to various parts of the basic letter modify the vowel. In this way, the South Arabian abjad evolved into the Geʽez script of Ethiopia between the 5th century BC and the 5th century AD. Similarly, the Brāhmī abugida of the Indian subcontinent developed around the 3rd century BC (from the Aramaic abjad , it has been hypothesized).

Abjads and the structure of Semitic languages [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The abjad form of writing is well-adapted to the morphological structure of the Semitic languages it was developed to write. This is because words in Semitic languages are formed from a root consisting of (usually) three consonants , the vowels being used to indicate inflectional or derived forms. For instance, according to Classical Arabic and Modern Standard Arabic , from the Arabic root ك‌ت‌ب K-T-B (to write) can be derived the forms كَتَبَ kataba (he wrote), كَتَبْتَ katabta (you (masculine singular) wrote), يَكْتُبُ⁩ yaktubu (he writes), and مَكْتَبَة⁩ maktabah (library). In most cases, the absence of full glyphs for vowels makes the common root clearer, allowing readers to guess the meaning of unfamiliar words from familiar roots (especially in conjunction with context clues) and improving word recognition [ citation needed ] [ dubious – discuss ] while reading for practiced readers.

Adaptation for use as true alphabets [ edit ] The Arabic abjad have been adapted to perform as true alphabets when used to write several languages, including Kurdish , Swahili , Malay , and Uyghur and historically Bosnian , Mozarabic , Aragonese , Portuguese , Spanish and Afrikaans , with some letters or letter combinations being repurposed to represent vowels. The Hebrew abjad has also been adapted to write Jewish languages like Ladino and Yiddish.

Comparative chart of abjads, extinct and extant [ edit ] Name In use Cursive Direction # of letters Matres lectionis Area of origin Used by Languages Time period (age) Influenced by Writing systems influenced Arabic yes yes right-left 28 3 Middle East Over 400 million people Arabic , Kashmiri , Persian , Pashto , Uyghur , Kurdish , Urdu , many others [ 15 ] 512 CE [ 16 ] [ 15 ] Nabataean Aramaic Thaana Syriac yes yes right-left 22 consonants 3 Middle East Syriac Christianity , Assyrians Aramaic : Syriac , Assyrian Neo-Aramaic , Turoyo , Mlahso c.

100 BCE [ 15 ] Aramaic Nabatean, Palmyran, Mandaic, Parthian, Pahlavi, Sogdian, Avestan and Manichean [ 15 ] Hebrew yes yes right-left 22 consonants + 5 final letters 4 Middle East Israelis , Jewish diaspora communities, Second Temple Judea Hebrew, Judeo-Arabic, Judeo-Aramaic, Judeo-Persian, Judeo-Italian, Yiddish , Ladino , many others 2nd century BCE Paleo-Hebrew , Early Aramaic Aramaic (Imperial) no no right-left 22 3 Middle East Achaemenid, Persian, Babylonian, and Assyrian empires Imperial Aramaic, Hebrew c.

500 BCE [ 15 ] Phoenician Late Hebrew, Nabataean, Syriac Aramaic (Early) no no right-left 22 none Middle East Various Semitic Peoples c.

1000 – c.

900 BCE [ citation needed ] Phoenician Hebrew, Imperial Aramaic.

[ 15 ] Nabataean no no right-left 22 none Middle East Nabataean Kingdom [ 17 ] Nabataean 200 BCE [ 17 ] Aramaic Arabic Phoenician no no right-left, boustrophedon 22 none Byblos [ 15 ] Canaanites Phoenician, Punic, Hebrew c.

1500 – c.

1000 BCE [ 15 ] Proto-Canaanite Alphabet [ 15 ] Punic (variant), Greek, Etruscan, Latin, Arabic and Hebrew Punic no no right-left 22 none Carthage (Tunisia), North Africa, Mediterranean [ 15 ] Punic Culture Punic, Neo-Punic Phoenician [ citation needed ] Ancient North Arabian no no right-left 29 yes Arabian Peninsula Northern Arabians Old Arabic , Ancient North Arabian languages 8th century BCE - 4th century CE Proto-Sinaitic Ancient South Arabian no yes ( Zabūr - cursive form of the South Arabian script) right-left, boustrophedon 29 yes South-Arabia (Yemen) D'mt Kingdom Amharic, Tigrinya, Tigre, Semitic, Cushitic, Nilo-Saharan [ citation needed ] 900 BCE [ citation needed ] Proto-Sinaitic Geʽez (Ethiopia and Eritrea) Sabaean no no right-left, boustrophedon 29 none Southern Arabia (Sheba) Southern Arabians Sabaean c.

500 BCE [ 15 ] Byblos [ 15 ] Ethiopic (Eritrea & Ethiopia) [ 15 ] Parthian no no right-left 22 yes Parthia (modern-day equivalent of Northeastern Iran, Southern Turkmenistan and Northwest Afghanistan) [ 15 ] Parthian & Sassanian periods of Persian Empire [ 15 ] Parthian c.

200 BCE [ 15 ] Aramaic Ugaritic no yes left-right 30 none, 3 characters for gs +vowel Ugarit (modern-day Northern Syria) Ugarites Ugaritic, Hurrian c.

1400 BCE [ 15 ] Proto-Sinaitic Proto-Sinaitic, Proto-Canaanite no no left-right 24 none Egypt, Sinai, Canaan Canaanites Canaanite c.

1900 – c.

1700 BCE In conjunction with Egyptian Hieroglyphs [ citation needed ] Phoenician, Hebrew Samaritan yes (700 people) no right-left 22 none Levant Samaritans (Nablus and Holon) Samaritan Aramaic, Samaritan Hebrew c.

100 BCE – c.

1 CE Paleo-Hebrew Alphabet Tifinagh yes no bottom-top, right-left, left-right, 31 yes North Africa Berbers Berber languages 2nd millennium BCE [ 18 ] Phoenician, Arabic Neo-Tifinagh Middle Persian, (Pahlavi) no no right-left 22 3 Middle East Sassanian Empire Pahlavi, Middle Persian c.

200 BCE – c.

700 CE Aramaic Psalter, Avestan [ 15 ] Psalter Pahlavi no yes right-left 21 yes Northwestern China [ 15 ] Persian Script for Paper Writing [ 15 ] 0400 c.

400 CE [ 19 ] Syriac [ citation needed ] Sogdian no no (yes in later versions) right-left, left-right (vertical) 20 3 parts of China (Xinjiang), Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Pakistan Buddhists, Manichaens Sogdian 0400 c.

400 CE Syriac Old Uyghur alphabet [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Abjad numerals (Arabic alphanumeric code) Abugida Disemvoweling Gematria (Hebrew & English system of alphanumeric code) Numerology Shorthand (constructed writing systems that are structurally abjads) References [ edit ] ^ "abjad" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Boyes, Philip J.; Steele, Philippa M. (10 October 2019).

Understanding Relations Between Scripts II . Oxbow Books. p. 24.

ISBN 978-1-78925-092-3 .

^ Lehmann, Reinhard G. (2012). de Voogt, Alex; Quack, Joachim Friedrich (eds.).

The Idea of Writing: Writing Across Borders . Leiden, Boston: Brill. p. 35.

ISBN 9789004215450 .

^ Daniels, P. (1990). " Fundamentals of Grammatology ".

Journal of the American Oriental Society , 110(4), 727-731.

doi : 10.2307/602899 . "We must recognize that the West Semitic scripts constitute a third fundamental type of script, the kind that denotes individual consonants only. It cannot be subsumed under either of the other terms. A suitable name for this type would be alephbeth, in honor of its Levantine origin, but this term seems too similar to alphabet to be practical; so I propose to call this type an "abjad," [Footnote:  I.e., the alif-ba-jim order familiar from earlier Semitic alphabets, from which the modern order alif-ba-ta-tha is derived by placing together the letters with similar shapes and differing numbers of dots. The abjad is the order in which numerical values are assigned to the letters (as in Hebrew).] from the Arabic word for the traditional order6 of its script, which (unvocalized) of course falls in this category... There is yet a fourth fundamental type of script, a type recognized over forty years ago by James- Germain Fevrier, called by him the "neosyllabary" (1948, 330), and again by Fred Householder thirty years ago, who called it "pseudo-alphabet" (1959, 382). These are the scripts of Ethiopia and "greater India" that use a basic form for the specific syllable consonant + a particular vowel (in practice always the unmarked a) and modify it to denote the syllables with other vowels or with no vowel. Were it not for this existing term, I would propose maintaining the pattern by calling this type an "abugida," from the Ethiopian word for the auxiliary order of consonants in the signary." ^ Amalia E. Gnanadesikan (2017), "Towards a typology of phonemic scripts", Writing Systems Research , 9:1, 14-35, doi : 10.1080/17586801.2017.1308239 . "Daniels (1990, 1996a) proposes the name abjad for these scripts, and this term has gained considerable popularity. Other terms include partial phonemic script (Hill, 1967), segmentally linear defective phonographic script (Faber, 1992), consonantary (Trigger, 2004), consonant writing (Coulmas, 1989) and consonantal alphabet (Gnanadesikan, 2009; Healey, 1990). " ^ Daniels & Bright 1996 .

^ Lehmann 2011 .

^ Coulmas, Florian (2004).

Writing Systems . Cambridge University Press. p. 113.

ISBN 978-0-521-78737-6 .

^ "Abjads / Consonant alphabets" ,
  Omniglot.com, 2009, quote: "Abjads, or consonant alphabets, represent consonants only, or consonants plus some vowels. Full vowel indication (vocalisation) can be added, usually by means of diacritics, but this is not usually done." Accessed 22 May 2009.

^ Rogers, Henry (2005): Writing systems: a linguistic approach . Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 0-631-23464-0, ISBN 978-0-631-23464-7. See esp.

Chap. 7, pp. 115ff .

^ Schone, Patrick (2006) : "Low-resource autodiacritization of abjads for speech keyword search", In INTERSPEECH-2006, paper 1412-Mon3FoP.13.

^ Ibn Durayd, Ta‘līq min amāli ibn durayd, ed. al-Sanūsī, Muṣṭafā, Kuwait 1984, p. 227 (Arabic). The author purports that a poet from the Kinda tribe in Yemen who settled in Dūmat al-Ǧandal during the advent of Islam told of how another member of the Yemenite Kinda tribe who lived in that town taught the Arabic script to the Banū Qurayš in Mecca and that their use of the Arabic script for writing eventually took the place of musnad , or what was then the Sabaean script of the kingdom of Ḥimyar: "You have exchanged the musnad of the sons of Ḥimyar / which the kings of Ḥimyar were wont to write down in books." ^ Daniels 2013 .

^ Lipiński 1994 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Ager 2015 .

^ Ekhtiar 2011 , p. 21.

^ a b Lo 2012 .

^ Franklin, Natalie R.; Strecker, Matthias (5 August 2008).

Rock Art Studies - News of the World Volume 3 . Oxbow Books. p. 127.

ISBN 9781782975885 .

^ "PAHLAVI PSALTER – Encyclopaedia Iranica" .

iranicaonline.org .

Sources [ edit ] Ager, Simon (2015).

"Abjads / Consonant alphabets" .

Omniglot .

Daniels, Peter T. (2013). "The Arabic Writing system". In Owens, Jonathan (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Arabic Linguistics . Oxford University Press. p. 415.

Daniels, Peter T.

& Bright, William, eds. (1996).

The World's Writing Systems . OUP. p.

4 .

ISBN 978-0195079937 .

Ekhtiar, Maryam (2011).

Masterpieces from the Department of Islamic Art in the Metropolitan Museum of Art . New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 21.

ISBN 9781588394347 .

Lehmann, Reinhard G. (2011). " Ch 2 27-30-22-26. How Many Letters Needs an Alphabet? The Case of Semitic". In de Voogt, Alex & Quack, Joachim Friedrich (eds.).

The idea of writing: Writing across borders . Leiden: Brill. pp.

11– 52.

ISBN 978-9004215450 .

Lipiński, Edward (1994).

Studies in Aramaic Inscriptions and Onomastics II . Leuven, Belgium: Peeters Publishers. pp.

29– 30.

ISBN 9068316109 .

Lo, Lawrence (2012).

"Berber" . Archived from the original on 26 August 2017.

Wright, W. (1967).

A Grammar of the Arabic Language [ transl. from the German of Caspari ]. Vol. 1 (3rd ed.). CUP. p. 28.

ISBN 978-0521094559 .

External links [ edit ] The Science of Arabic Letters, Abjad and Geometry, by Jorge Lupin is dead v t e Writing systems Index of language articles Overview Language History of writing History of the alphabet Graphemes Scripts in Unicode Lists Writing systems Languages by writing system / by first written account Ancient languages corpuses by size Undeciphered writing systems Creators of writing systems Types Abjads Abugidas Alphabets Featural Ideogrammic Logographic Numeral Phonogrammic Pictographic Semi-syllabaries Shorthand Syllabaries Current examples Arabic Canadian syllabics Chinese Devanagari Hangul Kana Latin Mongolian Related topics In Africa In Southeast Asia v t e Types of writing systems Overview History of writing Grapheme Lists Writing systems undeciphered inventors constructed Languages by writing system / by first written accounts Types Abjads Numerals Aramaic Hatran Arabic Elifba Egyptian hieroglyphs Elymaic Hebrew Ashuri Cursive Rashi Solitreo Tifinagh Mandaic Manichaean Nabataean Ancient North Arabian Pahlavi Book Inscriptional Inscriptional Parthian Psalter Pegon Phoenician Paleo-Hebrew Pitman shorthand Proto-Sinaitic Punic Samaritan South Arabian Zabur Musnad Sogdian Syriac ʾEsṭrangēlā Serṭā Maḏnḥāyā Teeline Shorthand Ugaritic Abugidas Brahmic Northern Bengali–Assamese Bhaiksuki Brahmi script Devanagari Dogri Gujarati Gupta Gurmukhi Kaithi Kalinga Khema Khojki Khudabadi Laṇḍā Lepcha Mahajani Marchen Meitei Modi Multani Nagari Nandinagari Nepalese scripts Bhujimol Golmol Himmol Kummol Kvemmol Pachumol Pracalit Ranjana Tamyig Tirhuta Limbu Litumol Odia Karani ʼPhags-pa Sharada Siddhaṃ Soyombo Sylheti Nagri Takri Tibetan Uchen Umê Tocharian Zanabazar square Southern Ahom Balinese Batak Baybayin Bhattiprolu Buda Buhid Chakma Cham Fakkham Grantha Goykanadi Hanunoo Javanese Kadamba Kannada Karen Kawi Khmer Khom Thai Kulitan Lanna Langdi Lao Leke Lontara Bilang-bilang Makasar Malayalam Old Maldivian Dhives Akuru Eveyla Akuru Mon–Burmese Pallava Pyu Saurashtra Shan Sinhala Sukhothai Sundanese Old Sundanese Tagbanwa Tai Le New Tai Lue Tai Noi Tai Tham Tai Viet Lai Tay Tamil Tamil-Brahmi Tanchangya Telugu Thai Tigalari Ulu scripts Incung Lampung Lembak Ogan Pasemah Rejang Serawai Vatteluttu Kolezhuthu Malayanma Others Bharati Boyd's syllabic shorthand Canadian syllabics Blackfoot Déné syllabics Dham Fox I Geʽez Gunjala Gondi Japanese Braille Sarati Jenticha Kharosthi Mandombe Masaram Gondi Meroitic Miao Mwangwego Pahawh Hmong Sorang Sompeng Tengwar Thaana Thomas Natural Shorthand Warang Citi Mwangwego Rma Alphabets Linear Adlam Ariyaka Armenian Avestan Pazend Avoiuli Bassa Vah Carian Caucasian Albanian Cirth Coelbren Coorgi–Cox alphabet Coptic Cyrillic Serbian Early Deseret Duployan shorthand Chinook Eclectic shorthand Elbasan Enochian Etruscan Formosan Fox II Fraser Gabelsberger shorthand Gadabuursi Garay alphabet Georgian Asomtavruli Nuskhuri Mkhedruli Veso Bey Glagolitic Gothic Gregg shorthand Greek ( Archaic ) Greco-Iberian alphabet Hangul Hanifi Sunuwar Kaddare Kayah Li Klingon Latin Beneventan Blackletter Carolingian minuscule Fraktur Gaelic Insular IPA Kurrent Merovingian Sigla Sütterlin Tironian notes Visigothic Luo Lycian Lydian Manchu Medefaidrin Molodtsov Mru Mundari Bani N'Ko Ogham Ol Chiki Old Hungarian Old Italic Old Permic Orkhon Old Uyghur Mongolian Evenki Galik alphabet Manchu Oirat Vagindra Ol Onal Osage Osmanya Pau Cin Hau Phrygian Pisidian Runic Anglo-Saxon Cipher Dalecarlian Elder Futhark Younger Futhark Gothic Marcomannic Medieval Staveless Shavian Sidetic Sorang Sompeng Sunuwar Tifinagh Todhri Tolong Siki Vellara Visible Speech Vithkuqi Wancho Warang Citi Yezidi Zaghawa Non-linear Braille Maritime flags Telegraph code New York Point Flag semaphore Moon type Ideograms Adinkra Aztec Blissymbols Dongba Ersu Shaba Emoji Isotype Kaidā Miꞌkmaw Mixtec New Epoch Notation Painting Nsibidi Anishinaabewibii'iganan Olmec Siglas poveiras Testerian Yerkish Zapotec Logograms Chinese family of scripts Chinese characters Simplified Traditional Oracle bone script Bronze scripts Seal script large small bird-worm Hanja Kanji Chữ Nôm Sawndip Bowen Chinese-influenced Jurchen Khitan large script Sui Tangut Cuneiform Akkadian Assyrian Elamite Hittite Luwian Sumerian Other logosyllabic Anatolian Bagam Cretan Isthmian Maya Proto-Elamite Tenevil Yi (Classical) Logoconsonantal Demotic Hieratic Hieroglyphs Numerals Hindu-Arabic Abjad Attic (Greek) Muisca Roman Other Sitelen Pona Semi-syllabaries Full Linear Elamite Celtiberian Iberian Northeastern Southeastern Khom Dunging Redundant Espanca script Pahawh Hmong Khitan small script Southwest Paleohispanic Bopomofo Quốc Âm Tân Tự Sign languages ASLwrite SignWriting si5s Stokoe notation Syllabaries Afaka Bamum Bété Byblos Canadian Aboriginal Cherokee Cypriot Cypro-Minoan Ditema tsa Dinoko Eskayan Geba Great Lakes Algonquian Iban Idu Kana Hiragana Katakana Man'yōgana Hentaigana Sōgana Jindai moji Kikakui Kpelle Linear B Linear Elamite Lisu Loma Nüshu Nwagu Aneke script Old Persian cuneiform Sumerian Vai Woleai Yi Yugtun v t e Braille ⠃⠗⠁⠊⠇⠇⠑ Braille cell 1829 braille International uniformity ASCII braille Unicode braille patterns Braille scripts French-ordered Albanian Azerbaijani Cantonese Catalan Chinese (mainland Mandarin) (largely reassigned) Czech Dutch English ( Unified English ) Esperanto French German Ghanaian Guarani Hawaiian Hungarian Iñupiaq IPA Irish Italian Latvian Lithuanian Luxembourgish (extended to 8-dot) Maltese Māori Navajo Nigerian Philippine Polish Portuguese Romanian Samoan Slovak South African Spanish Taiwanese Mandarin (largely reassigned) Turkish Vietnamese Welsh Yugoslav Zambian Nordic family Estonian Faroese Icelandic Scandinavian Danish Finnish Greenlandic Northern Sámi Norwegian Swedish Russian lineage family i.e.

Cyrillic -mediated scripts Belarusian Bulgarian Kazakh Kyrgyz Mongolian Russian Tatar Ukrainian Egyptian lineage family i.e.

Arabic -mediated scripts Arabic Persian Urdu (Pakistan) Indian lineage family i.e.

Bharati Braille Devanagari (Hindi / Marathi / Nepali) Bengali (Bangla / Assamese) Gujarati Kannada Malayalam Odia Punjabi Sinhala Tamil Telugu Urdu (India) Other scripts Amharic Armenian Burmese Dzongkha (Bhutanese) Georgian Greek Hebrew Inuktitut (reassigned vowels) Khmer Thai and Lao (Japanese vowels) Tibetan Reordered Algerian Braille (obsolete) Frequency-based American Braille (obsolete) Independent Chinese semi-syllabaries Cantonese Mainland Chinese Mandarin Taiwanese Mandarin Two-cell Chinese (Shuangpin) Japanese Korean Eight-dot Luxembourgish Kanji Gardner–Salinas braille codes (GS8) Symbols in braille Braille music Canadian currency marks Computer Braille Code Gardner–Salinas braille codes (science; GS8/GS6) International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) Nemeth braille code Braille technology Braille e-book Braille embosser Braille translator Braille watch Mountbatten Brailler Optical braille recognition Perforation Perkins Brailler Refreshable braille display Slate and stylus Braigo People Louis Braille Charles Barbier Róża Czacka Valentin Haüy Harris Mowbray Thakur Vishva Narain Singh Sabriye Tenberken William Bell Wait Organisations Braille Institute of America Braille Without Borders Japan Braille Library National Braille Association Blindness organizations Schools for the blind American Printing House for the Blind Other tactile alphabets Decapoint Moon type New York Point Night writing Vibratese Related topics Accessible publishing Braille literacy RoboBraille NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐srv92
Cached time: 20250814215643
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.858 seconds
Real time usage: 1.043 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6423/1000000
Revision size: 25306/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 228360/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9015/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84860/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.527/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21962890/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  846.373      1 -total
 17.08%  144.575      1 Template:Reflist
 13.25%  112.148      5 Template:Lang
 10.24%   86.662     28 Template:Sfn
  9.70%   82.116      1 Template:OED
  8.40%   71.131      1 Template:Writing_systems
  8.35%   70.678      7 Template:Citation_needed
  8.16%   69.031      1 Template:Short_description
  7.87%   66.626      8 Template:Fix
  6.67%   56.464      1 Template:Verification Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:877:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215643 and revision id 1305635848. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abjad&oldid=1305635848 " Categories : Abjad writing systems Arabic orthography 1990s neologisms Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2022 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2023 Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles needing additional references from March 2024 Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from August 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 06:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abjad 72 languages Add topic

