Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Mother 2 Key ideas Toggle Key ideas subsection 2.1 Human nature 2.2 The four beginnings 2.3 Education 2.4 Destiny 2.5 Politics and economics 3 Influence 4 Mencius Institute 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mencius 74 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса བོད་ཡིག Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Sakizaya Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Confucian philosopher (c. 371 – c. 289 BC) This article is about the ancient Chinese philosopher. For the book, see Mencius (book) .

In this Chinese name , the family name is Meng .

Mencius As depicted in the album Half Portraits of the Great Sage and Virtuous Men of Old ( 至聖先賢半身像 ) – held by the National Palace Museum in Taipei Born Meng Ke c.

371 BC Zou , Zhou dynasty (modern Zoucheng , Shandong) Died c.

289 BC Zou, Zhou dynasty Philosophical work Era Ancient philosophy Region Chinese philosophy School Confucianism Main interests Ethics , social philosophy , political philosophy Notable ideas Right to revolution as an aspect of the Mandate of Heaven Goodness of human nature Chinese name Chinese 孟子 Literal meaning "Master Meng" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Mèngzǐ Bopomofo ㄇㄥˋ ㄗˇ Wade–Giles Mêng 4 -tzŭ 3 IPA [mə̂ŋ.tsɨ̀] Wu Romanization Man-tsy Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Maahngjí Jyutping maang6 zi2 IPA [maŋ˨.tsi˧˥] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Bēng-chú Tâi-lô Bīng-tsú Middle Chinese Middle Chinese Mæ̀ng-tzí Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) * mˤraŋ-s tsəʔ Birth name Chinese 孟軻 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Mèng Kē Bopomofo ㄇㄥˋ ㄎㄜ Wade–Giles Mêng 4 K‘o 1 IPA [mə̂ŋ kʰɤ́] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Maahng Ō Jyutping maang6 o1 IPA [maŋ˨ ɔ˥] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Bēng Kho Korean name Hangul 맹자 Hanja 孟子 Transcriptions Revised Romanization Maengja McCune–Reischauer Maengja Japanese name Kanji 孟子 Kana もうし Transcriptions Romanization Mōshi Part of a series on Confucianism Early history Spring and Autumn period Confucius Warring States period Mencius Xunzi Western Han Dong Zhongshu Gongsun Hong Fundamental concepts Tian Ganying Zhengming Xiao Sangang Wuchang Li Ren Xin Yi Schools Neo-Confucianism Han Learning Taigu school Lingnan Confucianism New Confucianism Progressive Confucianism Hermeneutic schools Old Text New Text Confucianism by country Korea Japan Vietnam Indonesia United States Confucian texts Ruzang Five Classics Classic of Poetry Book of Documents Book of Rites Book of Changes Spring and Autumn Annals Four Books Analects Mencius Doctrine of the Mean Great Learning Other texts Three Commentaries Rites of Zhou Ceremonial Rites Classic of Filial Piety Erya Organization Religious Confucianism Confucian ritual religion Confucian royal ancestral shrine Temple of Confucius Confucian churches and sects Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Shengdao Nanyang Confucian Association v t e Mencius [ a ] (孟子, Mèngzǐ , MEN -shee-əs ; c.

371 – c.

289 BC ) was a Chinese Confucian philosopher, often described as the Second Sage ( 亞聖 ) to reflect his traditional esteem relative to Confucius himself. He was part of Confucius's fourth generation of disciples, inheriting his ideology and developing it further.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Living during the Warring States period , he is said to have spent much of his life travelling around the states offering counsel to different rulers. Conversations with these rulers form the basis of the Mencius , which would later be canonised as a Confucian classic .

One primary principle of his work is that human nature is righteous and humane. The responses of citizens to the policies of rulers embodies this principle, and a state with righteous and humane policies will flourish by nature. The citizens, with freedom from good rule, will then allocate time to caring for their wives, brothers, elders, and children, and be educated with rites and naturally become better citizens. This placed him at odds with his near contemporary, Xunzi , who believed that human nature is evil by birth.

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Mencius was born Meng Ke in the state of Zou , in what is now Zoucheng , Shandong. He was an itinerant philosopher and sage, and one of the principal interpreters of Confucianism . He was supposedly a pupil of Confucius's grandson Zisi ( c.

481 – c.

402 BC ). Like Confucius, according to legend, he travelled throughout China for forty years to offer advice to rulers for reform.

[ 4 ] During the Warring States period ( c.

475 – 221 BC), Mencius served as an official and scholar at the Jixia Academy in the state of Qi from 319 to 312 BC. He expressed his filial piety when he took three years leave of absence from his official duties for Qi to mourn his mother's death. Disappointed at his failure to effect changes in his contemporary world, he retired from public life.

[ 5 ] It is written in Fengsu Tongyi by Ying Shao that King Hui of Liang appointed Mencius as a high official at some point after the capital of Wei was moved from Anyi to Daliang .

[ 6 ] Mencius was buried in the Cemetery of Mencius ( 孟子林 ; Mèngzi lín ), located 12 km (7.5 mi) to the northeast of Zoucheng's central urban area. A stele carried by a giant stone tortoise and crowned with dragons stands in front of his grave.

[ 7 ] Mother [ edit ] Mencius's mother is often held up as an exemplary female figure in Chinese culture. One of the most famous traditional chengyu is 孟母三遷 ( mèngmǔ sānqiān ; 'Mencius's mother moves three times'); this saying refers to the legend that Mencius's mother moved houses three times before finding a location that she felt was suitable for the child's upbringing. As an expression, the idiom refers to the importance of finding the proper environment for raising children.

Mencius's father Meng Ji ( 孟激 ) died when Mencius was very young. His mother Meng Mu ( 孟母 ; 'Mother of Meng'), born Zhang ( 仉 ), raised her son alone. They were very poor. At first they lived by a cemetery, where the mother found her son imitating the paid mourners in funeral processions. Therefore, the mother decided to move. The next house was near a market in the town. There the boy began to imitate the cries of butchers. So the mother moved to a house next to a school. Inspired by the scholars and students, Mencius began to study. His mother decided to remain, and Mencius became a scholar.

Another story further illustrates the emphasis that Mencius's mother placed on her son's education. As the story goes, once when Mencius was young, he was a truant. His mother responded to his apparent disregard for his education by taking up a pair of scissors and cutting the cloth she had been weaving in front of him. This was intended to illustrate that one cannot stop a task midway, and her example inspired Mencius to be diligent in his studies.

There is another legend about his mother and his wife, involving a time when his wife was at home alone and was discovered by Mencius not to be sitting properly. Mencius thought his wife had violated a rite, and demanded a divorce. His mother claimed that it was written in The Book of Rites that before a person entered a room, he should announce his imminent presence loudly to let others prepare for his arrival; as he had not done that in this case, the person who had violated the rite was Mencius himself. Eventually Mencius admitted his fault.

She is one of 125 women of which biographies have been included in the Biographies of Exemplary Women , written by Liu Xiang .

Key ideas [ edit ] Main article: Mencius (book) Mencius, from Myths and Legends of China (1922) by E. T. C. Werner Human nature [ edit ] Mencius expounds on the concept that the human is naturally righteous and humane. It is the influence of society that causes bad moral character . Mencius describes this in the context of educating rulers and citizens about the nature of man. "He who exerts his mind to the utmost knows his nature" [ 8 ] and "the way of learning is none other than finding the lost mind." [ 9 ] The four beginnings [ edit ] To show innate goodness, Mencius used the example of a child falling down a well.

Witnesses of this event immediately feel alarm and distress, not to gain friendship with the child's parents, nor to seek the praise of their neighbors and friends, nor because they dislike the reputation [of lack of humanity if they did not rescue the child]...

The feeling of commiseration definitely is the beginning of humanity;
the feeling of shame and dislike is the beginning of righteousness;
the feeling of deference and compliance is the beginning of propriety;
and the feeling of right or wrong is the beginning of wisdom.

Men have these Four Beginnings just as they have their four limbs. Having these Four Beginnings, but saying that they cannot develop them is to destroy themselves.

[ 10 ] Human nature has an innate tendency towards goodness, but moral rightness cannot be instructed down to the last detail. This is why merely external controls always fail in improving society. True improvement results from educational cultivation in favorable environments. Likewise, bad environments tend to corrupt the human will. This, however, is not proof of innate evil because a clear thinking person would avoid causing harm to others. This position of Mencius puts him between Confucians such as Xunzi , who thought people were innately bad, and Taoists who believed humans did not need cultivation, they just needed to accept their innate, natural, and effortless goodness. The four beginnings/sprouts could grow and develop, or they could fail. In this way Mencius synthesized integral parts of Taoism into Confucianism. Individual effort was needed to cultivate oneself, but one's natural tendencies were good to begin with. The object of education is the cultivation of benevolence ( ren ).

[ citation needed ] Education [ edit ] Painting of Mencius by Kanō Sansetsu (1632) According to Mencius, education must awaken the innate abilities of the human mind. He denounced memorization and advocated active interrogation of the text, saying "One who believes all in the Book of Documents would be better off without the Book" ( 盡信書，則不如無書 , from 孟子.盡心下 ). One should check for internal consistency by comparing sections and debate the probability of factual accounts by comparing them with experience.

[ citation needed ] Destiny [ edit ] Mencius also believed in the power of Destiny in shaping the roles of human beings in society. What is destined cannot be contrived by the human intellect or foreseen. Destiny is shown when a path arises that is both unforeseen and constructive. Destiny should not be confused with Fate. Mencius denied that Heaven would protect a person regardless of his actions, saying, "One who understands Destiny will not stand beneath a tottering wall". The proper path is one which is natural and unforced. This path must also be maintained because, "Unused pathways are covered with weeds." One who follows Destiny will live a long and successful life. One who rebels against Destiny will die before his time.

[ citation needed ] Politics and economics [ edit ] Mencius emphasized the significance of the common citizens in the state. While Confucianism generally regards rulers highly, he argued that it is acceptable for the subjects to overthrow or even kill a ruler who ignores the people's needs and rules harshly. This is because a ruler who does not rule justly is no longer a true ruler. Speaking of the overthrow of the wicked King Zhou of Shang , Mencius said, "I have merely heard of killing a villain Zhou, but I have not heard of murdering [him as] the ruler." [ 11 ] This saying should not be taken as an instigation to violence against authorities but as an application of Confucian philosophy to society. Confucianism requires a clarification of what may be reasonably expected in any given relationship. All relationships should be beneficial, but each has its own principle or inner logic. A ruler must justify his position by acting benevolently before he can expect reciprocation from the people. In this view, a king is like a steward. Although Confucius admired kings of great accomplishment, Mencius is clarifying the proper hierarchy of human society. Although a king has presumably higher status than a commoner, he is actually subordinate to the masses of people and the resources of society. Otherwise, there would be an implied disregard of the potential of human society heading into the future. One is significant only for what one gives, not for what one takes.

[ citation needed ] Mencius distinguished between superior men who recognize and follow the virtues of righteousness and benevolence and inferior men who do not. He suggested that superior men considered only righteousness, not benefits. That assumes "permanent property" to uphold common morality.

[ 12 ] To secure benefits for the disadvantaged and the aged, he advocated free trade , low tax rates , and a more equal sharing of the tax burden .

[ 13 ] In regards to the Confucian perspective of the marketplace, more about Confucius' thoughts from Mencius than from the philosopher himself are learned. The government should have a mostly hands-off approach regarding the marketplace.

[ 14 ] This was in part, to prevent state-run monopolies, however, it was also the state's responsibility to protect against future monopolies that might come into existence. Mencius also advocated for no taxes on imports; the market was to exchange for what you lacked so taxing merchants importing goods would ultimately hurt the villagers. The thought behind this is that people are inherently good and rational and can be trusted to regulate themselves, so price gouging or deception would not be an issue. Taxes on the property were acceptable and to be the only means by which the dukes and states would collect money. They did not need to collect much because taxes were only for supplemental funds.

[ 14 ] These taxes were also progressive, meaning the families that owned larger, more fertile pieces of land would pay more than the families with uniform land allotments. Scarcity is an issue in any market; however, Mencius emphasizes the reframing of the idea of a scarce resource.

[ 15 ] Instead of scarce, resources are to be seen as abundant. Resources are gained through work ethic not by any other means so there are no unfair competitions or gains. To preserve these natural resources, they needed to be used or harvested according to their cycles of growth or replenishing. In many cases, posterity has priority over profit.

[ 16 ] Influence [ edit ] A Yuan dynasty turtle with a stele honoring Mencius Mencius's interpretation of Confucianism has generally been considered the orthodox version by subsequent Chinese philosophers, especially by the Neo-Confucians of the Song dynasty . Mencius's disciples included a large number of feudal lords, and he is said to have been more influential than Confucius had been.

[ 17 ] The Mencius is one of the Four Books that Zhu Xi (1130–1200) grouped as the core of orthodox Neo-Confucian thought. In contrast to the sayings of Confucius, which are short and self-contained, the Mencius consists of long dialogues, including arguments, with extensive prose. It was generally neglected by the Jesuit missionaries who first translated the Confucian canon into Latin and other European languages, as they felt that the Neo-Confucian school largely consisted of Buddhist and Taoist contamination of Confucianism.

Matteo Ricci also particularly disliked what they had believed to be condemnation of celibacy as unfilial, which is rather a mistranslation of a similar word referring more to aspects of personality.

[ citation needed ] François Noël , who felt that Zhu's ideas represented a natural and native development of Confucius's thought, was the first to publish a full edition of the Mencius at Prague in 1711 [ 18 ] as the Chinese Rites controversy had been recently decided against the Jesuits ; however, his edition attained little influence outside central and eastern Europe.

Mencius Institute [ edit ] The first Mencius Institute (a research and educational academic institute in theoretical Confucianism) was established in Xuzhou , China , in 2008 under a collaboration between Jiangsu Normal University , China Zoucheng Heritage Tourism Bureau, and Xuzhou Mengshi Clan Friendship Network.

[ 19 ] First Mencius Institute outside of China is located at Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR) Kampar Campus, Malaysia in 2016.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] China portal Biography portal Philosophy portal Cheng Yi (philosopher) Lu Jiuyuan Wang Yangming Notes [ edit ] ^ Alternatively Mengzi , born Meng Ke .

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Mei, Yi Pao (1985). "Mencius", The New Encyclopedia Britannica , v. 8, p. 3.

^ Shun, Kwong Loi.

"Mencius" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 18 November 2017 .

^ Goldin, Paul R. (2018), "Xunzi" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2022-05-15 ^ Chan 1963: 49.

^ Jaroslav Průšek and Zbigniew Słupski, eds., Dictionary of Oriental Literatures: East Asia (Charles Tuttle, 1978): 115-116.

^ Ying, Shao. "孟轲". In Sturgeon, Donald (ed.).

風俗通義 [ Fengsu Tongyi ] (in Literary Chinese) (Digitised ed.). China: Chinese Text Project. Archived from the original on 14 October 2015 . Retrieved 14 July 2025 .

又絕糧於鄒、薛，困殆甚，退與萬章之徒序《詩》、《書》、仲尼之意，作書中、外十一篇，以為："聖王不作，諸侯恣行，處士橫議，楊朱、墨翟之言盈於天下。天下之言不歸楊，則歸墨。楊氏為我，是無君也；墨氏兼愛，是無父也。無父無君，是禽獸也。楊、墨之道不息，孔子之道不著，是邪說誣民，充塞仁義也。仁義充塞，則率獸食人，人將相食也。吾為此懼，閑先王之道，距楊、墨，放淫辭，正人心，熄邪說，以承三聖者。予豈好辯哉？予不得已也。"梁惠王復聘請之，以為上卿。 ^ 孟子林 Archived 2012-08-05 at archive.today (Mencius Cemetery) ^ The Mencius 7:A1 in Chan 1963: 78.

^ The Mencius 6:A11 in Chan 1963: 58.

^ The Mencius 2A:6 in Chan 1963: 65. Formatting has been applied to ease readability.

^ The Mencius 1B:8 in Chan 1963: 62.

^ Yagi, Kiichiro (2008). "China, economics in," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , v. 1, p. 778.

Abstract.

^ Hart, Michael H.

(1978), The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History , p. 480.

^ a b Chen, Huanzhang (1911).

The economic principles of Confucius and his school . Columbia University, Longmans, Green & Co., Agents; [etc., etc.] OCLC 492146426 .

^ Estate, The Arthur Waley (2012-11-12).

The Analects of Confucius .

doi : 10.4324/9780203715246 .

ISBN 9780203715246 .

^ Martin, Michael R. (1990-02-01).

"David L. Hall and Roger T. Ames, Thinking Through Confucius, State University of New York Press, 19137" .

Journal of Chinese Philosophy .

17 (4): 495– 503.

doi : 10.1163/15406253-01704005 .

ISSN 0301-8121 .

^ Charles O. Hucker, China to 1850: A Short History , Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1978, p. 45 ^ Noël (1711) .

^ a b "Proud addition to university" .

The Star . 12 August 2016.

Bibliography [ edit ] Chan, Alan K. L. (ed.), 2002, Mencius: Contexts and Interpretations , Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Chan, Wing-tsit (trans.), 1963, A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy , Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Graham, A.C., 1993, Disputers of the Tao: Philosophical Argument in Ancient China , Chicago:  Open Court Press.

ISBN 0-8126-9087-7 Mingyuan Hu (trans.), 2023, Virtue Politics: Mencius on Kingly Rule , London: Hermits United.

Ivanhoe, Philip J.

, 2002, Ethics in the Confucian Tradition: The Thought of Mencius and Wang Yangming , 2nd edition, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.

Liščák, Vladimir (2015), "François Noël and His Latin Translations of Confucian Classical Books Published in Prague in 1711" , Anthropologia Integra , vol. 6, pp.

45– 52 .

Liu Xiusheng; et al., eds. (2002), Essays on the Moral Philosophy of Mengzi , Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing .

Noël, François , ed. (1711), "Sinensis Imperii Liber Quartus Classicus Dictus Memcius, Sinicè Mem Tsu [The Fourth Classic Book of the Chinese Empire, Called the Mencius or, in Chinese, Mengzi]" , Sinensis Imperii Libri Classici Sex [ The Six Classic Books of the Chinese Empire ] , Prague: Charles-Ferdinand University Press, pp.

199–472 .

(in Latin) Nivison, David S.

, 1996, The Ways of Confucianism: Investigations in Chinese Philosophy , La Salle, Illinois: Open Court. (Includes a number of seminal essays on Mencius, including "Motivation and Moral Action in Mencius," "Two Roots or One?" and "On Translating Mencius.") Shun, Kwong-loi, 1997, Mencius and Early Chinese Thought , Stanford:  Stanford University Press.

Van Norden, Bryan W.

(trans.), 2008, Mengzi:  With Selections from Traditional Commentaries , Indianapolis:  Hackett Publishing.

Van Norden, Bryan W.

, 2007, Virtue Ethics and Consequentialism in Early Chinese Philosophy , New York:  Cambridge University Press. (Chapter 4 is on Mencius.) Wang, Robin R. (ed.), 2003, Images of Women in Chinese Thought and Culture: Writings from the Pre–Qin Period through the Song Dynasty , Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. (See the translation of the stories about Mencius's mother on pp. 150–155.) Yearley, Lee H., 1990, Mencius and Aquinas: Theories of Virtue and Conceptions of Courage , Albany: State University of New York Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mencius .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Mencius .

Wikisource has the text of the 1921 Collier's Encyclopedia article Mencius .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry Mengzi : Chinese text with English translation and links to Zhuxi 's commentary English translation by A. Charles Muller Annotated scholarly translation with Chinese text Article discussing the view of ethics of Mencius from The Philosopher Legge, James (1911).

"Mencius" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). pp.

112– 115.

Works by Mencius at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Mencius at the Internet Archive v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia 2 Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove 2 DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mencius&oldid=1303835374 " Categories : 370s BC births 280s BC deaths 4th-century BC Chinese people 4th-century BC Chinese philosophers 3rd-century BC Chinese people 3rd-century BC Chinese philosophers Chinese Confucianists Epistemologists Humanists Ontologists People from Jining Philosophers from Lu (state) Philosophers of culture Philosophers of education Philosophers of language Philosophers of law Philosophers of mind Chinese political philosophers Sinchang Maeng clan Social philosophers Zhou dynasty essayists Zhou dynasty philosophers 4th-century BC Confucianists 3rd-century BC Confucianists Hidden categories: CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 09:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mencius 74 languages Add topic

