Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Buddhist socialism 1.2 Christian socialism 1.3 Islamic socialism 1.4 Jewish socialism 2 References 3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Religious socialism 17 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of socialism based on religious values Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Religious socialism is a type of socialism based on religious values . Members of several major religions have found that their beliefs about human society fit with socialist principles and ideas. As a result, religious socialist movements have developed within these religions. Those movements include Buddhist socialism , Christian socialism , Islamic socialism , and Jewish socialism . According to the Encyclopedia Britannica Online , socialism is a "social and economic doctrine that calls for public rather than private ownership or control of property and natural resources. According to the socialist view, individuals do not live or work in isolation but live in cooperation with one another. Furthermore, everything that people produce is in some sense a social product, and everyone who contributes to the production of a good is entitled to a share in it. Society as a whole, therefore, should own or at least control property for the benefit of all its members. [...] Early Christian communities also practiced the sharing of goods and labour, a simple form of socialism subsequently followed in certain forms of monasticism. Several monastic orders continue these practices today".

[ 1 ] The teachings of Jesus are frequently described as socialist, especially by Christian socialists.

[ 2 ] Acts 4 ( Acts 4:35 ) records that in the early church in Jerusalem , "[n]o one claimed that any of their possessions was their own", although the pattern would later disappear from church history except within monasticism . Christian socialism was one of the founding threads of the British Labour Party and is claimed to begin with the uprising of Wat Tyler and John Ball in the 14th century CE.

[ 3 ] Abu Dharr al-Ghifari , a companion of Muhammad , is credited by multiple authors as a principal antecedent of Islamic socialism.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The Hutterites believed in strict adherence to biblical principles and church discipline, and practised a religious form of communism . In the words of historians Rod Janzen and Max Stanton , the Hutterites "established in their communities a rigorous system of Ordnungen, which were codes of rules and regulations that governed all aspects of life and ensured a unified perspective. As an economic system, Christian communism was attractive to many of the peasants who supported social revolution in sixteenth century central Europe", such as the German Peasants' War , and " Friedrich Engels thus came to view Anabaptists as proto-Communists ." [ 9 ] Overview [ edit ] Religious socialism was the early form of socialism and pre-Marxist communism . In Christian Europe , communists were believed to have adopted atheism . In Protestant England, communism was too close to the Roman Catholic communion rite ; hence socialist was the preferred term.

[ 10 ] Friedrich Engels argued that in 1848, when The Communist Manifesto was published, socialism was respectable in Europe while communism was not. The Owenites in England and the Fourierists in France were considered respectable socialists, while working-class movements that "proclaimed the necessity of total social change" denoted themselves communists . This branch of socialism produced the communist work of Étienne Cabet in France and Wilhelm Weitling in Germany.

[ 11 ] Some view the early Christian Church , as described in the Acts of the Apostles , as an early form of communism and religious socialism. The view is that communism was just Christianity in practice, and Jesus was the first communist.

[ 12 ] This link was highlighted in one of Karl Marx 's early writings, which stated that "[a]s Christ is the intermediary unto whom man unburdens all his divinity, all his religious bonds, so the state is the mediator unto which he transfers all his Godlessness, all his human liberty".

[ 12 ] Furthermore, Thomas Müntzer led a significant Anabaptist communist movement during the German Peasants' War which Engels analysed in The Peasant War in Germany . The Marxist ethos that aims for unity reflects the Christian universalist teaching that humankind is one and that there is only one god who does not discriminate among people.

[ 13 ] Pre-Marxist communism was also present in the attempts to establish communistic societies such as those made by the Essenes and the Judean desert sect.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] In the 16th century, English writer Thomas More , venerated in the Catholic Church as Saint Thomas More, portrayed a society based on common property ownership in his treatise Utopia , whose leaders administered it through reason.

[ 17 ] Several groupings in the English Civil War supported this idea, especially the Diggers , who espoused clear communistic yet agrarian ideals.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Oliver Cromwell and the Grandees' attitude to these groups was, at best, ambivalent and often hostile.

[ 21 ] Criticism of the idea of private property continued into the Enlightenment era of the 18th century through such thinkers as the profoundly religious Jean-Jacques Rousseau . Raised a Calvinist , Rousseau was influenced by the Jansenist movement within the Roman Catholic Church. The Jansenist movement originated from the most orthodox Roman Catholic bishops who tried to reform the Roman Catholic Church in the 17th century to stop secularization and Protestantism . One of the main Jansenist aims was democratizing to stop the aristocratic corruption at the top of the Church hierarchy.

[ 22 ] The participants of the Taiping Rebellion , who founded the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom , a syncretic Christian- Shenic theocratic kingdom, are viewed by the Chinese Communist Party as proto-communists.

[ 23 ] Buddhist socialism [ edit ] Main article: Buddhist socialism Buddhist socialism advocates socialism based on the principles of Buddhism . Both Buddhism and socialism seek to provide an end to suffering by analyzing its conditions and removing its leading causes through praxis . Both also seek to provide a transformation of personal consciousness (respectively, spiritual and political) to bring an end to human alienation and selfishness.

[ 24 ] People described as Buddhist socialists include Buddhadasa Bhikkhu , [ 25 ] B. R. Ambedkar , S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike , Han Yong-un , [ 26 ] Girō Senoo , [ 27 ] U Nu , Uchiyama Gudō [ 28 ] and Norodom Sihanouk .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Bhikkhu Buddhadasa coined the phrase "Dhammic socialism".

[ 25 ] He believed that socialism is a natural state, [ 31 ] meaning all things exist together in one system.

[ 31 ] Han Yong-un felt that equality was one of the main principles of Buddhism.

[ 26 ] In an interview published in 1931, Yong-un spoke of his desire to explore Buddhist socialism: "I am recently planning to write about Buddhist socialism. Just like there is Christian socialism as a system of ideas in Christianity, there must be also Buddhist socialism in Buddhism." [ 26 ] Tenzin Gyatso , the Fourteenth Dalai Lama of Tibet, stated that "[o]f all the modern economic theories, the economic system of Marxism is founded on moral principles, while capitalism is concerned only with gain and profitability. [...] The failure of the regime in the former Soviet Union was, for me, not the failure of Marxism but the failure of totalitarianism. For this reason I still think of myself as half-Marxist, half-Buddhist".

[ 32 ] Christian socialism [ edit ] Main article: Christian socialism Further information: Christian anarchism , Christian communism , Christian left , Liberation theology , and Social Gospel Some individuals and groups, past and present, are both Christian and socialist, such as Frederick Denison Maurice , author of The Kingdom of Christ (1838). Another example is the Christian Socialist Movement , affiliated with the British Labour Party .

Distributism is an economic philosophy formulated by such Catholic thinkers as G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc to apply the principles of social justice articulated by the Roman Catholic Church, especially in Pope Leo XIII 's encyclical Rerum novarum .

Various Catholic clerical parties have at times referred to themselves as Christian Social. Two examples are the Christian Social Party of Karl Lueger in Austria before and after World War I and the contemporary Christian Social Union in Bavaria . Nonetheless, these parties have never espoused socialist policies and have always stood on the conservative side of Christian democracy .

[ 33 ] Hugo Chávez of Venezuela was an advocate of a form of Christian socialism as he claimed that Jesus was a socialist.

[ citation needed ] Leo Tolstoy Christian anarchism is a Christian movement in political theology that combines anarchism and Christianity.

[ 34 ] The foundation of Christian anarchism is a rejection of violence, with Leo Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is Within You regarded as a key text.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Tolstoy sought to separate Russian Orthodox Christianity —which was merged with the state —from what he believed was the true message of Jesus as contained in the Gospels, specifically in the Sermon on the Mount . Tolstoy believed that all governments that wage war, and churches that support those governments, are an affront to the Christian principles of nonviolence and nonresistance . Although Tolstoy never actually used the term Christian anarchism in The Kingdom of God Is Within You , reviews of this book following its publication in 1894 appear to have coined the term.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Christian anarchist groups have included the Doukhobors , Catholic Worker Movement and the Brotherhood Church .

Christian communism is a form of religious communism based on Christianity. It is a theological and political theory based upon the view that the teachings of Jesus Christ compel Christians to support communism as the ideal social system . Although there is no universal agreement on the exact date when Christian communism was founded, many Christian communists assert that evidence from the Bible (in the Acts of the Apostles) [ 39 ] suggests that the first Christians, including the apostles , established their small communist society in the years following Jesus' death and resurrection.

[ 39 ] Many advocates of Christian communism argue that it was taught by Jesus and practised by the apostles.

[ 40 ] Some independent historians confirm it.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Islamic socialism [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Islamic socialism Islamic socialism incorporates Islamic principles into socialism. As a term, it was coined by various Muslim leaders to describe a more spiritual form of socialism. Scholars have highlighted the similarities between the Islamic economic system and socialist theory, as socialism and Islam are against unearned income . Muslim socialists believe that the teachings of the Quran and Muhammad —especially the zakat —are compatible with the principles of socialism. They draw inspiration from the early Medinan welfare state established by Muhammad. Muslim socialists found their roots in anti-imperialism . Muslim socialist leaders believe in the derivation of legitimacy from the public.

Islamic socialism is the political ideology of Libya's Muammar al-Gaddafi , former Iraqi president Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr , Syrian president Hafez al-Assad , and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto , the Pakistani leader of the Pakistan Peoples Party .

The Green Book , written by Gaddafi, consists of three parts, namely "The Solution of the Problem of Democracy: 'The Authority of the People'", "The Solution of the Economic Problem: 'Socialism'" and "The Social Basis of the Third Universal Theory". The book is controversial because it completely rejects modern conceptions of liberal democracy and encourages the institution of a form of direct democracy based on popular committees. Critics charge that Qaddafi uses these committees as tools of autocratic political repression in practice.

Jewish socialism [ edit ] Main article: Jewish left Further information: Labor Zionism The Jewish left consists of Jews who identify with, or support, left-wing or liberal causes consciously as Jews, either as individuals or through organizations, although there is no single organization or movement which constitutes the Jewish left. Jews have been major forces in the history of the labour movement , the settlement house movement, the women's rights movement, anti-racist and anti-colonialist work and anti-fascist and anti-capitalist organizations of many forms in Europe, the United States, Algeria, Iraq, Ethiopia, and modern-day Israel.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Jews have a rich history of involvement in anarchism , socialism , Marxism and Western liberalism. Although the expression "on the left" covers a range of politics, many well-known figures "on the left" have been Jews who were born into Jewish families and have various degrees of connection to Jewish communities, Jewish culture, Jewish tradition, or the Jewish religion in its many variants.

Labor Zionism or socialist Zionism [ 57 ] ( Hebrew : צִיּוֹנוּת סוֹצְיָאלִיסְטִית , translit.

Tziyonut sotzyalistit ; Hebrew : תְּנוּעָת הָעַבוֹדָה translit.

Tnu'at ha'avoda , i.e.

The labor movement ) is the left-wing of the Zionist movement. It was the most significant tendency among Zionists and Zionist organizations. It saw itself as the Zionist sector of Eastern and Central Europe's historic Jewish labour movements , eventually developing local units in most countries with sizable Jewish populations. Unlike the "political Zionist" tendency founded by Theodor Herzl and advocated by Chaim Weizmann , Labor Zionists did not believe that a Jewish state would be created simply by appealing to the international community or a powerful nation such as Britain, Germany or the Ottoman Empire. Instead, Labor Zionists believed that a Jewish state could only be created through the efforts of the Jewish working class settling in the Land of Israel and constructing a state through creating a progressive Jewish society with rural kibbutzim and moshavim and an urban Jewish proletariat.

[ citation needed ] Labor Zionism grew in size and influence and eclipsed "political Zionism" by the 1930s internationally and within the British Mandate of Palestine, where Labor Zionists predominated among many of the institutions of the pre-independence Jewish community Yishuv , particularly the trade union federation known as the Histadrut . The Haganah , the largest Zionist paramilitary defence force, was a Labor Zionist institution and was used on occasion (such as during the Hunting Season ) against right-wing political opponents or to assist the British Administration in capturing rival Jewish militants. Labor Zionists played a leading role in the 1948 Arab–Israeli War , and Labor Zionists were predominant among the leadership of the Israeli Defense Force for decades after the formation of the state of Israel in 1948.

[ citation needed ] Prominent theoreticians of the Labor Zionist movement included Moses Hess , Nachman Syrkin , Ber Borochov , and Aaron David Gordon , and leading figures in the movement included David Ben-Gurion , Golda Meir and Berl Katznelson .

References [ edit ] ^ Ball, Terence; Dagger, Richard; et al.

(30 April 2020).

"Socialism" .

Encyclopedia Britannica Online . Retrieved 15 September 2020.

^ The Gospels, by Terry Eagleton, 2007.

^ "Labour revives faith in Christian Socialism" . 21 May 1994.

^ Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World . New York: Oxford University Press. 1995. p.

19 .

ISBN 978-0-19-506613-5 .

OCLC 94030758 .

^ "Abu Dharr al-Ghifari" .

Oxford Islamic Studies Online . Archived from the original on 18 June 2013 . Retrieved 23 January 2010 .

^ And Once Again Abu Dharr . Retrieved 15 August 2011 .

^ Hanna, Sami A.; George H. Gardner (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Leiden: E.J. Brill. pp.

273– 74.

^ Hanna, Sami A. (1969).

"al-Takaful al-Ijtimai and Islamic Socialism" .

The Muslim World .

59 ( 3– 4): 275– 86.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-1913.1969.tb02639.x . Archived from the original on 13 September 2010.

^ Janzen, Rod; Stanton, Max (2010).

The Hutterites in North America (illustrated ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

p. 17 .

ISBN 9780801899256 .

^ Williams, Raymond (1976).

Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society . Fontana.

ISBN 978-0-00-633479-8 .

^ Engels, Frederick, Preface to the 1888 English Edition of the Communist Manifesto , p. 202. Penguin (2002).

^ a b Houlden, Leslie; Minard, Antone (2015).

Jesus in History, Legend, Scripture, and Tradition: A World Encyclopedia: A World Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. p. 357.

ISBN 9781610698047 .

^ Halfin, Igal (2000).

From Darkness to Light: Class, Consciousness, and Salvation in Revolutionary Russia . Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 46.

ISBN 0822957043 .

^ "Essenes" . Retrieved 12 December 2019 .

^ Kaufmann Kohler.

"ESSENES" .

^ Yosef Gorni; Iaácov Oved; Idit Paz (1987).

Communal Life: An International Perspective .

^ J. C. Davis (28 July 1983).

Utopia and the Ideal Society: A Study of English Utopian Writing 1516–1700 . Cambridge University Press. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-521-27551-4 .

^ Campbell, Heather M, ed. (2009).

The Britannica Guide to Political Science and Social Movements That Changed the Modern World . The Rosen Publishing Group. pp.

127–129 .

ISBN 978-1-61530-062-4 .

^ E.g. "That we may work in righteousness, and lay the Foundation of making the Earth a Common Treasury for All, both Rich and Poor, That every one that is born in the Land, may be fed by the Earth his Mother that brought him forth, according to the Reason that rules in the Creation. Not Inclosing any part into any particular hand, but all as one man, working together, and feeding together as Sons of one Father, members of one Family; not one Lording over another, but all looking upon each other, as equals in the Creation;" in The True Levellers Standard A D V A N C E D: or, The State of Community opened, and Presented to the Sons of Men ^ Peter Stearns; Cissie Fairchilds; Adele Lindenmeyr; Mary Jo Maynes; Roy Porter; Pamela radcliff; Guido Ruggiero, eds. (2001).

Encyclopedia of European Social History: From 1350 to 2000 – Volume 3 . Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 290.

ISBN 0-684-80577-4 .

^ Eduard Bernstein (1930).

Cromwell and Communism . Retrieved 12 December 2019 .

^ Daniel Roche (1993).

La France des Lumières .

^ Little, Daniel (17 May 2009).

"Marx and the Taipings" .

China Beat Archive . University of Nebraska–Lincoln. Retrieved 5 August 2020. "Mao and the Chinese Communists largely represented the Taiping rebellion as a proto-communist uprising." ^ Shields, James Mark; Liberation as Revolutionary Praxis: Rethinking Buddhist Materialism; Journal of Buddhist Ethics. Volume 20, 2013.

^ a b "What is Dhammic Socialism?" .

^ a b c Tikhonov, Vladimir, Han Yongun's Buddhist Socialism in the 1920s–1930s, International Journal of Buddhist Thought and Culture 6, 207–228 (2006).

PDF ^ Shields, James Mark; Blueprint for Buddhist Revolution The Radical Buddhism of Seno'o Girō (1889–1961) and the Youth League for Revitalizing Buddhism, Japanese Journal of religious Studies 39 (2), 331–351 (2012) PDF ^ Rambelli, Fabio (2013). Zen Anarchism: The Egalitarian Dharma of Uchiyama Gudō. Institute of Buddhist Studies and BDK America, Inc.

^ Cambodia Under the Khmer Rouge ^ Kershaw, Roger (4 January 2002).

Monarchy in South East Asia: The Faces of Tradition in Transition . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780203187845 – via Google Books.

^ a b Dhammic Socialism Political Thought of Buddhadasa Bhikku, Chulalangkorn Journal of Buddhist Studies 2 (1), page 118 (2003) PDF ^ "Dalai Lama Answers Questions on Various Topics" .

hhdl.dharmakara.net .

^ "Political Spectrum as seen by the Social Democratic Party of America" .

^ Christoyannopoulos, Alexandre (2010).

Christian Anarchism: A Political Commentary on the Gospel . Exeter: Imprint Academic. pp.

2– 4.

Locating Christian anarchism...In political theology ^ Christoyannopoulos, Alexandre (March 2010).

"A Christian Anarchist Critique of Violence: From Turning the Other Cheek to a Rejection of the State" (PDF) . Political Studies Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 August 2011.

^ Christoyannopoulos, Alexandre (2010).

Christian Anarchism: A Political Commentary on the Gospel . Exeter: Imprint Academic. pp. 19 and 208.

Leo Tolstoy ^ William Thomas Stead, ed. (1894).

The review of reviews, Volume 9, 1894, p.306 .

^ Mather & Crowther, ed. (1894).

The Speaker, Volume 9, 1894, p.254 .

^ a b Acts 2:44, 4:32–37; 5:1–12. Other verses are: Matthew 5:1–12, 6:24, Luke 3:11, 16:11, 2 Corinthians 8:13–15 and James 5:3.

^ This is the standpoint of the orthodox Marxist Kautsky, Karl (1953) [1908].

"IV.II. The Christian Idea of the Messiah. Jesus as a Rebel." .

Foundations of Christianity . Russell and Russell.

Christianity was the expression of class conflict in Antiquity.

^ Gustav Bang Crises in European History p. 24.

^ Lansford, Tom (2007).

"History of Communism" .

Communism. Political Systems of the World . Marshall Cavendish. pp.

24– 25.

ISBN 9780761426288 . Retrieved 16 May 2011 .

^ von Mises, Ludwig (1981) [1951].

"Christianity and Socialism" .

Socialism . New Heaven: Yale University Press. p. 424.

ISBN 9780913966624 . Retrieved 16 May 2011 .

^ "Rénan's Les Apôtres. Community life" .

The London Quarterly and Holborn Review, Volume 26 . London. 1866 [April and July]. p. 502 . Retrieved 10 May 2011 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Unterbrink, Daniel T. (2004).

"The Dead Sea Scrolls" .

Judas the Galilean . Lincoln: iUniverse. p. 92.

ISBN 0-595-77000-2 . Retrieved 10 May 2011 .

^ Guthrie, Donald (1992) [1975].

"3. Early Problems. 15. Early Christian Communism" .

The Apostles . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan. p.

46 .

ISBN 978-0-310-25421-8 .

^ Renan, Ernest (1869).

"VIII. First Persecution. Death of Stephen. Destruction of the First Church of Jerusalem" .

Origins of Christianity . Vol. II. The Apostles. New York: Carleton. p. 152.

^ Ehrhardt, Arnold (1969).

"St Peter and the Twelve" .

The Acts of the Apostles . Manchester: University of Manchester. The University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0719003820 .

^ Boer, Roland (2009).

"Conclusion: What If? Calvin and the Spirit of Revolution. Bible" .

Political Grace. The Revolutionary Theology of John Calvin . Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press. p. 120.

ISBN 978-0-664-23393-8 .

^ Halteman Finger, Reta (2007).

"Reactions to Style and Redaction Criticism" .

Of Widows and Meals. Communal Meals in the Book of Acts . Cambridge, UK: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. p. 39.

ISBN 978-0-8028-3053-1 .

^ Ellicott, Charles John; Plumptre, Edward Hayes (1910).

"III. The Church in Jerusalem. I. Christian Communism" .

The Acts of the Apostles . London: Cassell.

^ Montero, Roman A. (2017).

All Things in Common The Economic Practices of the Early Christians . Foster, Edgar G. Eugene: Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 9781532607912 .

OCLC 994706026 .

^ "The New Left." Jewish Virtual Library (2008); retrieved 6 June 2015.

^ "Henri Alleg, auteur de "La Question", est mort" .

Le Monde.fr . 18 July 2013 – via Le Monde.

^ Naeim Giladi , "The Jews of Iraq": "In many countries, including the United States and Iraq, Jews represented a large part of the Communist party. In Iraq, hundreds of Jews of the working intelligentsia occupied key positions in the hierarchy of the Communist and Socialist parties." ^ Hannah Borenstein, "Savior Story" : "The violence of the late 1970s and early 1980s Ethiopia spurred many forms of active and comprehensive resistance. Ethiopian Jews participated widely; many, for instance, were members of the Marxist-Leninist EPRP." ^ "Socialist Zionism" .

Jewish Virtual Library . Retrieved 19 August 2014 .

v t e Religion in politics General concepts Anti-clericalism Anti-clericalism and Freemasonry Caesaropapism Civil religion Clericalism Clerical fascism Confessionalism Constitutional references to God Divine law Divine rule Engaged Spirituality Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Freedom of religion Humanism Identity politics Organized secularism Political religion Religious anarchism Religious anti-Masonry Religious anti-Zionism Religious communism Religious humanism Religious law Religious nationalism Religious pacifism Religion and peacebuilding Religious police Religious rejection of politics Religious segregation Religious separatism Religious socialism Religious views on same-sex marriage Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Secular religion Separation of church and state Spiritual left State atheism State religion Theocracy Theonomy Christianity and politics Blaine Amendment Christian anarchism Christian anti-communism Christian anti-Masonry Papal ban Christian anti-Zionism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian democracy Christian egalitarianism Christian environmentalism Evangelical environmentalism Christian fascism German Christians (movement) National Catholicism Positive Christianity Protestant Reich Church Christian feminism Mormon feminism Christian humanism Christian law Christian left Evangelical left Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Christian pacifism Christian peacemaking Christian reconstructionism Christian republic Christian right Christian socialism In Utah Christian state Christian Zionism Cisalpinism Dominion Theology Febronianism Gallicanism Liberation theology Maronite politics Phoenicianism Papal state Pillarisation Political Catholicism Relations between the Catholic Church and the state In Argentina Sphere sovereignty Subsidiarity Temporal power Theodemocracy Ultramontanism Neo-ultramontanism Islam and politics Hui pan-nationalism Human Rights in Islam Imamate Islamic anarchism Islamic anti-Masonry Islamic anti-Zionism Islamic democracy Islamic fascism Islamic feminism Sharia law by country In Pakistan In South Asia Islamic pacifism Islamic republic Islamic socialism Islamic state Islamic Zionism Islamism Criticism Islamization Khilafat Petro-Islam Political quietism Taliban Talibanization Two-nation theory Judaism and politics Halachic state Jewish anarchism Jewish anti-Zionism Haredim Jewish Autonomism Jewish democracy Jewish fascism Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Jewish feminism Jewish law Jewish left Jewish pacifism Jewish political movements Jewish right Jewish secularism Jewish socialism Bundism Poale Zion Zionism Religious World Agudath Israel Hinduism and politics Akhand Bharat Hindu feminism Gandhism Hindu law Hindu modernism Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu Rashtra Panun Kashmir Bangabhumi Hindu revolution Hindu revivalism Hindu environmentalism Integral humanism Indigenous Aryans Rama Rajya Saffronisation Shuddhi Uniform civil code Buddhism and politics Buddhist anti-communism Buddhist feminism Buddhist law Buddhist modernism Buddhist nationalism 969 Movement Nichirenism Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist socialism Engaged Buddhism Humanistic Buddhism Secular Buddhism Other American civil religion Disestablishmentarianism Imperial cult Ancient Rome Gottgläubig Khalistan movement Neopaganist feminism Religious aspects of Nazism Cult of personality State Shinto v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Portals : Religion Socialism Further reading [ edit ] Stefan Arvidsson (2018).

The style and mythology of socialism: socialist idealism, 1871-1914.

Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge Stefan Arvidsson (2025).

Secularist, Religious and Scientistic Socialism: Red Faith I.

Routledge Boer, Roland (2007–2019).

The Criticism of Heaven and Earth.

Six volumes. Leiden och Chicago: E.J. Brill och Haymarket, Christoyannopoulos, Alexandre J.M.E. & Adams, Matthew S. (ed.) (2017-20).

Essays in anarchism and religion.

Three volumes. Stockholm: Stockholm University Press Crossley, James (2024).

A. L. Morton and the Radical Tradition.

Palgrave Studies in Utopianism Dorrien, Gary (2019).

Social democracy in the making: political and religious roots of European socialism.

New Haven, CT: Yale University Press Kirkpatrick, Graeme, McMylor, Peter & Fadaee, Simin (ed.) (2022).

Marxism, Religion, and Emancipatory Politics.

Cham: Palgrave Macmillan Kirsch, Anja & Rota, Andrea (2024). “Religion and utopia: a critical overview of the field”. Religion, vol. 54, no. 3 Stedman Jones, Gareth (2010). ‘Religion and the origins of socialism’, in Ira Katznelson and Gareth Stedman Jones, eds., Religion and the Political Imagination (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010) Julian Strube (2016).

Sozialismus, Katholizismus und Okkultismus im Frankreich des 19. Jahrhunderts: Die Genealogie der Schriften von Eliphas Lévi.

1 De Gruyter Tóth, Heléna & Weir, Todd (2020).

Religion and Socialism in the Long 1960s.

Special issue of Contemporary European History. Co-editor: 2020 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b499cfbc7‐kl8gg
Cached time: 20250815144052
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.932 seconds
Real time usage: 1.167 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3985/1000000
Revision size: 33116/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 231184/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3008/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 184985/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.580/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 29031851/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  916.214      1 -total
 38.23%  350.260      1 Template:Reflist
 20.07%  183.927     29 Template:Cite_book
 14.32%  131.159      1 Template:Socialism_sidebar
 14.06%  128.836      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.56%  105.933      2 Template:Langx
  8.54%   78.260      2 Template:Cite_news
  7.75%   70.998      1 Template:Short_description
  5.60%   51.288      3 Template:Cn
  4.87%   44.576      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2048291:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815144052 and revision id 1298272298. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religious_socialism&oldid=1298272298 " Categories : Religious socialism Political science terminology Religion and politics Socialism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 Use Oxford spelling from June 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Hebrew-language text This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 13:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religious socialism 17 languages Add topic

