Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Opposition Party 1.2 Radical Party 1.3 From Address Party to Liberal Party 1.4 From Extreme Left to Kossuth Party 1.5 Independence Party 1.6 From Independent Liberal Party to National Party 1.7 From Communal Democratic Party to Civic Democratic Party 1.8 Left Party 1.9 Countrywide Republican Party 1.10 Independence and 1848 Károlyi Party 1.11 Countrywide Civic Radical Party 1.12 Liberal Citizens' Party 1.13 From Independence Party of Smallholders, Agrarian Workers and Citizens to Civic Freedom Party 1.14 Alliance of Free Democrats 1.15 Momentum Movement 2 Liberal leaders 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism and radicalism in Hungary Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of liberalism and radicalism in Hungary This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism and radicalism in Hungary" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Laissez-faire Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism left Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism left-wing Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage women Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Alfonsín Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Bonino Bright Bryan Cartwright Castberg Clemenceau Cobbett Cobden Daladier Dewey Dilke Domergue Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Herriot Hobhouse Hunt Jefferson Lacombe La Follette Leclerc Lerroux Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Pannella Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Sacchi Saint-Just Servan-Schreiber Stevens Varlet Venizelos Videla Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Yrigoyen Zahle Groups Alfarista Radical Front Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance Independent Radicals Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Liberals, Democrats and Radicals National Radical Party Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain United States Radical Federative Movement Radical International Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Works Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1824) Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism and radicalism in Hungary . It is limited to liberal and radical parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having had a representation in parliament. Modern Hungarian liberalism mostly opposes Viktor Orbán 's government since 2010 and claims it to be undemocratic , quasi-democratic or hybrid .

From the start of liberalism in Hungary its program is combined with the struggle for independence from the Habsburg-rule and thus more autonomy in the country's affairs in relation with the Austrian Empire and later Austria-Hungary . The two realists groups, Deákists and Kossuthists, differ in their attitude towards the Habsburg rulers. Both groups had a conservative liberal or even conservative philosophy by the beginning of the 20th century.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] In the antebellum period, liberalism was very successful and led by the party of Károlyi, but after the communist revolution of 1919, and during the conservative regency, liberalism became limited to small city-based parties. After the 1988 end of communist rule, liberalism reconstituted itself in the Alliance of Free Democrats ( Szabad Demokraták Szövetsége , member LI , ELDR ), a center market liberal party. Originally also the Young Democrats chose a liberal profile, but soon they developed into a national-conservative party.

Opposition Party [ edit ] 1847: Liberal opposition led by Ferenc Deák and Lajos Kossuth formed the Opposition Party .

[ 2 ] 1849: The party is banned.

Radical Party [ edit ] 1849: Radical liberals formed the illegal Radical Party .

1868: The party joined with the new 1848 Party.

From Address Party to Liberal Party [ edit ] 1861: The moderate followers of Ferenc Deák formed the Address Party .

[ 3 ] 1866: After a compromise with the Austrian rulers, the party is reorganized into the conservative liberal Deák Party .

1875: The party merged with the conservative Left Centre into the conservative liberal Liberal Party .

1876: The liberal wing seceded as the Independent Liberal Party .

1899: The National Party joined the party.

1904: The National Party seceded from the party.

1906: The party was dissolved.

From Extreme Left to Kossuth Party [ edit ] 1867: Going back to the traditions of the Opposition, liberals formed the Independence and 1848 Party .

1868: The party united with the former radicals into the Independence and 1848 Party .

1874: A faction seceded and formed the Independence Party .

1884: The parties reunited into the Independence and 1848 Party .

1895: An agrarian faction formed the Independence and 1848 Party of Ug .

1904: The parties reunited.

1905: The National Party joined.

1908: A left-wing faction seceded as the Left Party.

1909: A conservative faction formed the 1848 Independence Kossuth Party .

1910: The Left Party rejoined the party.

1912: The radical Countrywide Republican Party seceded.

1913: The party merged with the 1848 Independence Kossuth Party into the United Independence and 1848 Party .

1916: The liberal wing seceded as the Independence and 1848 Károlyi Party .

1919: The party, now a conservative party, is renamed Independence and 1848 Party and in 1924, it was renamed the Kossuth Party . It was disbanded by 1945.

Independence Party [ edit ] 1874: A faction of the 1848 Party formed the Independence Party .

1884: The parties reunited into the Independence and 1848 Party .

From Independent Liberal Party to National Party [ edit ] 1876: The liberal wing of the Liberal Party formed the Independent Liberal Party .

1878: It joined the more conservative groups and the United Opposition was formed.

1881: The party is reorganised into the Moderate Opposition .

1891: The party is renamed National Party .

1899: It joined the Liberal Party .

1904: The party seceded from the Liberal Party .

1905: It joined the Independence and 1848 Party .

From Communal Democratic Party to Civic Democratic Party [ edit ] 1894: Budapest liberals formed the Civic Democratic Party .

1900: The party is reorganized into a national party and named Civic Democratic Party .

1918: The party split into the National Socialist Party and the Liberal Citizen's Party .

1919: The parties reunited into the National Democratic Party .

1926: The party merged with the FKFPP into the Independent National Democratic Party .

1928: The former FKPP secedes and the party is renamed National Democratic Party .

1942: The party was dissolved.

1944: The party is reorganized into the Civic Democratic Party .

1949: The PDP joined the left-wing non-Marxist Hungarian Radical Party .

Left Party [ edit ] 1908: A left-wing faction of the Independence and 1848 Party formed the Left Party .

1910: The party rejoined with the Independence and 1848 Party .

Countrywide Republican Party [ edit ] 1912: A radical faction of the Independence and 1848 Party formed the Countrywide Republican Party .

1913: The party is banned.

Independence and 1848 Károlyi Party [ edit ] 1916: The liberal wing of the United Independence and 1848 Party formed the Independence and 1848 Party , led by Mihály Károlyi .

1919: After a communist coup, the party is dissolved.

Countrywide Civic Radical Party [ edit ] 1916: Radical liberals formed the Countrywide Civic Radical Party .

1919: The party was dissolved.

Liberal Citizens' Party [ edit ] 1918: A faction of the Civic Democratic Party formed the Liberal Citizens' Party .

1919: The parties reunited into the National Democratic Party .

From Independence Party of Smallholders, Agrarian Workers and Citizens to Civic Freedom Party [ edit ] 1921: Károly Rassay formed, in an attempt to find liberal support outside the cities, the liberal Independence Party of Smallholders, Agrarian Workers and Citizens .

[ 4 ] 1926: The party merged into the Independent National Democratic Party .

1928: The party is reconstituted as the National Liberal Party .

1934: The party is renamed the Civic Freedom Party .

1944: The remnants of the party joined the Civic Democratic Party .

Alliance of Free Democrats [ edit ] 1988: Just before the collapse of the communist regime, the  liberal Alliance of Free Democrats party was formed.

2010: The Alliance of Free Democrats fell out of the Parliament , and split into several parties.

2013: Former SZDSZ members founded the Hungarian Liberal Party .

2020s: MLP became inactive and de facto merged into Democratic Coalition Momentum Movement [ edit ] 2015: The Momentum Movement has been founded.

2017: Momentum Movement became a party.

Liberal leaders [ edit ] 19th century: Lajos Kossuth , Ferenc Deák Alliance of Free Democrats: Árpád Göncz See also [ edit ] History of Hungary Politics of Hungary List of political parties in Hungary Politics in 19th-century Hungary References [ edit ] ^ "THE HUNGARIAN CRISIS" .

Advertiser . 1905-02-13 . Retrieved 2021-09-28 .

^ Travel, D. K. (2018-03-20).

DK Eyewitness Travel Guide Hungary . Penguin.

ISBN 978-1-4654-7672-2 .

^ "Ferenc Deák | Hungarian statesman" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-09-28 .

^ Thomas Lorman (2005).

The Domestic Politics of the Bethlen Government, 1921-1925 . London: ProQuest LLC. pp.

221– 235.

v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_and_radicalism_in_Hungary&oldid=1292340077 " Categories : Liberalism and radicalism by country Politics of Hungary Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 13:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism and radicalism in Hungary Add languages Add topic

