Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Definition 3 State obligations on the right to rest and leisure Toggle State obligations on the right to rest and leisure subsection 3.1 Respect, protect and fulfil 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Right to rest and leisure 7 languages Čeština Español Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Bahasa Melayu پښتو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic, social and cultural right This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Right to rest and leisure" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e The right to rest and leisure is the economic, social and cultural right to adequate time away from work and other societal responsibilities. It is linked to the right to work and historical movements for legal limitations on working hours . Today, the right to leisure and rest, including sleep and breaks , is recognised in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights , the Convention on the Rights of the Child , and in many regional texts such as the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child .

History [ edit ] The movement for a recognised right to rest, play and have leisure time. can be traced back to the 19th century and the eight-hour day movement. As early as 1856, stonemasons working at the University of Melbourne in Australia put down their tools until demands for reduced working hours were accepted. The ensuing guarantee of a maximum eight-hour workday is one of the earliest examples of legal protection against too much work, which today we recognise as the right to rest and leisure. The motto of the Australian Stonemasons in 1856 was as follows: [ 1 ] Eight hours to work, Eight hours to play, Eight hours to sleep, Eight bob a day. A fair day’s work, For a fair day’s pay.

Whilst Australia was one of the earliest countries to enjoy universal working hour limitations (an implied right to leisure), throughout the 20th century many other countries began to pass similar laws limiting the number of hours one can work.

Definition [ edit ] The modern notion of a right to rest and leisure is recognised in article 24 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which states: [ 2 ] Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with pay.

The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights recognises in part III, Article 7: [ 3 ] Rest, leisure and reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with pay, as well as remuneration for public holidays.

The Right to Leisure has also been recognised in article 31 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child , and article 12 of the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child , both recognising the: [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Right of the child to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities appropriate to the age of the child and to participate freely in cultural life and the arts.

The Right to Leisure is considered an economic, social and cultural right, as opposed to a civil and political right . The right to rest and leisure is connected to the right to work , which is provided for by Article 23 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and article 6.3 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights. Where the right to work provides a right to work, the right to rest and leisure protects individuals from too much work.

The Committee on Economic, Cultural, and Social Rights has made no general comment on article 7 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights. Therefore, there is no universal agreement on the specific obligations of states in relation to the right to rest and leisure, and "no common conception of these terms that may be formally assumed".

[ 5 ] Nonetheless, states do still have responsibilities in relation to the right to rest and leisure State obligations on the right to rest and leisure [ edit ] Despite the ambiguous language of article 24 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , States do have obligations and responsibilities in relation to the right to leisure. The body of texts published by the Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights has established that in relation to all rights, including the right to rest and leisure, States have an obligation to respect, protect and fulfil.

Respect, protect and fulfil [ edit ] The respect, protect and fulfil principle constitutes the core state obligation in relation to economic, cultural and social rights, including the right to leisure: [ 6 ] Governments and other duty bearers are under an obligation to respect, protect and fulfil human rights.

Based on the definition of respect, protect and fulfil principle outlined in the Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights ' general comment No. 14, [ 7 ] the obligation to respect requires States to refrain from interfering directly or indirectly with the enjoyment of the right to leisure. The obligation to protect requires States to take measures that prevent third parties from interfering with the right to leisure. Finally, the obligation to fulfil requires States to adopt appropriate legislative, administrative, budgetary, judicial, promotional and other measures towards the realisation and enjoyment of the right to leisure.

Therefore, states must not only respect and protect individuals from too much work, but must also fulfil the right, and ensure that individuals have the capacity to positively enjoy their right to leisure, and not simply be in the absence of too much work.

Criticism [ edit ] The right to rest and leisure, like many economic, social, and cultural rights (ESCR), has often been considered less important or fundamental than civil and political rights . Critiques of economic, social, and cultural rights such as Maurice Cranston and Aryeh Neier , or William Talbott's Which Rights Should be Universal , [ 8 ] often argue that ESCR are unnecessary for human dignity, are less fundamental than civil and political rights , are too expensive and impractical, and that some constituencies of humans are undeserving of ESCR.

[ 9 ] However, human rights scholars are increasingly embracing the concept of indivisibility and acknowledging that all human rights are fundamental.

[ 10 ] Defenders of the right to rest and leisure claim that it is of fundamental importance to well-being once basic security has been assured, and that leisure is "not an idle waste of time or mere absence from work, but, rather, necessary for a life of dignity".

[ 11 ] The right to rest and leisure is an emerging human right, and debates around its importance and implementability are likely to be ongoing.

See also [ edit ] Annual leave Critique of work Effects of overtime Four-day week Job strain Karoshi Labor rights Leisure Occupational burnout Occupational stress Overwork Paid time off Recreation Six-hour day Work–life balance References [ edit ] ^ corporateName=National Museum of Australia; address=Lawson Crescent, Acton Peninsula.

"National Museum of Australia - Eight-hour day" .

www.nma.gov.au . Retrieved 2020-02-28 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "OHCHR |" .

www.ohchr.org . Retrieved 2020-02-28 .

^ a b "International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession by General Assembly resolution 2200A (XXI) of 16 December 1966 entry into force 3 January 1976, in accordance with article 27" (PDF) . Retrieved 2020-02-28 .

^ "AFRICAN CHARTER ON THE RIGHTS AND WELFARE OF THE CHILD" (PDF) . Retrieved 2020-02-28 .

^ David Richards and Benjamin Carbonetti, “Worth what we decide: a defense of the right to Leisure,” International Journal of Human Rights, vo. 17, no. 3, (2013): 331.

^ "Human Rights" (PDF) . Retrieved 2020-02-28 .

^ "CESCR General Comment No. 14: The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health (Art. 12)" (PDF) . Retrieved 2020-02-28 .

^ William Talbott, Which Rights Should be Universal. Oxford. Oxford University Press. 2005 ^ David Richards and Benjamin Carbonetti, “Worth what we decide: a defense of the right to
Leisure,” International Journal of Human Rights, vo. 17, no. 3, (2013): 331.

^ Richard McGrath, Janette Young, and Caroline Adams, ‘leisure as a human right special edition introduction,’ Annals of Leisure Research, vol. 20, no. 3, (2017): p. 314.

^ David Richards and Benjamin Carbonetti, “Worth what we decide: a defense of the right to
Leisure,” International Journal of Human Rights, vo. 17, no. 3, (2013): 334.

v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e Critique of work Historical persons Abbie Hoffman Edward Bellamy Alfredo M. Bonanno André Gorz Bob Black Günther Anders Guy Debord Heinrich Böll Ivan Illich Mikhail Bakunin Paul Lafargue Walter Benjamin Antonio Negri Bertrand Russell Friedrich Nietzsche Henry David Thoreau Herbert Marcuse Jerry Rubin Josef Pieper Karl Marx Max Stirner Max Weber Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Raoul Vaneigem Renzo Novatore Zo d'Axa Contemporary persons Franco Berardi L. Susan Brown Madeleine Bunting David Graeber Michael Hardt Maurizio Lazzarato Claus Peter Ortlieb Roland Paulsen Jeremy Rifkin Penelope Rosemont Mark Slouka Nick Srnicek Claire Wolfe John Zerzan Terminology and related topics 996 working hour system Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy Autonomism Bare minimum Monday Bullshit job Career catfishing Coffee badging Corporatocracy Conscious quitting Cycle of poverty Dolce far niente Effects of overtime Eight-hour day Employee ghosting Extermination through labour Career cushioning Careerism Flextime Forced labour Four-day workweek Funemployment Ghost job Uberisation / Gig worker Glass cliff Happiness economics Honeymoon-hangover effect Hush trip Infinite workday Job crafting Job cuffing Jobless employed Karoshi Loud quitting Neijuan Microretirement Occupational burnout Occupational safety and health Occupational stress Orange S.A. suicides Overwork Performance punishment Post-work society Precariat Presenteeism Digital presenteeism Productivity theater Professional abuse Protestant work ethic Psychological safety Quick quitting Quiet hiring Quiet promotion Quiet quitting Quiet thriving Lazy girl job Rage applying Refusal of work Resenteeism Right to rest and leisure Sampo generation Sunday scaries Six-hour day Tang ping Technological unemployment Toxic workplace Narcissism Psychopathy Wage slavery Work ethic Workaholic Working poor Work–life interface Theater, movies, music and art À Nous la Liberté Office Space Swedish Public Freedom Service " Take This Job and Shove It " The Future of Work and Death The Main Thing Is Work!

The Working Class Goes to Heaven Yama—Attack to Attack Literature Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Bartleby, the Scrivener Bonjour paresse Bullshit Jobs The Conquest of Bread Critique of Economic Reason Fight Club Future Primitive and Other Essays In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays Inventing the Future Manifesto Against Work New Escapologist On the Poverty of Student Life The Society of the Spectacle Steal This Book The Abolition of Work The End of Work The Human Use of Human Beings The Idler The Revolution of Everyday Life The Right to Be Lazy The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy Communities R/antiwork CrimethInc.

Situationist International See also Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Job strain NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐lwncg
Cached time: 20250817011927
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.379 seconds
Real time usage: 0.496 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1417/1000000
Revision size: 9216/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 64340/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2294/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53435/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.230/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6086021/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  406.174      1 -total
 27.05%  109.881      1 Template:Reflist
 23.56%   95.709      6 Template:Cite_web
 20.06%   81.470      1 Template:Rights
 19.38%   78.733      1 Template:Sidebar
 16.87%   68.537      1 Template:Short_description
 15.46%   62.808      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 14.97%   60.797      1 Template:Ambox
  9.82%   39.901      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.62%   35.015      1 Template:Substantive_human_rights Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:62189068:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817011927 and revision id 1285440840. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_rest_and_leisure&oldid=1285440840 " Categories : Human rights by issue Leisure studies Work–life balance Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from August 2021 Articles needing additional references from October 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 13 April 2025, at 18:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right to rest and leisure 7 languages Add topic

