Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 National Biodiversity Assessments 3 Physical oceanography Toggle Physical oceanography subsection 3.1 Continental shelf 3.2 Ocean currents 3.3 Upwellings 4 Ecological regions Toggle Ecological regions subsection 4.1 Habitat types 5 Endemism 6 Species lists Toggle Species lists subsection 6.1 National 6.2 Regional 7 Economic value 8 Protection 9 Threats 10 Research organisations 11 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 11.1 Books 11.2 Journals 11.3 Reports 12 See also 13 References Toggle the table of contents Marine biodiversity of South Africa Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Variety of living organisms that live in the seas off the coasts of South Africa Coelacanth off Pumula on the KwaZulu-Natal South Coast, South Africa, on 22 November 2019 Kelps Laminaria pallida (top) and Ecklonia maxima (below) The Marine biodiversity of South Africa is the variety of living organisms that live in the seas off the coast of South Africa . It includes genetic , species and ecosystems biodiversity in a range of habitats spread over a range of ecologically varied regions, influenced by the geomorphology of the seabed and circulation of major and local water masses , which distribute both living organisms and nutrients in complex and time-variable patterns.

South Africa has a wide range of marine diversity with coastline in three oceans, two major current systems, major ocean frontal systems and benthic topography extending to a maximum depth of 5 700 m. There are 179 defined marine ecosystem types, 150 of them around South Africa and 29 around the sub-Antarctic territory of the Prince Edward Islands.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Research on biodiversity of South African waters started in the colonial period from the late 18th century to the late 19th century, with shipboard survey and collection expeditions, like the Challenger , Deutsche Tiefsee and Discovery expeditions. From the early 20th century to the 1970s a group of local marine taxonomists such as J.D.F. Gilchrist and K.H. Barnard , described most of the common fauna on a morphological basis, and after 1970 marine research shifted to ecological aspects and taxonomy was largely neglected. This has left the region with a shortage of taxonomic expertise in comparison with most of the developed world.

[ 2 ] : 21 The SeaKeys project was started in 2014 to help develop foundational marine biodiversity knowledge by addressing some of the more significant gaps. The project had some success in collating species checklists and records, and national 
inventories covering over 9700 species in various groups were compiled. Data sets were digitised, distribution data updated for fish and benthic invertebrates, and a guide to offshore marine invertebrates was published. This project highlighted the deficit in taxonomic skills, as it became apparent that most of the guides and lists had not changed much since the 1970s.

[ 2 ] : 22 National Biodiversity Assessments [ edit ] The National Biodiversity Assessment (NBA) is recurring project by the South African National Biodiversity Institute in collaboration with the Department of Environmental Affairs and several other organisations to assess the state of South Africa's biodiversity over time as an input for policy and decision making where the environment may be affected. The NBA looks into genetic, species and ecosystems biodiversity for terrestrial, freshwater, estuarine and marine environments. Each assessment cycle takes approximately five years, and both generates new knowledge and analyses existing knowledge.

[ 3 ] NBA reports are named for the year of the data, and are usually published in the following year. They have been published for 2004, [ 4 ] 2011, [ 5 ] and 2018, [ 2 ] and include reports, data, and supplementary documents.

[ 6 ] Physical oceanography [ edit ] Main article: Physical oceanography Physical oceanography is the sub-domain of oceanography which focuses on the study of physical conditions and processes within the ocean, including the physical properties and circulation of ocean waters. These matters influence the biodiversity by providing the setting in which the ecology and biodiversity evolve.

The physical setting for the biodiversity of the South African coastal and offshore waters is mainly temperate continental shelf, slope and abyss in the South Atlantic and South-west Indian Oceans off the southern part of the continent of Africa. The geomorphology of this region has local effects on the ocean circulation, particularly effects on ocean currents and upwellings, which in turn affect the distribution of organisms and the environment in which they live.

This section needs expansion with: Continental shelf , slope, abyss, seamounts, Agulhas plateau, tectonics, currents, upwellings etc. You can help by adding to it .

( February 2019 ) Continental shelf [ edit ] The continental shelf of southern Africa varies considerably in width along the coast, and the shelf edge also varies in depth. To the north-east the shelf is narrow to very narrow, with a relatively shallow break, but it is much wider over the Agulhas Bank off the southern tip of the continent. This gradual increase in width affects the path of the powerful Agulhas Current , pushing it further offshore towards the Southern Ocean .

Ocean currents [ edit ] Eddies of the Agulhas Current meander past the Agulhas Bank leaking warm and salty water into the South Atlantic before retroflecting back into the Indian Ocean Mean chlorophyll-a concentration map of the oceans surrounding Southern Africa for 2009. Note the high productivity water in the Agulhas Retroflection and the very high concentrations along the west coast, due to the upwelling of mineral rich water from the cold depths the South Atlantic Ocean, forming the Benguela Current.

Benguela Current in the South Atlantic Gyre See also: Agulhas Current and Benguela Current The Agulhas Current is the western boundary current of the southwest Indian Ocean. It flows south along the African east coast and along the south-eastern edge of the bank. It then retroflects back into the Indian7 Ocean south-west of the bank. This retroflection results in intense eddy activities such as meanders, eddies, and filaments.

[ 7 ] In upper layer water, the Agulhas rings and eddies move warm and salty water into the large South Atlantic gyre , which exports it to the tropics. In the lower ocean layers water is transported in the opposite direction.

[ 8 ] The Agulhas acts as an oceanic convergence zone . Due to mass continuity this drives surface waters down, resulting in the upwelling of cold, nutrient rich water south of the current. Additionally, the convergence tends to increase the concentration of plankton in and around the Agulhas. Both of these factors result in the area being one of enhanced primary productivity as compared to the surrounding waters. This is especially notable in the Agulhas Retroflection waters, where chlorophyll-a concentrations tend to be significantly higher than the surrounding South Indian Ocean and South Atlantic Ocean waters.

[ 9 ] Warm core rings are known to have lower primary productivity than surrounding cold waters. Agulhas Rings have been observed to carry waters with low chlorophyll-a concentration into the South Atlantic . The size of phytoplankton in Agulhas Rings tends to be smaller than in the surrounding water (around 20 μm in diameter).

[ 9 ] Agulhas Rings have also been observed as removing larval and juvenile fish from the continental shelf.

The Benguela Current is the broad, northward flowing ocean current that forms the eastern portion of the South Atlantic Ocean gyre . The current extends from roughly Cape Point in the south, to the position of the Angola-Benguela front in the north, at around 16°S. The current is driven by the prevailing south easterly trade winds. Inshore of the Benguela Current proper, the south easterly winds drive coastal upwelling , forming the Benguela Upwelling System . The cold, nutrient rich waters that upwell from around 200–300 m depth in turn fuel high rates of phytoplankton growth, and sustain the productive Benguela ecosystem.

Upwellings [ edit ] Main article: Upwelling If the wind blows parallel to the coast with sea to the left in the southern hemisphere (such as along the west coast of South Africa), then Ekman transport can produce a net offshore movement of surface water. This may result in coastal upwelling.

Upwelling is an oceanographic phenomenon that involves wind -driven motion of surface water away from the coast, which is replaced by a flow of deeper dense, cooler, and usually nutrient -rich water towards the ocean surface, The nutrient-rich upwelled water stimulates the growth and reproduction of primary producers such as phytoplankton . Due to the biomass of phytoplankton and presence of cool water in these regions, upwelling zones can be identified by cool sea surface temperatures (SST) and high concentrations of chlorophyll-a .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The increased availability of nutrients in upwelling regions results in high levels of primary production . Upwellings that are driven by coastal currents or diverging open ocean have the greatest impact on nutrient-enriched waters and global fishery yields.

[ 12 ] [ 9 ] This section needs expansion with: specific relevance of upwellings to biodiversty in the region. You can help by adding to it .

( November 2020 ) Ecological regions [ edit ] Main article: Marine ecoregions of the South African exclusive economic zone Marine ecoregions of the South African Exclusive Economic Zone (redefined 2011) The marine ecoregions of the South African exclusive economic zone are a set of geographically delineated regions of similar ecological characteristics on a fairly broad scale, covering the exclusive economic zone along the South African coast. There were originally five inshore bioregions over the continental shelf and four offshore bioregions covering the continental slope and abyssal regions. These bioregions are used for conservation research and planning. They were defined in the South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment of 2004.

[ 4 ] The South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment of 2011 amended this to reduce the number of regions to four inshore and two offshore and rename them as ecoregions.

[ 5 ] Habitat types [ edit ] See also: Marine ecoregions of the South African exclusive economic zone § Habitat types A total of 136 marine habitat types have been identified. These include 37 coastal habitat types, 17 inshore habitat types in the 5 to 30 m depth range, 62 offshore benthic habitat types deeper than 30 m, and 16 offshore pelagic habitat types, [ 13 ] three types of island and one type of lagoon.

[ 5 ] Endemism [ edit ] See also: Endemism Endemism is the ecological state of a species or other taxonomic group being native to a single defined geographic location, such as an island, country or other defined zone, or habitat type; organisms that are indigenous to a place are not endemic to it if they are also found elsewhere. The extreme opposite of an endemic species is one with a cosmopolitan distribution , having a global or widespread range. Although the specific drivers of endemism are unclear, physical, climatic and biological factors can contribute to endemism. Endemic species can easily become endangered or extinct if their already restricted habitat changes, particularly—but not only—due to human actions, including the introduction of new species.

Over 13000 species of marine organisms are recorded from South African waters. Endemism is estimated at between 26 and 33%, the third highest marine endemism after New Zealand (51%) and Antarctica (45%). This varies between taxonomic groups from no endemic marine mammals or birds, to over 90% of chitons .

[ 2 ] : 20 The region of highest known endemism is the south coast Agulhas inshore ecoregion, which is relatively far from the national borders, and relatively isolated from large scale oceanic circulation due to the effects of the widening of the continental shelf at the Agulhas Bank on the path of the Agulhas current, and far from other warm temperate regions. This region is largely bypassed by the Agulhas current, and has cooler inshore water due to upwelling, making it less hospitable to tropical Indo-west Pacific species. It is also isolated from the South Atlantic and Southern Ocean, so has been more prone to niche speciation.

[ 2 ] : 20 This section needs expansion with: Distribution of South African and southern African endemic marine organisms. You can help by adding to it .

( August 2020 ) Species lists [ edit ] National [ edit ] Marine animals List of comb jellies of South Africa List of echinoderms of South Africa List of marine and coastal birds of South Africa List of marine arthropods of South Africa List of marine crustaceans of South Africa List of sea spiders of South Africa List of marine bristleworms of South Africa List of marine bryozoans of South Africa List of marine cnidarians of South Africa List of marine fishes of South Africa List of marine bony fishes of South Africa List of marine spiny-finned fishes of South Africa List of marine Perciform fishes of South Africa List of marine fishes of the suborder Percoidei of South Africa List of marine flatworms of South Africa List of marine mammals of South Africa List of marine molluscs of South Africa List of marine gastropods of South Africa List of marine heterobranch gastropods of South Africa List of marine reptiles of South Africa List of sponges of South Africa Seaweeds List of green seaweeds of South Africa List of brown seaweeds of South Africa List of red seaweeds of South Africa Prokaryotes This section needs expansion with: other missing lists. You can help by adding to it .

( November 2020 ) Regional [ edit ] List of marine animals of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay Seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of green seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of brown seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of red seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay Economic value [ edit ] This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( May 2021 ) Protection [ edit ] Main article: Marine protected areas of South Africa Biodiversity protection is one of the priorities of the network of marine protected areas of South Africa.

[ 14 ] A marine protected area of South Africa is an area of coastline or ocean within the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of the Republic of South Africa that is protected in terms of specific legislation for the benefit of the environment and the people who live in it and use it.

[ 15 ] An MPA is a place where marine life can thrive under less pressure than unprotected areas, like underwater parks, and this healthy environment can benefit neighbouring areas.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] There are a total of 45 marine protected areas in the South African EEZ, with a total area of 5% of the waters as of 2019. The target was to have 10% of the oceanic waters protected by 2020. All but one of the MPAs are in the exclusive economic zone off continental South Africa, and one is off Prince Edward Island in the Southern Ocean .

People can take part in a wide range of non-consumptive activities in all of South Africa's MPAs, and some parts of some MPAs are zoned for limited consumptive activities.

[ 17 ] Some of these activities require a permit, which is a form of taxation.

Threats [ edit ] See also: Marine ecoregions of the South African exclusive economic zone § Threats This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2020 ) Research organisations [ edit ] Council for Scientific and Industrial Research ( CSIR ) – South African scientific research and development organisation Iziko South African Museum – South African national museum in Cape Town South African Association for Marine Biological Research – Non profit conservation research organisation based in Durban, SA South African Environmental Observation Network ( SAEON ) – A network to perform long-term ecological research in South Africa and surrounding waters South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity ( SAIAB ) – Centre for the study of aquatic biodiversity in Grahamstown, South Africa South African National Biodiversity Institute ( SANBI ) – Institution under the South African Department of Environmental Affairs Publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Field guides: Lara Atkinson; Kerry Sink (2018). Atkinson, LJ; Sink, KJ (eds.).

Field Guide to the Offshore Marine Invertebrates of South Africa (PDF) . Pretoria: Malachite Marketing and Media.

doi : 10.15493/SAEON.PUB.10000001 .

Branch, G.M.; Branch, M.L. (1985).

The Living Shores of Southern Africa (3rd impression ed.). Cape Town: C. Struik.

ISBN 0-86977-115-9 .

Branch, G.M.; Branch, M.L.; Griffiths, C.L.; Beckley, L.E. (2010).

Two Oceans: a guide to the marine life of southern Africa (2nd ed.). Cape Town: Struik Nature.

ISBN 978-1-77007-772-0 .

Day, J.H. (1969).

A guide to marine life on South African shores . Cape Town: Balkema.

De Clerck, O.; Bolton, J.J.; Anderson, R. J.; Coppejans, E. (2005).

Guide to the Seaweeds of KwazZulu-Natal . Scripta Botanica Belgica Volume 33. Joint publication of: National Botanical gardens of Belgium, VLIZ Flanders Marine Institute and Flemish Community.

ISBN 90-72619-64-1 .

Gosliner, T.M. (1987).

Nudibranchs of Southern Africa .

ISBN 0-930118-13-8 .

Jones, Georgina (2008).

A field guide to the marine animals of the Cape Peninsula . Cape Town: SURG.

ISBN 978-0-620-41639-9 .

Heemstra, Phil; Heemstra, Elaine (2004).

Coastal Fishes of Southern Africa . NISC/SAIAB.

ISBN 1920033017 .

Kilburn, R.; Rippey, E. (1982).

Sea Shells of Southern Africa . Macmillan.

ISBN 0-86954-094-7 .

King, Dennis (1996).

Reef fishes and corals: East coast of southern Africa . Cape Town: Struik.

ISBN 1-86825-981-1 .

King, D.; Fraser, V. (2001).

More Reef Fishes and Nudibranchs . Cape Town: Struik.

ISBN 1-86872-686-X .

King, Dennis; Fraser, Valda (2014).

The Reef Guide: East and South Coasts of Southern Africa . Cape Town: Struik Nature.

ISBN 9781775840183 .

Liltved, William Rune (2000).

Cowries and their relatives of southern Africa: A study of the southern African Cypraeacean and Velutinacean gatropod fauna (2nd ed.). Gordon Verhoef, Seacomber Publications.

ISBN 0908-42089-7 .

Smith, Margaret M; Heemstra, P., eds. (2003).

Smith's sea fishes . Cape Town: Struik.

ISBN 1-86872-890-0 .

Smith, J.L.B.; Smith, Margaret M. (1966).

Fishes of the Tsitsikamma Coastal National Park . Johannesburg: Swan Press.

Stegenga, H.; Bolton, J.J.; Anderson, R.J. (1997).

Seaweeds of the South African West Coast . Contributions from the Bolus Herbarium, University of Cape Town.

ISBN 0-7992-1793-X .

Steyn, D.G.; Lussi, M. (2005).

Offshore Shells of Southern Africa .

ISBN 0-620-33607-2 .

Zsilavecz, Guido (2005).

Coastal fishes of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay: A divers' identification guide . Cape Town: SURG.

ISBN 0-620-34230-7 .

Zsilavecz, G. (2007).

Nudibranchs of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay . Cape Town: SURG.

ISBN 978-0-620-38054-6 .

Journals [ edit ] Annals of the South African Museum Reports [ edit ] South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004 Summary Report Driver, A., Maze, K., Lombard, A.T., Nel, J., Rouget, M., Turpie, J.K., Cowling, R.M., Desmet, P., Goodman, P., Harris, J., Jonas, Z., Reyers, B., Sink, K. & Strauss, T. 2004. South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004: Summary Report. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

Technical Reports Volume 3: Estuary Component Turpie, J.K. 2004. South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004: Technical Report. Volume 3: Estuary Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

Volume 4: Marine Component Lombard, A.T.; Strauss, T.; Harris, J.; Sink, K.; Attwood, C.; Hutchings, L. (2004).

South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004: Technical Report (PDF) (Report). Vol. 4: Marine Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

National Biodiversity Assessment 2011 Volume 4: Marine and coastal component Sink, K; Holness, S; Harris, L; Majiedt, P; Atkinson, L; Robinson, T; Kirkman, S; Hutchings, L; Leslie, R; Lamberth, S; Kerwath, S; von der Heyden, S; Lombard, A; Attwood, C; Branch, G; Fairweather, T.; Taljaard, S.; Weerts, S.; Cowley, P.; Awad, A.; Halpern, B.; Grantham, H; Wolf, T. (2012).

National Biodiversity Assessment 2011: Technical Report (PDF) (Report). Vol. 4: Marine and Coastal Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

National Biodiversity Assessment for 2018 Volume 3: Estuarine Realm Van Niekerk, Lara; Adams, Janine; Stephen, Lamberth; MacKay, Fiona; Taljaard, Suzan; Turpie, Jane; Weerts, Steven; Raimondo, Domitiila, C (29 September 2019).

South African National Biodiversity Assessment 2018: Technical Report (Report). Vol. 3: Estuarine Realm. SANBI.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6373 .

{{ cite report }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Volume 4: Marine realm Sink, Kerry, J; Van der Bank, Megan; Majiedt, Prideel; Harris, Linda; Atkinson, Lara; Kirkman, Stephen; Karenyi, Natasha (29 September 2019).

South African National Biodiversity Assessment 2018 Technical Report (Report). Vol. 4: Marine Realm. South African National Biodiversity Institute.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6372 .

{{ cite report }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) See also [ edit ] Biodiversity – Variety and variability of life forms Ecology – Study of organisms and their environment Marine biodiversity – The variety of living organisms that live in the seas Marine biology – Scientific study of ocean life Marine protected areas of South Africa – Protected areas of coastline or ocean in the EEZ of South Africa References [ edit ] ^ "Tenfold increase in marine protected areas supports SA'S sustainable oceans economy" .

www.sanbi.org . 7 October 2019 . Retrieved 30 August 2020 .

^ a b c d e Sink, Kerry, J; Van der Bank, Megan; Majiedt, Prideel; Harris, Linda; Atkinson, Lara; Kirkman, Stephen; Karenyi, Natasha (29 September 2019).

South African National Biodiversity Assessment 2018 Technical Report (Report). Vol. 4: Marine Realm. South African National Biodiversity Institute.

hdl : 20.500.12143/6372 .

{{ cite report }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "National Biodiversity Assessment" .

www.sanbi.org . 4 March 2018 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

^ a b Lombard, A.T.; Strauss, T.; Harris, J.; Sink, K.; Attwood, C.; Hutchings, L. (2004).

South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004: Technical Report (PDF) (Report). Vol. 4: Marine Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute.

^ a b c Sink, K; Holness, S; Harris, L; Majiedt, P; Atkinson, L; Robinson, T; Kirkman, S; Hutchings, L; Leslie, R; Lamberth, S; Kerwath, S; von der Heyden, S; Lombard, A; Attwood, C; Branch, G; Fairweather, T.; Taljaard, S.; Weerts, S.; Cowley, P.; Awad, A.; Halpern, B.; Grantham, H; Wolf, T. (2012).

National Biodiversity Assessment 2011: Technical Report (PDF) (Report). Vol. 4: Marine and Coastal Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute. p. 325.

Note: This is the full document, with numbered pages.

^ "2018 National Biodiversity Assessment" .

biodiversityadvisor.sanbi.org . Retrieved 30 August 2020 .

^ Blanke, B.; Penven, P.; Roy, C.; Chang, N.; Kokoszka, F. (2009).

"Ocean variability over the Agulhas Bank and its dynamical connection with the southern Benguela upwelling system" (PDF) .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

114 (C12028): Introduction, pp. 1–2.

Bibcode : 2009JGRC..11412028B .

doi : 10.1029/2009JC005358 . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

^ Ruijter, W. P. M., de; Cunningham, S. A.; Gordon, A. L.; Lutjeharms, J. R. E.; Matano, R. P.; Piola, A. R. (2003).

"On the South Atlantic Climate Observing System (SACOS)" (PDF) .

Report of the CLIVAR/OOPC/IAI Workshop : 45 . Retrieved 4 January 2015 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Mann, K. H.; Lazier, J.R. (2006).

Dynamics of Marine Ecosystems: Biological-Physical Interactions in the Oceans (3rd ed.). Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-1405111188 .

^ Anderson, DM; Prell, WL (1993). "A 300 KYR record of upwelling off Oman during the late quaternary: evidence of the Asian southwest monsoon".

Paleoceanography .

8 (2): 193– 208.

Bibcode : 1993PalOc...8..193A .

doi : 10.1029/93pa00256 .

^ Sarhan, T; Lafuente, JG; Vargas, M; Vargas, JM; Plaza, F (1999). "Upwelling mechanisms in the northwestern Alboran Sea".

Journal of Marine Systems .

23 (4): 317– 331.

doi : 10.1016/s0924-7963(99)00068-8 .

^ Jennings, S.; Kaiser, M.J.; Reynolds, J.D. (2001).

Marine Fisheries Ecology . Oxford: Blackwell Science Ltd.

ISBN 0-632-05098-5 .

^ Sink, K.; Holness, S.; Harris, L.; Majiedt, P; Atkinson, L; Robinson, T; Kirkman, S; Hutchings, L.; Leslie, R; Lambeth, S; Kerwath, S; von der Heyden, S; Lombard, A; Attwood, C.; Branch, G.; Fairweather, T.; Taljaard, S.; Weerts, S.; Cowley, P.; Awad, A.; Halpern, B.; Grantham, H; Wolf, T. (2012).

National Biodiversity Assessment 2011: Technical Report (PDF) (Report). Vol. 4: Marine and Coastal Component. Pretoria: South African National Biodiversity Institute. Key findings.

Note: This is the executive summary ^ "Government Notices - Department of Environmental Affairs".

Regulation Gazette No. 10553 .

608 (39646). Pretoria: Government Printer. 3 February 2016.

^ "Protecting the ocean" .

www.marineprotectedareas.org.za . Retrieved 18 January 2019 .

^ "Marine Protected Areas" .

www.saambr.org.za . Retrieved 16 May 2019 .

^ a b Mann-Lang, Judy; Mann, Bruce; Sink, Kerry, eds. (September 2018).

"Fact sheet 3: Marine Protected Areas" (PDF) . SAAMBR . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

v t e Biodiversity of South Africa Afrotropical realm Marine biodiversity of South Africa Temperate Southern Africa Western Indo-Pacific Wildlife of South Africa National taxon checklists Plants Conifers Cycads Hornworts Liverworts Lycophytes Mosses Pteridophytes Flowering plants Acorales Alismatales Apiales Apiaceae Aquifoliales Arecales Asparagales Asphodelaceae Hyacinthaceae Iridaceae Orchidaceae Asterales Asteraceae Boraginales Brassicales Bruniales Buxales Canellales Caryophyllales Aizoaceae Celastrales Ceratophyllales Commelinales Cornales Crossosomatales Cucurbitales Dioscoreales Dipsacales Ericales Escalloniales Fabales Fagales Gentianales Apocynaceae Rubiaceae Geraniales Gunnerales Huerteales Icacinales Lamiales Acanthaceae Lamiaceae Scrophulariaceae Laurales Liliales Magnoliales Malpighiales Euphorbiaceae Malvales Myrtales Nymphaeales Oxalidales Pandanales Piperales Poales Poaceae Proteales Ranunculales Rosales Santalales Sapindales Saxifragales Solanales Vahliales Vitales Zingiberales Zygophyllales Animals Ascidians Bryozoans Comb jellies Echinoderms Nematodes Polychaetes Marine cnidarians Marine flatworms Sponges Tardigrades Arthropods Marine crustaceans Sea spiders Centipedes Millipedes Entognatha Arachnids Harvestmen Microwhip scorpions Pseudoscorpions Scorpions Shorttailed whipscorpions Solifugae Araneae Ixodida Whip spiders and tailless whip scorpions Insects Alderflies, dobsonflies and fishflies Beetles Booklice, barklice and barkflies Butterflies and moths Caddisflies Cockroaches and termites Dragonflies and damselflies Earwigs Fleas Flies Jumping bristletails Lice Mantises Mayflies Net-winged insects Notoptera Orthoptera Sawflies, wasps, bees, and ants Scorpionflies Silverfish and firebrats Stick and leaf insects Stoneflies Strepsiptera Termites Thrips True bugs Webspinners Molluscs Non-marine molluscs Marine molluscs Marine gastropods Marine heterobranch gastropods Vertebrates Amphibians Birds Freshwater fishes Marine fishes Marine bony fishes Marine spiny-finned fishes Marine Perciform fishes Mammals Reptiles Seaweeds Green seaweeds Brown seaweeds Red seaweeds Fungi A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Related List of bacteria of South Africa List of invasive species in South Africa List of invasive plant species in South Africa List of Oomycetes of South Africa List of slime moulds of South Africa List of Southern African indigenous trees and woody lianes List of botanists by author abbreviation Regional taxon checklists and other minor lists List of marine invertebrates of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of marine vertebrates of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of green seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of brown seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay List of red seaweeds of the Cape Peninsula and False Bay Related: Timber trees of Gauteng Biodiversity hotspots and Centres of diversity Cape Floristic Region Maputaland-Pondoland-Albany Hotspot Succulent Karoo Succulent Karoo Cape Floristic Region Griqualand West Centre Albany Centre Drakensberg Alpine Centre Soutpansberg Centre Wolkberg Centre Sekhukhuneland Centre Barberton Centre Maputaland-Pondoland Region Ecoregions List of ecoregions in South Africa Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests Knysna–Amatole montane forests KwaZulu–Cape coastal forest mosaic Maputaland coastal forest mosaic Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Kalahari Acacia-Baikiaea woodlands Southern Africa bushveld Zambezian and mopane woodlands Montane grasslands and shrublands Drakensberg alti-montane grasslands and woodlands Drakensberg montane grasslands, woodlands and forests Highveld grasslands Maputaland–Pondoland bushland and thickets Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Albany thickets Lowland fynbos and renosterveld Montane fynbos and renosterveld Deserts and xeric shrublands Kalahari xeric savanna Nama Karoo Succulent Karoo Tundra Southern Indian Ocean Islands tundra Mangroves Southern Africa mangroves Marine ecoregions Agulhas ecoregion Benguela ecoregion Delagoa ecoregion Natal ecoregion Southeast Atlantic ecoregion Southwest Indian ecoregion Biomes and Vegetation classification List of vegetation types of South Africa Savanna Andesite Mountain Bushveld Aoub Duneveld Barberton Serpentine Sourveld Bhisho Thornveld Cathedral Mopane Bushveld Central Sandy Bushveld Delagoa Lowveld Dwaalboom Thornveld Dwarsberg-Swartruggens Mountain Bushveld Eastern Valley Bushveld Gabbro Grassy Bushveld Gauteng Shale Mountain Bushveld Ghaap Plateau Vaalbosveld Gold Reef Mountain Bushveld Gordonia Duneveld Gordonia Kameeldoring Bushveld Gordonia Plains Shrubland Granite Lowveld Gravelotte Rocky Bushveld Kaalrug Mountain Bushveld Kathu Bushveld Kimberley Thornveld Koranna-Langeberg Mountain Bushveld Kuruman Mountain Bushveld Kuruman Thornveld Kuruman Vaalbosveld KwaZulu-Natal Hinterland Thornveld KwaZulu-Natal Sandstone Sourveld Lebombo Summit Sourveld Legogote Sour Bushveld Limpopo Ridge Bushveld Limpopo Sweet Bushveld Loskop Mountain Bushveld Loskop Thornveld Lowveld Rugged Mopaneveld Madikwe Dolomite Bushveld Mafikeng Bushveld Makatini Clay Thicket Makhado Sweet Bushveld Makuleke Sandy Bushveld Malelane Mountain Bushveld Mamabolo Mountain Bushveld Marikana Thornveld Molopo Bushveld Moot Plains Bushveld Mopane Basalt Shrubland Mopane Gabbro Shrubland Musina Mopane Bushveld Ngongoni Veld Norite Koppies Bushveld Northern Lebombo Bushveld Northern Zululand Sourveld Nossob Bushveld Nwambyia-Pumbe Sandy Bushveld Ohrigstad Mountain Bushveld Olifantshoek Plains Thornveld Phalaborwa-Timbavati Mopaneveld Pilanesberg Mountain Bushveld Polokwane Plateau Bushveld Postmasburg Thornveld Poung Dolomite Mountain Bushveld Pretoriuskop Sour Bushveld Roodeberg Bushveld Schmidtsdrif Thornveld Schweizer-Reneke Bushveld Sekhukhune Mountain Bushveld Sekhukhune Plains Bushveld South Eastern Coastal Thornveld Southern Lebombo Bushveld Soutpansberg Mountain Bushveld Springbokvlakte Thornveld Stella Bushveld Swaziland Sour Bushveld Tembe Sandy Bushveld Thukela Thornveld Thukela Valley Bushveld Tsende Mopaneveld Tshokwane-Hlane Basalt Lowveld Tzaneen Sour Bushveld Vaalbos Rocky Shrubland VhaVenda Miombo Waterberg Mountain Bushveld Western Maputaland Clay Bushveld Western Maputaland Sandy Bushveld Western Sandy Bushveld Zeerust Thornveld Zululand Coastal Thornveld Zululand Lowveld Grassland Aliwal North Dry Grassland Amathole Mistbelt Grassland Amathole Montane Grassland Amersfoort Highveld Clay Grassland Barberton Montane Grassland Basotho Montane Shrubland Bedford Dry Grassland Besemkaree Koppies Shrubland Bloemfontein Dry Grassland Bloemfontein Karroid Shrubland Carletonville Dolomite Grassland Central Free State Grassland Drakensberg Afroalpine Heathland Drakensberg Foothill Moist Grassland Drakensberg-Amathole Afromontane Fynbos East Griqualand Grassland Eastern Free State Clay Grassland Eastern Free State Sandy Grassland Eastern Highveld Grassland Egoli Granite Grassland Frankfort Highveld Grassland Income Sandy Grassland Ithala Quartzite Sourveld KaNgwane Montane Grassland Karoo Escarpment Grassland Klerksdorp Thornveld KwaZulu-Natal Highland Thornveld Leolo Summit Sourveld Lesotho Highland Basalt Grassland Low Escarpment Moist Grassland Lydenburg Montane Grassland Lydenburg Thornveld Mabela Sandy Grassland Midlands Mistbelt Grassland Mooi River Highland Grassland Mthatha Moist Grassland Northern Drakensberg Highland Grassland Northern Escarpment Afromontane Fynbos Northern Escarpment Dolomite Grassland Northern Escarpment Quartzite Sourveld Northern Free State Shrubland Northern KwaZulu-Natal Moist Grassland Northern KwaZulu-Natal Shrubland Northern Zululand Mistbelt Grassland Paulpietersburg Moist Grassland Queenstown Thornveld Rand Highveld Grassland Sekhukhune Montane Grassland Senqu Montane Shrubland Southern Drakensberg Highland Grassland Southern KwaZulu-Natal Moist Grassland Soutpansberg Summit Sourveld Soweto Highveld Grassland Steenkampsberg Montane Grassland Stormberg Plateau Grassland Strydpoort Summit Sourveld Tarkastad Montane Shrubland Tsakane Clay Grassland Tsomo Grassland uKhahlamba Basalt Grassland Vaal Reefs Dolomite Sinkhole Woodland Vaal-Vet Sandy Grassland Vredefort Dome Granite Grassland Wakkerstroom Montane Grassland Waterberg-Magaliesberg Summit Sourveld Western Free State Clay Grassland Western Highveld Sandy Grassland Western Lesotho Basalt Shrubland Winburg Grassy Shrubland Wolkberg Dolomite Grassland Woodbush Granite Grassland Xhariep Karroid Grassland Zastron Moist Grassland Fynbos Agulhas Limestone Fynbos Agulhas Sand Fynbos Albertinia Sand Fynbos Algoa Sandstone Fynbos Atlantis Sand Fynbos Bokkeveld Sandstone Fynbos Boland Granite Fynbos Breede Alluvium Fynbos Breede Quartzite Fynbos Breede Sand Fynbos Breede Shale Fynbos Canca Limestone Fynbos Cape Flats Sand Fynbos Cape Winelands Shale Fynbos Cederberg Sandstone Fynbos Central Coastal Shale Band Vegetation Central Inland Shale Band Vegetation De Hoop Limestone Fynbos Eastern Coastal Shale Band Vegetation Eastern Inland Shale Band Vegetation Elgin Shale Fynbos Elim Ferricrete Fynbos Garden Route Granite Fynbos Garden Route Shale Fynbos Graafwater Sandstone Fynbos Greyton Shale Fynbos Grootrivier Quartzite Fynbos Hangklip Sand Fynbos Hawequas Sandstone Fynbos Hopefield Sand Fynbos Kamiesberg Granite Fynbos Kango Conglomerate Fynbos Knysna Sand Fynbos Kogelberg Sandstone Fynbos Kouebokkeveld Alluvium Fynbos Kouebokkeveld Shale Fynbos Kouga Grassy Sandstone Fynbos Kouga Sandstone Fynbos Leipoldtville Sand Fynbos Loerie Conglomerate Fynbos Lourensford Alluvium Fynbos Matjiesfontein Quartzite Fynbos Matjiesfontein Shale Fynbos Montagu Shale Fynbos Namaqualand Sand Fynbos North Hex Sandstone Fynbos North Kammanassie Sandstone Fynbos North Langeberg Sandstone Fynbos North Outeniqua Sandstone Fynbos North Rooiberg Sandstone Fynbos North Sonderend Sandstone Fynbos North Swartberg Sandstone Fynbos Northern Inland Shale Band Vegetation Olifants Sandstone Fynbos Overberg Sandstone Fynbos Peninsula Granite Fynbos Peninsula Sandstone Fynbos Piketberg Sandstone Fynbos Potberg Ferricrete Fynbos Potberg Sandstone Fynbos Robertson Granite Fynbos South Hex Sandstone Fynbos South Kammanassie Sandstone Fynbos South Langeberg Sandstone Fynbos South Outeniqua Sandstone Fynbos South Rooiberg Sandstone Fynbos South Sonderend Sandstone Fynbos South Swartberg Sandstone Fynbos Southern Cape Dune Fynbos Stinkfonteinberge Quartzite Fynbos Suurberg Quartzite Fynbos Suurberg Shale Fynbos Swartberg Altimontane Sandstone Fynbos Swartberg Shale Fynbos Swartland Alluvium Fynbos Swartruggens Quartzite Fynbos Swellendam Silcrete Fynbos Tsitsikamma Sandstone Fynbos Western Altimontane Sandstone Fynbos Western Coastal Shale Band Vegetation Winterhoek Sandstone Fynbos Renosterveld Baviaanskloof Shale Renosterveld Breede Alluvium Renosterveld Breede Shale Renosterveld Central Mountain Shale Renosterveld Central Ruêns Shale Renosterveld Ceres Shale Renosterveld Eastern Ruêns Shale Renosterveld Hantam Plateau Dolerite Renosterveld Humansdorp Shale Renosterveld Kango Limestone Renosterveld Langkloof Shale Renosterveld Matjiesfontein Shale Renosterveld Montagu Shale Renosterveld Mossel Bay Shale Renosterveld Namaqualand Granite Renosterveld Nieuwoudtville Shale Renosterveld Nieuwoudtville-Roggeveld Dolerite Renosterveld Peninsula Shale Renosterveld Robertson Granite Renosterveld Roggeveld Shale Renosterveld Ruêns Silcrete Renosterveld Swartberg Shale Renosterveld Swartland Alluvium Renosterveld Swartland Granite Renosterveld Swartland Shale Renosterveld Swartland Silcrete Renosterveld Uniondale Shale Renosterveld Vanrhynsdorp Shale Renosterveld Western Ruêns Shale Renosterveld Succulent Karoo Aggeneys Gravel Vygieveld Agter-Sederberg Shrubland Anenous Plateau Shrubland Bushmanland Inselberg Shrubland Central Knersvlakte Vygieveld Central Richtersveld Mountain Shrubland Citrusdal Vygieveld Die Plate Succulent Shrubland Doringrivier Quartzite Karoo Eastern Little Karoo Eenriet Plains Succulent Shrubland Goariep Mountain Succulent Shrubland Hantam Karoo Kamiesberg Mountains Shrubland Klawer Sandy Shrubland Knersvlakte Dolomite Vygieveld Knersvlakte Quartz Vygieveld Knersvlakte Shale Vygieveld Koedoesberge-Moordenaars Karoo Kosiesberg Succulent Shrubland Lekkersing Succulent Shrubland Little Karoo Quartz Vygieveld Namaqualand Arid Grassland Namaqualand Blomveld Namaqualand Coastal Duneveld Namaqualand Heuweltjie Strandveld Namaqualand Heuweltjieveld Namaqualand Inland Duneveld Namaqualand Klipkoppe Shrubland Namaqualand Shale Shrubland Namaqualand Spinescent Grassland Namaqualand Strandveld Northern Knersvlakte Vygieveld Northern Richtersveld Scorpionstailveld Northern Richtersveld Yellow Duneveld Oograbies Plains Sandy Grassland Piketberg Quartz Succulent Shrubland Platbakkies Succulent Shrubland Prince Albert Succulent Karoo Richtersveld Coastal Duneveld Richtersveld Red Duneveld Richtersveld Sandy Coastal Scorpionstailveld Riethuis-Wallekraal Quartz Vygieveld Robertson Karoo Roggeveld Karoo Rooiberg Quartz Vygieveld Rosyntjieberg Succulent Shrubland Southern Namaqualand Quartzite Klipkoppe Shrubland Southern Richtersveld Inselberg Shrubland Southern Richtersveld Scorpionstailveld Southern Richtersveld Yellow Duneveld Steytlerville Karoo Stinkfonteinberge Eastern Apron Shrubland Swartruggens Quartzite Karoo Tanqua Escarpment Shrubland Tanqua Karoo Tatasberg Mountain Succulent Shrubland Umdaus Mountains Succulent Shrubland Upper Annisvlakte Succulent Shrubland Vanrhynsdorp Gannabosveld Vyftienmyl se Berge Succulent Shrubland Western Bushmanland Klipveld Western Gwarrieveld Western Little Karoo Willowmore Gwarrieveld Albany Thicket and Strandveld Albany Arid Thicket Albany Bontveld Albany Mesic Thicket Albany Valley Thicket Baviaans Valley Thicket Bethelsdorp Bontveld Blombos Strandveld Buffels Mesic Thicket Buffels Valley Thicket Cape Flats Dune Strandveld Crossroads Grassland Thicket Doubledrift Karroid Thicket Eastern Gwarrieveld Elands Forest Thicket Escarpment Arid Thicket Escarpment Mesic Thicket Escarpment Valley Thicket Fish Arid Thicket Fish Mesic Thicket Fish Valley Thicket Gamka Arid Thicket Gamka Valley Thicket Geluk Grassland Thicket Goukamma Dune Thicket Gouritz Valley Thicket Grahamstown Grassland Thicket Grassridge Bontveld Groot Brak Dune Strandveld Hamburg Dune Thicket Hartenbos Dune Thicket Kasouga Dune Thicket Koedoeskloof Karroid Thicket Lambert's Bay Strandveld Langebaan Dune Strandveld Mons Ruber Fynbos Thicket Motherwell Karroid Thicket Nanaga Savanna Thicket Oudshoorn Karroid Thicket Overberg Dune Strandveld Saldanha Flats Strandveld Saldanha Granite Strandveld Saldanha Limestone Strandveld Saltaire Karroid Thicket Sardinia Forest Thicket St Francis Dune Thicket Subtropical Dune Thicket Sundays Arid Thicket Sundays Mesic Thicket Sundays Valley Thicket Thorndale Forest Thicket Umtiza Forest Thicket Vanstadens Forest Thicket Western Gwarrieveld Willowmore Gwarrieveld Nama Karoo and desert Albany Broken Veld Blouputs Karroid Thornveld Bushmanland Arid Grassland Bushmanland Basin Shrubland Bushmanland Sandy Grassland Eastern Lower Karoo Eastern Upper Karoo Gamka Karoo Kalahari Karroid Shrubland Lower Gariep Broken Veld Lower Karoo Gwarrieveld Northern Upper Karoo Upper Karoo Hardeveld Western Upper Karoo Alexander Bay Coastal Duneveld Eastern Gariep Plains Desert Eastern Gariep Rocky Desert Helskloof Canyon Desert Kahams Mountain Desert Kwaggarug Mountain Desert Namib Lichen Fields Noms Mountain Desert Northern Nababiepsberge Mountain Desert Richtersberg Mountain Desert Richtersveld Sheet Wash Desert Southern Nababiepsberge Mountain Desert Western Gariep Hills Desert Western Gariep Lowland Desert Western Gariep Plains Desert Azonal Albany Alluvial Vegetation Albany Dune Strandveld Algoa Dune Strandveld Arid Estuarine Salt Marshes Bushmanland Vloere Cape Estuarine Salt Marshes Cape Inland Salt Pans Cape Lowland Alluvial Vegetation Cape Lowland Freshwater Wetlands Cape Seashore Vegetation Cape Vernal Pools Drakensberg Wetlands Eastern Temperate Freshwater Wetlands Fynbos Riparian Vegetation Highveld Alluvial Vegetation Highveld Salt Pans Lesotho Mires Lower Gariep Alluvial Vegetation Muscadel Riviere Namaqualand Riviere Namaqualand Salt Pans Namaqualand Seashore Vegetation Namib Seashore Vegetation Southern Kalahari Mekgacha Southern Kalahari Salt Pans Southern Karoo Riviere Subantarctic Kelp Bed Vegetation Subtropical Alluvial Vegetation Subtropical Dune Thicket Subtropical Estuarine Salt Marshes Subtropical Freshwater Wetlands Subtropical Salt Pans Subtropical Seashore Vegetation Tanqua Wash Riviere Upper Gariep Alluvial Vegetation Forest and Coastal belt KwaZulu-Natal Coastal Belt Maputaland Coastal Belt Maputaland Wooded Grassland Pondoland-Natal Sandstone Coastal Sourveld Transkei Coastal Belt Ironwood Dry Forest Lowveld Riverine Forest Mangrove Forest Northern Afrotemperate Forest Northern Coastal Forest Northern Mistbelt Forest Sand Forest Scarp Forest Southern Afrotemperate Forest Southern Coastal Forest Southern Mistbelt Forest Swamp Forest Subantarctic biome Subantarctic Biotic Herbfield and Grassland Subantarctic Cinder Cone Vegetation Subantarctic Coastal Vegetation Subantarctic Drainage Line Vegetation Subantarctic Fellfield Subantarctic Fernbrake Vegetation Subantarctic Mire Subantarctic Polar Desert not on VEGMAP List of forests of South Africa List of forests of the Eastern Cape Forests of KwaZulu-Natal KwaZulu-Natal Dune Forest KwaZulu-Natal coastal lowland forest List of forests of the Western Cape Protected areas of South Africa Index of protected areas of South Africa South African National Parks Addo Elephant National Park Agulhas National Park Augrabies Falls National Park Bontebok National Park Camdeboo National Park Garden Route National Park Tsitsikamma National Park Wilderness National Park Golden Gate Highlands National Park Karoo National Park Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park Kruger National Park Mapungubwe National Park Marakele National Park Mokala National Park Mountain Zebra National Park Namaqua National Park Table Mountain National Park Tankwa Karoo National Park West Coast National Park ǀAi-ǀAis/Richtersveld Transfrontier Park Biosphere reserves Cape Winelands Biosphere Reserve Gouritz Cluster Biosphere Reserve Kogelberg Nature Reserve Kruger to Canyons Biosphere Magaliesberg Biosphere Reserve Waterberg Biosphere Marine protected areas of South Africa Coastal Addo Elephant National Park Marine Protected Area Amathole Marine Protected Area Betty's Bay Marine Protected Area Bird Island Marine Protected Area De Hoop Marine Protected Area Dwesa-Cwebe Marine Protected Area Goukamma Marine Protected Area Helderberg Marine Protected Area Hluleka Marine Protected Area I iSimangaliso Marine Protected Area Jutten Island Marine Protected Area Langebaan Lagoon Marine Protected Area Malgas Island Marine Protected Area Marcus Island Marine Protected Area Namaqua National Park Marine Protected Area Pondoland Marine Protected Area Robben Island Marine Protected Area Rocherpan Marine Protected Area Robberg Marine Protected Area Sardinia Bay Marine Protected Area Sixteen Mile Beach Marine Protected Area Stilbaai Marine Protected Area Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Trafalgar Marine Protected Area Tsitsikamma Marine Protected Area uThukela Banks Marine Protected Area Walker Bay Whale Sanctuary Offshore Agulhas Bank Complex Marine Protected Area Agulhas Front Marine Protected Area Agulhas Muds Marine Protected Area Aliwal Shoal Marine Protected Area Amathole Offshore Marine Protected Area Benguela Bank Marine Protected Area Benguela Muds Marine Protected Area Browns Bank Complex Marine Protected Area Browns Bank Corals Marine Protected Area Cape Canyon Marine Protected Area Childs Bank Marine Protected Area iSimangaliso Offshore Marine Protected Area Namaqua Fossil Forest Marine Protected Area Orange Shelf Edge Marine Protected Area Prince Edward Islands Marine Protected Area Protea Banks Marine Protected Area Southeast Atlantic Seamounts Marine Protected Area Southwest Indian Seamount Marine Protected Area Port Elizabeth Corals Marine Protected Area uThukela Banks Marine Protected Area Management organisations CapeNature City of Cape Town Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries Department of Science and Innovation Eastern Cape Parks Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife iSimangaliso Wetland Park Authority Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality South African National Parks Biodiversity research in SA Bolus Herbarium Iziko South African Museum National Research Foundation South African National Collection of Fungi Research organisations Animal Demography Unit BirdLife South Africa South African Association for Marine Biological Research South African Environmental Observation Network South African Institute for Aquatic Biodiversity South African National Biodiversity Institute Research projects African Coelacanth Ecosystem Programme National Biodiversity Assessment National Vegetation Map Project Reef Atlas Project SeaKeys Citizen science databases iNaturalist iSpot Percy FitzPatrick Institute of African Ornithology Virtual Museum Botanical gardens Durban Botanic Gardens Free State National Botanical Garden Garden Route Botanical Garden Hantam National Botanical Garden Harold Porter National Botanical Garden Johannesburg Botanical Garden Karoo Desert National Botanical Garden Kwelera National Botanical Garden Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden KwaZulu-Natal National Botanical Garden Lowveld National Botanical Garden Makana Botanical Gardens Manie van der Schijff Botanical Garden North-West University Botanical Garden Pretoria National Botanical Garden Stellenbosch University Botanical Garden Thohoyandou National Botanical Garden University of KwaZulu-Natal Botanical Garden Walter Sisulu National Botanical Garden Taxonomists List of authors of South African botanical taxa List of authors of South African animal taxa Related Biodiversity Biosphere Ecotourism Encyclopedia of Life Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving International Union for Conservation of Nature Marine protected area National park Nature conservation Nature reserve Scuba diving tourism South African Sustainable Seafood Initiative World Register of Marine Species World Wide Fund for Nature Regional biodiversity Biodiversity of Cape Town List of nature reserves in Cape Town Legislation Marine Living Resources Act, 18 of 1998 National Environmental Management Act, 1998 National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act, 10 of 2004 National Environmental Management: Integrated Coastal Management Act, 24 of 2008 National Environmental Management: Protected Areas Act, 57 of 2003 Publications List of field guides to South African biota Categories: Biodiversity of South Africa Index v t e Biodiversity worldwide Biodiversity hotspot Biodiversity loss Global biodiversity Ecology Bioresilience Dark diversity Ecological effects of biodiversity Elevational diversity gradient Genetic diversity Insect biodiversity Soil biodiversity Species–area relationship Species richness Measurement All-taxa biodiversity inventory Alpha diversity Beta diversity Diversity index Environmental DNA Gamma diversity Range condition scoring Species diversity Phylogenetic diversity Zeta diversity Conservation Biodiversity action plan Convention on Biological Diversity 2010 Biodiversity Target Key Biodiversity Areas Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework Economics Agricultural biodiversity Biodiversity in agriculture Biodiversity banking Biodiversity credit Crop diversity Biodiversity and drugs Food biodiversity Biodiversity offsetting Health Biodiversity hypothesis of health By region Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Benin Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Libya Madagascar Mali Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria Rodrigues Rwanda Seychelles Somalia South Africa Cape Town Marine South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Borneo Cambodia China Georgia India Assam Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Philippines Qatar Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Syria Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Latvia Lithuania Kosovo Montenegro Norway Poland Portugal Republic of Ireland Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Wales North America Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Martinique Mexico Nicaragua Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States Oceania Australia New Caledonia New Zealand Papua New Guinea South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Antarctica Antarctica List of biodiversity databases Global 200 Megadiverse countries Millennium Ecosystem Assessment NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n8rv6
Cached time: 20250815232056
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.891 seconds
Real time usage: 1.080 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6397/1000000
Revision size: 32406/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 402878/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3481/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 146892/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.551/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19754545/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  816.999      1 -total
 24.46%  199.874     21 Template:Cite_book
 18.11%  147.960     11 Template:Annotated_link
 16.37%  133.734      1 Template:Reflist
 13.81%  112.803      1 Template:Biodiversity_of_South_Africa
 13.44%  109.812      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.51%   77.669      8 Template:Cite_report
  7.28%   59.485      1 Template:Short_description
  5.94%   48.568      5 Template:Expand_section
  5.53%   45.205      6 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:59953761:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815232056 and revision id 1302906053. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marine_biodiversity_of_South_Africa&oldid=1302906053 " Category : Marine biodiversity of South Africa Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from February 2019 All articles to be expanded Articles to be expanded from November 2020 Articles to be expanded from August 2020 Articles to be expanded from May 2021 Articles with empty sections from May 2021 All articles with empty sections This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 02:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marine biodiversity of South Africa Add languages Add topic

