Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and definition 2 Role in the Western world Toggle Role in the Western world subsection 2.1 Relationship with performers 2.2 History of employment 2.3 Role of women 3 Modern training Toggle Modern training subsection 3.1 Undergraduate 3.2 Masters 3.3 Doctoral 3.4 Other routes 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 General and cited sources 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Composer 117 languages Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu अवधी Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Livvinkarjala La .lojban.

Magyar Македонски Malti მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Picard Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro Walon Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Руски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person who writes music This article is about composers of music. For other uses, see Composer (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Composer" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Portrait of Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov composing at his desk, by Valentin Serov , 1898 A composer is a person who writes music .

[ 1 ] The term is especially used to indicate composers of Western classical music , [ 2 ] or those who are composers by occupation.

[ 3 ] Many composers are, or were, also skilled performers of music.

Etymology and definition [ edit ] See also: Lists of composers The term is descended from Latin , compōnō ; literally "one who puts together".

[ 4 ] The earliest use of the term in a musical context given by the Oxford English Dictionary is from Thomas Morley 's 1597 A Plain and Easy Introduction to Practical Music , where he says "Some wil  [ sic ] be good descanters [...] and yet wil be but bad composers".

[ 1 ] "Composer" is a loose term that generally refers to any person who writes music.

[ 1 ] More specifically, it is often used to denote people who are composers by occupation, [ 3 ] or those who work in the tradition of Western classical music .

[ 2 ] Writers of exclusively or primarily songs may be called composers, but since the 20th century the terms ' songwriter ' or ' singer-songwriter ' are more often used, particularly in popular music genres.

[ 5 ] In other contexts, the term 'composer' can refer to a literary writer, [ 6 ] or more rarely and generally, someone who combines pieces into a whole.

[ 7 ] Across cultures and traditions composers may write and transmit music in a variety of ways. In much popular music, the composer writes a composition , and it is then transmitted via oral tradition . Conversely, in some Western classical traditions music may be composed aurally—i.e. "in the mind of the musician"—and subsequently written and passed through written documents .

[ 8 ] Role in the Western world [ edit ] Relationship with performers [ edit ] In the development of European classical music , the function of composing music initially did not have much greater importance than that of performing it.

[ citation needed ] The preservation of individual compositions did not receive enormous attention and musicians generally had no qualms about modifying compositions for performance.

In the Western world, before the Romantic period of the 19th century, composition almost always went side by side with a combination of either singing, instructing and theorizing .

[ 9 ] Even in a conventional Western piece of instrumental music, in which all of the melodies , chords , and basslines are written out in musical notation, the performer has a degree of latitude to add artistic interpretation to the work, by such means as by varying their articulation and phrasing , choosing how long to make fermatas (held notes) or pauses, and — in the case of bowed string instruments, woodwinds or brass instruments — deciding whether to use expressive effects such as vibrato or portamento . For a singer or instrumental performer, the process of deciding how to perform music that has been previously composed and notated is termed "interpretation". Different performers' interpretations of the same work of music can vary widely, in terms of the tempos that are chosen and the playing or singing style or phrasing of the melodies. Composers and songwriters who present their music are interpreting, just as much as those who perform the music of others. The standard body of choices and techniques present at a given time and a given place is referred to as performance practice , whereas interpretation is generally used to mean the individual choices of a performer.

[ citation needed ] Although a musical composition often has a single author, this is not always the case. A work of music can have multiple composers, which often occurs in popular music when a band collaborates to write a song, or in musical theatre , where the songs may be written by one person, the orchestration of the accompaniment parts and writing of the overture is done by an orchestrator, and the words may be written by a third person.

A piece of music can also be composed with words, images, or, in the 20th and 21st centuries, computer programs that explain or notate how the singer or musician should create musical sounds. Examples of this range from wind chimes jingling in a breeze, to avant-garde music from the 20th century that uses graphic notation , to text compositions such as Aus den Sieben Tagen , to computer programs that select sounds for musical pieces. Music that makes heavy use of randomness and chance is called aleatoric music , and is associated with contemporary composers active in the 20th century, such as John Cage , Morton Feldman , and Witold Lutosławski .

The nature and means of individual variation of the music are varied, depending on the musical culture in the country and the time period it was written. For instance, music composed in the Baroque era , particularly in slow tempos, often was written in bare outline, with the expectation that the performer would add improvised ornaments to the melody line during a performance. Such freedom generally diminished in later eras, correlating with the increased use by composers of more detailed scoring in the form of dynamics, articulation, and so on; composers became uniformly more explicit in how they wished their music to be interpreted, although how strictly and minutely these are dictated varies from one composer to another. Because of this trend of composers becoming increasingly specific and detailed in their instructions to the performer, a culture eventually developed whereby faithfulness to the composer's written intention came to be highly valued (see, for example, Urtext edition ). This musical culture is almost certainly related to the high esteem (bordering on veneration) in which the leading classical composers are often held by performers.

The historically informed performance movement has revived to some extent the possibility of the performer elaborating seriously the music as given in the score, particularly for Baroque music and music from the early Classical period . The movement might be considered a way of creating greater faithfulness to the original in works composed at a time that expected performers to improvise . In genres other than classical music, the performer generally has more freedom; thus for instance when a performer of Western popular music creates a "cover" of an earlier song, there is little expectation of exact rendition of the original; nor is exact faithfulness necessarily highly valued (with the possible exception of "note-for-note" transcriptions of famous guitar solos ).

In Western art music, the composer typically orchestrates their compositions, but in musical theatre and pop music, songwriters may hire an arranger to do the orchestration. In some cases, a pop songwriter may not use notation at all, and, instead, compose the song in their mind and then play or record it from memory. In jazz and popular music, notable recordings by influential performers are given the weight that written scores play in classical music. The study of composition has traditionally been dominated by the examination of methods and practice of Western classical music, but the definition of composition is broad enough for the creation of popular and traditional music songs and instrumental pieces and to include spontaneously improvised works like those of free jazz performers and African percussionists such as Ewe drummers .

History of employment [ edit ] During the Middle Ages, most composers worked for the Catholic church and composed music for religious services such as plainchant melodies. During the Renaissance music era, composers typically worked for aristocratic employers. While aristocrats typically required composers to produce a significant amount of religious music, such as Masses , composers also penned many non-religious songs on the topic of courtly love : the respectful, reverential love of a great woman from afar. Courtly love songs were very popular during the Renaissance era. During the Baroque music era, many composers were employed by aristocrats or as church employees. During the Classical period , composers began to organize more public concerts for profit, which helped composers to be less dependent on aristocratic or church jobs. This trend continued in the Romantic music era in the 19th century. In the 20th century, composers began to seek employment as professors in universities and conservatories. In the 20th century, composers also earned money from the sales of their works, such as sheet music publications of their songs or pieces or as sound recordings of their works.

[ citation needed ] Role of women [ edit ] Main articles: Women in music § Composers , and List of female composers by birth date Nineteenth-century composer and pianist Clara Schumann In 1993, American musicologist Marcia Citron asked, "Why is music composed by women so marginal to the standard 'classical' repertoire?" [ 10 ] Citron "examines the practices and attitudes that have led to the exclusion of women composers from the received ' canon ' of performed musical works." She argues that in the 1800s, women composers typically wrote art songs for performance in small recitals rather than symphonies intended for performance with an orchestra in a large hall, with the latter works being seen as the most important genre for composers; since women composers did not write many symphonies, they were deemed to be not notable as composers.

[ 10 ] According to Abbey Philips, "women musicians have had a very difficult time breaking through and getting the credit they deserve." [ 11 ] During the Medieval eras, most of the art music was created for liturgical (religious) purposes and due to the views about the roles of women that were held by religious leaders, few women composed this type of music, with the nun Hildegard von Bingen being among the exceptions. Most university textbooks on the history of music discuss almost exclusively the role of male composers. As well, very few works by women composers are part of the standard repertoire of classical music. In Concise Oxford History of Music , " Clara Shumann [ sic ] is one of the only female composers mentioned", [ 11 ] but other notable women composers of the common practice period include Fanny Mendelssohn and Cécile Chaminade , and arguably the most influential teacher of composers during the mid-20th century was Nadia Boulanger .

[ citation needed ] Philips states that "[d]uring the 20th century the women who were composing/playing gained far less attention than their male counterparts." [ 11 ] Women today are being taken more seriously in the realm of concert music, though the statistics of recognition, prizes, employment, and overall opportunities are still biased toward men.

[ 12 ] Modern training [ edit ] Professional classical composers often have a background in performing classical music during their childhood and teens, either as a singer in a choir , as a player in a youth orchestra , or as a performer on a solo instrument (e.g., piano , pipe organ , or violin ). Teens aspiring to be composers can continue their postsecondary studies in a variety of formal training settings, including colleges, conservatories, and universities.

Conservatories , which are the standard musical training system in countries such as France and Canada, provide lessons and amateur orchestral and choral singing experience for composition students. Universities offer a range of composition programs, including bachelor's degrees, Master of Music degrees, and Doctor of Musical Arts degrees. As well, there are a variety of other training programs such as classical summer camps and festivals, which give students the opportunity to get coaching from composers.

Undergraduate [ edit ] Bachelor's degrees in composition (referred to as B.Mus.

or B.M) are four-year programs that include individual composition lessons, amateur orchestra/choral experience, and a sequence of courses in music history, music theory, and liberal arts courses (e.g., English literature), which give the student a more well-rounded education. Usually, composition students must complete significant pieces or songs before graduating. Not all composers hold a B.Mus. in composition; composers may also hold a B.Mus. in music performance or music theory.

Masters [ edit ] Master of Music degrees (M.mus.) in composition consists of private lessons with a composition professor , ensemble experience, and graduate courses in music history and music theory, along with one or two concerts featuring the composition student's pieces. A master's degree in music (referred to as an M.Mus. or M.M.) is often a required minimum credential for people who wish to teach composition at a university or conservatory. A composer with an M.Mus. could be an adjunct professor or instructor at a university, but it would be difficult in the 2010s to obtain a tenure track professor position with this degree.

Doctoral [ edit ] To become a tenure track professor, many universities require a doctoral degree . In composition, the key doctoral degree is the Doctor of Musical Arts , rather than the PhD ; the PhD is awarded in music, but typically for subjects such as musicology and music theory .

Doctor of Musical Arts (referred to as D.M.A., DMA, D.Mus.A. or A.Mus.D) degrees in composition provide an opportunity for advanced study at the highest artistic and pedagogical level, requiring usually an additional 54+ credit hours beyond a master's degree (which is about 30+ credits beyond a bachelor's degree). For this reason, admission is highly selective. Students must submit examples of their compositions. If available, some schools will also accept video or audio recordings of performances of the student's pieces. Examinations in music history, music theory, ear training/dictation, and an entrance examination are required.

Students must prepare significant compositions under the guidance of faculty composition professors. Some schools require DMA composition students to present concerts of their works, which are typically performed by singers or musicians from the school. The completion of advanced coursework and a minimum B average are other typical requirements of a D.M.A program. During a D.M.A. program, a composition student may get experience teaching undergraduate music students.

Other routes [ edit ] Some composers did not complete composition programs, but focused their studies on the performance of voice or an instrument or on music theory , and developed their compositional skills over the course of a career in another musical occupation.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c OED : composer , 3..

^ a b "Composer" .

Collins English Dictionary . Retrieved 19 January 2021 .

^ a b Stevenson, Angus; Lindberg, Christine A., eds. (2015) [2010].

"Composer" .

New Oxford American Dictionary .

ISBN 978-0-19-539288-3 . Retrieved 4 April 2022 .

^ "compose (v.)" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 4 April 2022 .

^ Root, Deane L. (2001).

"Songwriter" .

Grove Music Online . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.26215 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

(subscription, Wikilibrary access, or UK public library membership required) ^ OED : composer , 2..

^ OED : composer , 1..

^ Nettl 1983 , p. 192.

^ Everist 2011 , p. 2.

^ a b Citron, Marcia J.

(1993).

Gender and the Musical Canon .

CUP Archive .

ISBN 9780521392921 .

^ a b c Philips, Abbey (1 September 2011).

"The history of women and gender roles in music" .

Rvanews.com . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ Alex Ambrose (21 August 2014).

"Her Music: Today's Emerging Female Composer" .

WQXR . Retrieved 13 April 2020 .

General and cited sources [ edit ] Everist, Mark (2011). "Introduction". In Everist, Mark (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Medieval Music . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-316303-4 .

Nettl, Bruno (1983).

The Study of Ethnomusicology: Twenty-nine Issues and Concepts . Champaign: University of Illinois Press .

ISBN 978-0-252-01039-2 .

"composer, n" .

OED Online . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

(subscription required) Further reading [ edit ] Beckwith, John ; Kasemets, Udo (1961).

The Modern Composer and His World . Heritage. Foreword by Louis Applebaum . Toronto: University of Toronto Press .

ISBN 978-0-608-16267-6 .

JSTOR 10.3138/j.ctt15jjfcx .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Blum, Stephen (2023) [2001].

"Composition" .

Grove Music Online . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.06216 .

(subscription, Wikilibrary access, or UK public library membership required) Mugmon, Matthew (November 2013). "Beyond the Composer-Conductor Dichotomy: Bernstein's Copland-Inspired Mahler Advocacy".

Music & Letters .

94 (4): 606– 627.

doi : 10.1093/ml/gct131 .

JSTOR 24547378 .

Everist, Mark (2013). "Master and Disciple: Teaching the Composition of Polyphony in the Thirteenth Century".

Musica Disciplina .

58 : 51– 71.

JSTOR 24429413 .

Meyer, Leonard B.

(2010).

Music, the Arts, and Ideas: Patterns and Predictions in Twentieth-Century Culture . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0-226-52144-2 .

Piotrowska, Anna G. (December 2007). "Modernist Composers and the Concept of Genius / Skladatelji Moderne i pojam genija".

International Review of the Aesthetics and Sociology of Music .

38 (2): 229– 242.

JSTOR 25487527 .

Wegman, Rob C. (Autumn 1996). "From Maker to Composer: Improvisation and Musical Authorship in the Low Countries, 1450-1500".

Journal of the American Musicological Society .

49 (3): 409– 479.

doi : 10.2307/831769 .

JSTOR 831769 .

Williams, Justin A.; Williams, Katherine, eds. (2016).

The Cambridge Companion to the Singer-Songwriter . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-06364-8 .

Young, Toby (2024). "Introduction". In Young, Toby (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Composition . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp.

1– 18.

ISBN 978-1-108-92373-6 .

Ziolkowski, Jan M.

(2018).

"1. The Composer" .

The Juggler of Notre Dame and the Medievalizing of Modernity . Vol. 4: Picture That: Making a Show of the Jongleur. Cambridge: Open Book Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-01-329142-5 .

JSTOR j.ctv8d5t5s .

External links [ edit ] Look up composer in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Composers .

v t e Musical composition and song Roles Composer List Lyricist Songwriter Singer-songwriter Hymnwriter Components Instrumentation Libretto Electronic libretto Lyrics Musical form Musical notation Orchestration Song cycle Song types Answer song Art song Ballad Execution ballad Murder ballad Sentimental ballad Car song Children's song Campfire song Cumulative song Repetitive song Christmas carol Advent song Drinking song Hit song Sleeper hit Summer hit Instrumental List song Love song Torch song Breakup song Novelty song Nonsense song Patter song Plainsong Hymn tune Political or revolutionary song Campaign song Freedom song Protest song War song Show tune "I Want" song Signature song Sporting song Fight song Football chant Theme song Tragedy song Work song Sea shanty v t e Music History of music Prehistoric Ancient Dance Martial Religious Biblical Secular Art music Afghan classical music—Klasik Andalusi classical music Arabic music Azerbaijani Mugham Burmese classical music—Mahāgīta Cambodian ceremonial music—Pinpeat Chinese traditional music Indian classical music Byzantine music Indonesian art music—Gamelan Japanese court music—Gagaku Korean court music Lao classical music Mandé art music Ottoman music Persian classical music Philippine art songs—Kundiman Scottish Ceòl Mór Kandyan dance of Sri Lanka Thai classical music—Piphat Vietnam imperial court music—Nhã nhạc Western classical music Vernacular music Circus music Folk music Blues Country music Electronic music Hip hop music Jazz Pop music Progressive music Psychedelic music Soul music Musical instruments Arched Harp Angular harp History of the harpsichord History of lute-family instruments Nafir Evolution of timpani in the 18th and 19th centuries History of the trumpet History of the violin Musician Ensembles Band (rock and pop) Backup band All-female band Rhythm section Big band Concert band Disc jockey Military band Lead vocalist Backing vocalist Theory Composition Form Genre Notation Improvisation Lyrics Singing Song Technique Education and study Bachelor of Music Master of Music Doctor of Musical Arts PhD Method Music archaeology Music history Music psychology Music school Composition Musicology Biomusicology Cognitive musicology Computational musicology Ecomusicology Ethnomusicology New musicology Organology Sociomusicology Zoomusicology Production Single A-side and B-side Extended play Compilation Live Remix Audio engineer Record label Record producer Sampling Music technology (electric) Music technology (electronic and digital) Sound recording and reproduction Cover Remix Cultural and regional genres African Central East North Southern West Asian Central East Middle Eastern South Southeast European Balkan Nordic Latin American Central American South American North American Caribbean Oceanian Melanesian Micronesian Polynesian By sovereign state Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé and Príncipe Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Lists Index Outline Timeline Albums Classical and art music traditions Classical music genres Cultural and regional genres Instruments Jazz and popular music glossary Music genres and styles Songs Terminology related articles Aesthetics of music Album era Fictional music Music and emotion Music and exercise Music and fashion Music industry Music and politics Censorship Environmentalism Warfare Music and sleep Music community Music festival Music technology Music therapy Musical escapism Musical instrument Classification Folk Women in music Music portal Record production portal Category Portal : Music Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐b6nsj
Cached time: 20250812014320
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.780 seconds
Real time usage: 1.033 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4411/1000000
Revision size: 23061/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 191446/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17438/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 213/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 99819/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.528/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8648348/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  895.404      1 -total
 33.20%  297.246      3 Template:Navbox
 23.08%  206.661      1 Template:Music_topics
 18.80%  168.336      1 Template:World_topic
 13.00%  116.366      1 Template:Reflist
 10.46%   93.668      6 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 10.40%   93.162      1 Template:Musical_composition
  7.75%   69.413      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  6.77%   60.621      1 Template:Short_description
  6.15%   55.091      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:198778:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014320 and revision id 1293771530. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Composer&oldid=1293771530 " Categories : Composers Musical terminology Occupations in music Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles needing additional references from September 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2021 Articles that may contain original research from September 2021 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 15:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Composer 117 languages Add topic

