Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Appearance 2 Forecasting 3 Subtypes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cirrocumulus cloud 47 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genus of high-altitude clouds Cirrocumulus cloud Cirrocumulus floccus Abbreviation Cc [ 1 ] Genus Cirro- ( curl ) -cumulus ( heaped ) Species Castellanus Floccus Lenticularis Stratiformis Variety Lacunosus Undulatus Altitude 6,096–15,000 m (20,000–49,000 ft) Classification Family A (High-level) Appearance Small, flakey, and white high-altitude cumulus patches.

Precipitation Occasionally virga .

[ 2 ] May form ahead of a frontal system, especially together with other cirriform clouds meaning rain in around 10 hours.

Cirrocumulus is one of the three main genus types of high-altitude tropospheric clouds , the other two being cirrus and cirrostratus .

[ 3 ] They usually occur at an altitude of 5 to 12 km (16,000 to 39,000 ft), however they can occur as low as 10,000 ft (3.0 km) in the arctic and weather reporting standards such as the Canadian MANOBS suggests heights of 29,000 ft (8.8 km) in summer and 26,000 ft (7.9 km) in winter.

[ 4 ] Like lower-altitude cumuliform and stratocumuliform clouds, cirrocumulus signifies convection . Unlike other  high-altitude tropospheric clouds like  cirrus and cirrostratus, cirrocumulus includes a small amount of liquid water droplets, although these are in a supercooled state. Ice crystals are the predominant component, and typically, the ice crystals cause the supercooled water drops in the cloud to rapidly freeze, transforming the cirrocumulus into cirrostratus. This process can also produce precipitation in the form of a virga consisting of ice or snow. Thus, cirrocumulus clouds are usually short-lived.

[ 5 ] They usually only form as part of a short-lived transitional phase within an area of cirrus clouds and can also form briefly as a result of the breaking up of part of a cumulonimbus anvil.

Properly, the term cirrocumulus refers to each cloud, but is typically also used to refer to an entire patch of cirrocumulus. When used in this way, each cirrocumulus element is referred to as a "cloudlet".

[ 6 ] Appearance [ edit ] High cloud weather map symbols Cirrocumulus is a cloud of the stratocumuliform physical category that shows both stratiform and cumuliform characteristics and typically appears as white, patchy sheets with ripples or tufts without gray shading.

[ 7 ] Each cloudlet appears no larger than a finger held at arm's length.

[ 5 ] These often are organized in rows like other cumuliform and stratocumuliform clouds, but since they are so small, cirrocumulus patches take on a finer appearance, sometimes also referred to colloquially as "herringbone" or as a " mackerel sky ".

[ 1 ] Cirrocumulus is coded C H 9 for the main genus-type and all subforms.

Cirrocumulus is distinguished from altocumulus in several ways, although the two stratocumuliform genus types can occasionally occur together with no clear demarcation between them. Cirrocumulus generally occur at higher altitudes than altocumulus, thus the "cloudlets" appear smaller, as they are more distant from observation at ground level. They are also colder. Cirrocumulus clouds never cast self-shadows and are translucent to a certain degree. They are also typically found amongst other cirrus clouds in the sky and are usually themselves seen to be transforming into these other types of cirrus.

[ 5 ] This often occurs at the leading edge of a warm front, where many types of cirriform clouds can be present.

Cirrocumulus clouds on a summer afternoon Cirrocumulus clouds tend to reflect the red and yellow colours during a sunset and sunrise, so they have been referred to as "one of the most beautiful clouds".

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] This occurs because they reflect the unscattered rays of light from the early morning or evening sun, and those rays are yellow, orange, red, and sometimes purple.

[ 9 ] Forecasting [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cirrocumulus usually only forms in patches. If it forms in patches with cirrus or cirrostratus and the clouds spread across the sky, it usually means rain in 8–10  hours (can be more if the front is slow-moving). Only small patches of cirrocumulus and perhaps some wisps of cirrus usually mean a continuation of good weather (although this may also be seen in conjunction with showers and thunderstorms). If it is seen after rain, it usually means improving the weather.

Subtypes [ edit ] Species: Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) is one of four species and appears in the form of relatively flat stratocumuliform sheets or patches.  The species Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) takes its name from the lens-shaped structure of this cloud which is tapered at each end.

Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) has cumuliform buildups that give the cloud a partly or mainly turreted appearance.  When the cumuliform parts have more of a tufted appearance, it is given the species name Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo).

[ 10 ] Cirrocumulus with castellanus buildups can show some vertical extent, but are not usually classified as vertical or multi-étage clouds.

Varieties:  This genus type is always translucent and so has no opacity-based varieties.  However, like cirrus, certain cirrocumulus species can sometimes be divided into pattern-based varieties.  The undulatus variety has a wavy undulating base and is seen mostly with the stratiformis and lenticularis species types.  The lacunosus variety contains circular holes caused by downdrafts in the cloud and is associated mainly with the species stratiformis, castellanus, and floccus.

[ 11 ] Precipitation-based supplementary feature: Cirrocumulus occasionally produces virga , precipitation that evaporates before reaching the ground.

Cloud-based supplementary feature: Mamma in the form of downward forming bubbles is infrequently seen as a cloud-based supplementary feature.

[ 12 ] Mother clouds: This genus type has no recognized genitus mother clouds.  However cirrocumulus stratiformis cirromutatus or cirrostratomutatus can result from sheets or filaments of high cloud taking on a stratocumuli form structure as a result of high altitude convection.  A high layer of white or light grey altocumulus of a particular species can thin out into pure white cirrocumulus altocumulomutatus of the same species.

Cirrocumulus undulatus clouds References [ edit ] ^ a b c Ahrens, C. Donald (February 2006).

Meteorology Today: an Introduction to Weather, Climate, and the Environment (eBook) (8 ed.). Brooks Cole. p. 120.

ISBN 978-0-495-01162-0 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "Cirrocumulus Clouds" (PDF) .

Cloud Microphysics Webpage . Georgia Institute of Technology. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2011 . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ Funk, Ted.

"Cloud Classifications and Characteristics" (PDF) .

The Science Corner . NOAA . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ "Manual of Surface Weather Observation Standards (MANOBS) 8th Edition, Amendment 2" . 2 December 2021.

^ a b c Pretor-Pinney, Gavin (2009).

The Cloud Collector's Handbook . Sceptre.

ISBN 978-0-340-91943-9 .

, p.21 ^ "Cirrocumulus – Meteorology/Climate" .

Integration and Application Network . University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (1975).

Cirrocumulus, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

27–29 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ Palmer, Chad (October 16, 2005).

"Cumulus clouds" . USA Today . Retrieved 6 February 2011 .

^ Ahrens, C. Donald (January 2007).

Essentials of Meteorology: An Invitation to the Atmosphere (5 ed.). Brooks Cole. pp.

97 –99.

ISBN 978-0-495-11558-8 .

^ World Meteorological Organization , ed. (1975).

Species, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

17–20 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (1975).

Varieties, International Cloud Atlas (PDF) . pp.

20– 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2016 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ World Meteorological Organization , ed. (1975).

Features, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

22–24 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cirrocumulus clouds .

International Cloud Atlas – Cirrocumulus v t e Cirrocumulus cloud (Cc) types Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Varieties Cirrocumulus lacunosus (Cc la) Cirrocumulus undulatus (Cc un) Variants Cirrocumulus mamma Cirrocumulus virga v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cirrocumulus_cloud&oldid=1300161286 " Categories : Cirrus Cumulus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2018 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cirrocumulus cloud 47 languages Add topic

