Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Honors 4 Publications 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Émile Clapeyron 48 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Benoît Paul Émile Clapeyron ) French engineer and physicist Émile Clapeyron Born ( 1799-01-26 ) 26 January 1799 Paris , France Died 28 January 1864 (1864-01-28) (aged 65) Paris , France Nationality French Known for Second law of thermodynamics Ideal gas law Clapeyron's theorem Clapeyron's theorem of three moments Clapeyron equation Clausius-Clapeyron relation Scientific career Fields Physics Benoît Paul Émile Clapeyron ( French: [klapɛʁɔ̃] ; 26 January 1799 – 28 January 1864) was a French engineer and physicist , one of the founders of thermodynamics .

Life [ edit ] Born in Paris , Clapeyron studied at the École polytechnique , graduating in 1818.

[ 1 ] He also studied at École des mines . In 1820 he and Gabriel Lamé went to Saint Petersburg to teach and work at the school of public works there. He returned to Paris only after the Revolution of July 1830 , supervising the construction of the first railway lines connecting Paris to Versailles and Paris to Saint-Germain .

[ 1 ] The half brothers Stéphane Mony and Eugène Flachat collaborated in this project, which was financed by Adolphe d'Eichthal ( fr ) , Rothschild , Auguste Thurneyssen, Sanson Davillier and the Péreire brothers .

[ 2 ] Clapeyron took his steam engine designs to England in 1836 to find a manufacturer and engaged Sharp, Roberts and Co.

[ 1 ] From 1844 to 1859 Clapeyron was a professor at École des Ponts et Chaussées .

[ 1 ] Clapeyron married Mélanie Bazaine, daughter of Pierre-Dominique Bazaine (mathematician and ingénieur des ponts ), and older sister of Pierre-Dominique (Adolphe) Bazaine (railway engineer) and François Achille Bazaine (Marshal of France).

Work [ edit ] In 1834, he made his first contribution to the creation of modern thermodynamics by publishing a report entitled Mémoire sur la puissance motrice de la chaleur ( Memoir on the Motive Power of Heat ), in which he developed the work of the physicist Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot , deceased two years before. Though Carnot had developed a compelling analysis of a generalised heat engine , he had employed the clumsy and already unfashionable caloric theory .

Clapeyron, in his memoire, presented Carnot's work in a more accessible and analytic graphical form, showing the Carnot cycle as a closed curve on an indicator diagram , a chart of pressure against volume (named in his honor Clapeyron's graph ). Clapeyron's analysis of Carnot was more broadly disseminated in 1843 when Johann Poggendorff translated it into German.

[ 3 ] In 1842 Clapeyron published his findings on the "optimal position for the piston at which the various valves should be opened or closed." [ 1 ] [ 4 ] In 1843, Clapeyron further developed the idea of a reversible process , already suggested by Carnot and made a definitive statement of Carnot's principle , what is now known as the second law of thermodynamics .

These foundations enabled him to make substantive extensions of Clausius' work, including the formula, now known as the Clausius–Clapeyron relation , which characterises the phase transition between two phases of matter . He further considered questions of phase transitions in what later became known as Stefan problems .

Clapeyron also worked on the characterisation of perfect gases , the equilibrium of homogeneous solids , and calculations of the statics of continuous beams , notably the theorem of three moments [ 5 ] ( Clapeyron's theorem ).

Honors [ edit ] Member of the Académie des Sciences , (1858).

The Rue Clapeyron in Paris ' 8th arrondissement (here) is named for him.

His name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower .

Publications [ edit ] Clapeyron, E. (1834).

"Mémoire sur la Puissance Motrice de la Chaleur" .

Journal de l'École Royale Polytechnique (in French). Vingt-troisième cahier, Tome XIV. Paris: De l'Imprimerie Royale: 153– 190.

Clapeyron, E. (1837).

Taylor, Richard (ed.).

"Memoir on the Motive Power of Heat" .

Scientific Memoirs .

1 : 347 – via Wikisource .

[ scan ] (source: The Internet Archive ) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Kerker, Milton (1960). "Sadi Carnot and the Steam Engine Engineers".

Isis .

51 (3): 257– 270.

doi : 10.1086/348909 .

JSTOR 226506 .

S2CID 144719098 .

^ "Christophe Stéphane Mony (1800–1884) dit Flachat" .

Annales des Mines (in French) . Retrieved 2018-03-09 .

^ Annalen der Physik und Chemie 59: 446 ^ Clapeyron (1842) "Mémoir sur le règlement des tiroirs dans la machines à vapeur", Comptes Rendus 14: 632 ^ "Three Moments Theorem" . Archived from the original on 2006-01-10 . Retrieved 2008-02-28 .

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

"Émile Clapeyron" .

MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive .

University of St Andrews .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Poland Israel Belgium Academics zbMATH People Structurae Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Émile_Clapeyron&oldid=1277145186 " Categories : 1799 births 1864 deaths Scientists from Paris French physicists Thermodynamicists École Polytechnique alumni Mines Paris - PSL alumni Corps des mines Members of the French Academy of Sciences Corresponding members of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences French fluid dynamicists Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 22 February 2025, at 23:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Émile Clapeyron 48 languages Add topic

