Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 Restoration of wetland 4 Visitor centre 5 Recreation 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Queen Elizabeth Park, Kāpiti Coast 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Queen Elizabeth Park, Kapiti Coast ) Park in New Zealand This article is about the park in the Kāpiti Coast. For the park in Christchurch, see Queen Elizabeth II Park . For the park in Masterton, see Queen Elizabeth Park, Masterton .

Queen Elizabeth Park Queen Elizabeth Park, looking towards State Highway One Type Regional park Location Kāpiti Coast , New Zealand Coordinates 40°57′54″S 174°58′10″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.964928°S 174.969335°E ﻿ / -40.964928; 174.969335 Area 638 hectares (1,580 acres) Created 1953 Operated by Wellington Regional Council Open 8am-dusk Status Open Queen Elizabeth Park is a regional park located on the Kāpiti Coast in New Zealand. The park is managed by the Greater Wellington Regional Council and contains the last area of natural dunes on the Kāpiti Coast .

[ 1 ] Facilities and attractions at the park include walkways, a restored wetland, a campground,  a visitor centre, the Wellington Tramway Museum , and an area for equestrian activities.

Geography [ edit ] The park is bordered by Paekākāriki , Raumati South , two state highways ( SH 1 and SH 59 ), and the North Island Main Trunk Railway .

The main entrance is at Mackays Crossing ; secondary entrances are in Raumati South and Paekākāriki.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The park is steeped in history including pā sites at Whareroa Beach and Wainui Beach. The tangata whenua of the park are Ngāti Haumia, a hapū of the Ngāti Toa iwi and Te Atiawa ki Whakarongotai , [ 2 ] who occupied the area for hundreds of years until the mid-19th century.

[ 3 ] The number of European settlers grew during the 1830s, and European farmers started to dominate the area from the mid-1850s.

[ 3 ] During World War II , the park was the location of two United States Army and Marines bases, Camp MacKay and Camp Russell.  U.S. troops were stationed at the camps in 1942–44 prior to being sent into combat in the Pacific Ocean theatre . Today, little evidence of the 20,000 strong military camps remains.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] A group of facades represents the huts of the marines who lived in the area during World War II, and there is also a sculpture memorial to ten marines who died when a vessel sank offshore.

[ 5 ] The park was named for Queen Elizabeth II before her coronation and was opened during the 1953 Royal Visit . Many recreation facilities were developed in the 1950s and 1960s.

[ 2 ] The park has legal protection as a recreation reserve under the Reserves Act 1977.

[ 6 ] Restoration of wetland [ edit ] Wetland scene at Queen Elizabeth Park Two areas of wetland were created within the park in the 2000s near Mackay's Crossing, using excavation and plantings to restore the habitat. There is a remnant of native bush adjacent to the restored wetland.

[ 7 ] In 2021, about 25 hectares (62 acres) of highly modified peat land on the north-eastern corner of the park was replanted, to restore it to wetland and native forest by about 2026.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Environmentalists wanted other farmland in the regional park to also be restored to wetland.

[ 10 ] In December 2021, 200 hectares (490 acres) of land previously leased for grazing stock was retired so that it could be restored.

[ 11 ] Visitor centre [ edit ] Ramaroa Centre – Mackays Crossing, Queen Elizabeth Park Plans for the development of the park facilities at the Mackays Crossing entrance were announced in 2012.

[ 12 ] A visitor centre named Ramaroa was opened in 2017.

[ 13 ] The complex includes a meeting room with capacity for 60 people, a park ranger office and public toilets. The design of the Ramaroa Centre is unusual and includes a gullwing roof. The architecture takes inspiration from the history of the site, including Māori wharenui and the forms of the tents and huts used in the US Marines camp.

[ 14 ] Recreation [ edit ] Several expansive lawn areas near Whareroa Beach and the southern entrance at Paekākāriki provide plenty of space for picnics and recreational activities. Public toilets are located at the car parks at the end of the road to Whareroa Beach, and near the playground and car parks at the Paekākāriki entrance.

[ 1 ] A coastal walkway and an inland walkway run the length of Queen Elizabeth Park from Raumati South to Paekākārikii. Near the main entrance, a loop walkway leads through a wetland area and bush remnant with mature kahikatea .

[ 1 ] The park also includes the Wellington Tramway Museum [ 15 ] and several campgrounds.

[ 1 ] The park is open from 8 am to dusk, year-round. Dogs are permitted, but must be kept on a leash in picnic areas and are not permitted on or near farmland. Fireworks are prohibited at all times.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "Queen Elizabeth Park" .

gw.govt.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2021 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ a b c "Queen Elizabeth Park History" .

gw.govt.nz . Wellington Regional Council.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 21 December 2019 .

^ a b Willis, Rosalie (30 December 2019).

"Lots to do at Queen Elizabeth Park on Kāpiti Coast" . New Zealand Herald.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ "The Camps" .

nzhistory.net.nz . Ministry for Culture and Heritage.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2008 . Retrieved 28 December 2008 .

^ Walker, Randall (23 January 2013).

"History tour of royal park" .

Stuff .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ "Queen Elizabeth Park" .

Land Information New Zealand .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2022 . Retrieved 7 December 2022 .

^ "Queen Elizabeth Park Resource Statement" (PDF) . Greater Wellington Regional Council. November 2008.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ "Final planting just the beginning for Queen Elizabeth Park" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment .

New Zealand Herald . 9 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ Gaylor, Penny (30 September 2020).

"Restoration work in popular park means big win for environment" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment . Kapiti News.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ Wannan, Oliva (3 March 2020).

"Queen Elizabeth Park wetlands restoration delay could cost thousands of tonnes of carbon dioxide" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment .

Dominion Post .

Archived from the original on 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ "Stock grazing to end in Queen Elizabeth Park" .

RNZ . 11 December 2021.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ Maxwell, Joel (12 September 2012).

"Queen Elizabeth Park to get $2m revamp" .

Stuff .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ "Ramaroa opening adds new dimension to Queen Elizabeth Park" .

Greater Wellington Regional Council .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ "Ramaroa Centre" .

Greater Wellington Regional Council .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ Thomson, Rebecca (17 December 2015).

"Tramways museum keeps trams trundling along" .

Stuff .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Queen Elizabeth Park, Kapiti Coast at Wikimedia Commons Media related to Camp McKay, Paekakariki at Wikimedia Commons Queen Elizabeth Park at Greater Wellington Boffa Miskell (25 June 2012).

"Queen Elizabeth Park - Heritage Framework" (PDF) . Greater Wellington. Archived from the original on 21 December 2019.

The US Marines in Kāpiti, New Zealand, 1942–1944 v t e Kāpiti Coast District and Kapiti Urban Area , New Zealand Seat : Paraparaumu Populated places Ōtaki Ward Ōtaki Ōtaki Beach Ōtaki Forks Te Horo Te Horo Beach Forest Lakes Waitohu Paekākāriki-Raumati Ward Paekākāriki Mackays Crossing Moonshine Valley Raumati Beach Raumati South Paraparaumu Ward Paraparaumu Paraparaumu Beach Maungakotukutuku Otaihanga Waikanae Ward Waikanae Reikorangi Waikanae Beach Peka Peka Geographic features Akatarawa Saddle Akatarawa Valley Kapiti Island Maungakōtukutuku Stream Ngatiawa River Ōtaki River Rangiora River Rauoterangi Channel Reikorangi Stream South Taranaki Bight Tararua Range Southern Crossing Forest Park Mount Hector Waikanae River Waiotauru River Waitewaewae River Wharemauku Stream Facilities and attractions Battle Hill Farm Forest Park Escarpment Track Hadfield railway station Hautere railway station Kapiti Coast Airport Kāpiti Expressway Ngā Manu Nature Reserve Otaihanga railway station Ōtaki Health Camp Ōtaki Museum Ōtaki railway station Our Lady of Lourdes Paraparaumu railway station Paekākāriki railway station Paekakariki Station Museum Pharazyn Reserve Queen Elizabeth Park Rangiātea Church Raumati Marine Gardens Southward Car Museum Te Horo railway station Waikanae Park Waikanae railway station Wainui railway station Wellington Tramway Museum Government District Council Mayor Wellington Regional Council Organisations Kapiti Coast United Kāpiti College Kapiti Fine Foods Ōtaki College Paekakariki Station Precinct Trust Paraparaumu College Steam Incorporated Te Wānanga o Raukawa v t e Greater Wellington Regional Council Regional parks Akatarawa Forest Baring Head Battle Hill Farm Forest Park Belmont Regional Park East Harbour Regional Park Hutt River Trail Hutt Water Collection Area Kaitoke Regional Park Pakuratahi Forest Queen Elizabeth Park Te Awarua-o-Porirua Harbour Wainuiomata Regional Park Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Wairarapa Moana Wetlands Wellington Harbour Whitireia Park v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Queen_Elizabeth_Park,_Kāpiti_Coast&oldid=1297925617 " Categories : Kāpiti Coast District Regional parks of the Wellington Region Farmed protected areas of New Zealand Wetlands of the Wellington Region Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Use dmy dates from October 2022 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 11:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Queen Elizabeth Park, Kāpiti Coast 1 language Add topic

