Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Lateral meristems 2 In nonwoody plants 3 Abnormal secondary growth 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Secondary growth 18 languages Afrikaans العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Simple English Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of growth in plants This article is about the type of plant growth. For secondary-growth forests, see Secondary forest .

Secondary growth thickens the stem and roots , typically making them woody . Obstructions such as this metal post and stubs of limbs can be engulfed.

In botany , secondary growth is the growth that results from cell division in the cambia or lateral meristems and that causes the stems and roots to thicken, while primary growth is growth that occurs as a result of cell division at the tips of stems and roots, causing them to elongate, and gives rise to primary tissue. Secondary growth occurs in most seed plants , but monocots usually lack secondary growth. If they do have secondary growth, it differs from the typical pattern of other seed plants.

The formation of secondary vascular tissues from the cambium is a characteristic feature of dicotyledons and gymnosperms . In certain monocots, the vascular tissues are also increased after the primary growth is completed but the cambium of these plants is of a different nature. In the living pteridophytes this feature is extremely rare, only occurring in Isoetes .

Lateral meristems [ edit ] Diagram of secondary growth in a tree showing idealised vertical and horizontal sections. New wood is added in each growth season by the lateral meristems, the cork cambium and vascular cambium .

In many vascular plants , secondary growth is the result of the activity of the two lateral meristems, the cork cambium and vascular cambium . Arising from lateral meristems, secondary growth increases the width of the plant root or stem, rather than its length.  As long as the lateral meristems continue to produce new cells, the stem or root will continue to grow in diameter. In woody plants , this process produces wood , and shapes the plant into a tree with a thickened trunk.

[ citation needed ] Because this growth usually ruptures the epidermis of the stem or roots, plants with secondary growth usually also develop a cork cambium . The cork cambium gives rise to thickened cork cells to protect the surface of the plant and reduce water loss. If this is kept up over many years, this process may produce a layer of cork. In the case of the cork oak it will yield harvestable cork .

[ citation needed ] In nonwoody plants [ edit ] Secondary growth also occurs in many nonwoody plants, e.g.

tomato , [ 1 ] potato tuber , carrot taproot and sweet potato tuberous root . A few long-lived leaves also have secondary growth.

[ 2 ] Abnormal secondary growth [ edit ] Palms (in the picture Roystonea regia palm) increase their trunk diameter by means of division and enlargement of parenchyma tissue, without a real secondary growth (production of secondary vascular strands—secondary xylem and phloem tissues—with the consequent enlargement of the canopy and root system).

[ 3 ] Abnormal secondary growth does not follow the pattern of a single vascular cambium producing xylem to the inside and phloem to the outside as in ancestral lignophytes. Some dicots have anomalous secondary growth, e.g. in Bougainvillea a series of cambia arise outside the oldest phloem.

[ 4 ] Ancestral monocots lost their secondary growth and their stele has changed in a way it could not be recovered without major changes that are very unlikely to occur. Monocots either have no secondary growth, as is the ancestral case, or they have an "anomalous secondary growth" of some type, or, in the case of palms, they enlarge their diameter in what is called a sort of secondary growth or not depending on the definition given to the term.

Palm trees increase their trunk diameter due to division and enlargement of parenchyma cells, which is termed "primary gigantism" [ 3 ] because there is no production of secondary xylem and phloem tissues, [ 3 ] [ 5 ] or sometimes "diffuse secondary growth".

[ 6 ] In some other monocot stems as in Yucca and Dracaena with anomalous secondary growth, a cambium forms, but it produces vascular bundles and parenchyma internally and just parenchyma externally. Some monocot stems increase in diameter due to the activity of a primary thickening meristem, which is derived from the apical meristem.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Bark Cambium (botany) Root Stem Tylosis Dendrochronology Herbchronology Anatomy References [ edit ] ^ Thompson, N.P. and Heimsch, C. 1964. Stem anatomy and aspects of development in tomato.

American Journal of Botany 51: 7-19.

[1] ^ Ewers, F.W. 1982. Secondary growth in needle leaves of Pinus longaeva (bristlecone pine) and other conifers: Quantitative data.

American Journal of Botany 69: 1552-1559.

[2] ^ a b c James D. Mauseth, 2003.

Botany: An Introduction to Plant Biology, Third Edition.

^ Esau, K. and Cheadle, V.I. 1969. Secondary growth in bougainvillea.

Annals of Botany 33: 807-819.

[3] ^ MG Simpson (2005) "Arecaceae (Palmae)" In: Plant Systematics . p.185: "...Plant sex is variable, and secondary growth is absent..." ^ Esau, K. 1977.

Anatomy of Seed Plants . New York: Wiley ^ Augusto, S. C.; Garófalo, C. A. (2004-11-01). "Nesting biology and social structure of Euglossa (Euglossa) townsendi Cockerell (Hymenoptera, Apidae, Euglossini)".

Insectes Sociaux .

51 (4): 400– 409.

doi : 10.1007/s00040-004-0760-2 .

ISSN 0020-1812 .

S2CID 13448653 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Secondary_growth&oldid=1296673759 " Categories : Plant anatomy Plant physiology Tissues (biology) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 13:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Secondary growth 18 languages Add topic

