Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and background 1.2 Childhood and adolescence 1.3 Education 1.4 Early career 1.5 First World War 1.6 G. H. Hardy on the Trinity controversy 1.7 Between the wars 1.8 Second World War 1.9 Later life 1.10 Political causes 1.11 Final years, death and legacy 2 Marriages and issue 3 Titles, awards and honours Toggle Titles, awards and honours subsection 3.1 Honours and awards 3.2 Scholastic 4 Views Toggle Views subsection 4.1 Philosophy 4.2 Religion 4.3 Society 4.4 Freedom of opinion and expression 4.5 Education 5 Selected works 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 General and cited sources 8.2.1 Primary sources 8.2.2 Secondary sources 9 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 9.1 Books about Russell's philosophy 9.2 Biographical books 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Bertrand Russell 125 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British philosopher and logician (1872–1970) The Right Honourable The Earl Russell OM FRS Russell in 1936 Born Bertrand Arthur William Russell ( 1872-05-18 ) 18 May 1872 Trellech , Monmouthshire [ a ] Died 2 February 1970 (1970-02-02) (aged 97) Penrhyndeudraeth , Merionethshire, Wales Spouses Alys Pearsall Smith ​ ​ ( m.

1894; div.

1921) ​ Dora Black ​ ​ ( m.

1921; div.

1935) ​ Patricia Spence ​ ​ ( m.

1936; div.

1952) ​ [ 1 ] Edith Finch ​ ( m.

1952) ​ Awards De Morgan Medal (1932) Sylvester Medal (1934) Nobel Prize in Literature (1950) Kalinga Prize (1957) Jerusalem Prize (1963) Education Education Trinity College, Cambridge ( BA , 1893) Academic advisors James Ward [ 6 ] A. N. Whitehead Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Institutions Trinity College, Cambridge London School of Economics University of Chicago University of California, Los Angeles Doctoral students Ludwig Wittgenstein Notable students Raphael Demos Irving Copi Walter Pitts Main interests Epistemology ethics logic mathematics metaphysics history of philosophy Notable ideas Analytic philosophy Automated reasoning Automated theorem proving Axiom of reducibility Barber paradox Berry paradox Chicken Connective Criticism of the coherence theory of truth Criticism of the doctrine of internal relations / logical holism Definite description Descriptivist theory of names Direct reference theory [ 2 ] Double negation Epistemic structural realism [ 3 ] Existential fallacy Failure of reference Knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description Logical atomism ( atomic proposition ) Logical form Mathematical beauty Mathematical logic Meaning Metamathematics Philosophical logic Predicativism Propositional analysis Propositional calculus Naive set theory Neutral monism [ 4 ] Paradoxes of set theory Peano–Russell notation Propositional formula Self-refuting idea Quantification Russell–Myhill paradox Russell's conjugation Russell-style universes Russell's paradox Russell's teapot Russell's theory of causal lines [ 5 ] Russellian change Russellian propositions Russellian view (Russell's critique of Meinong's theory of objects ) Set-theoretic definition of natural numbers Singleton Theory of descriptions Theory of relations Type theory / ramified type theory Tensor product of graphs Unity of the proposition Member of the House of Lords Lord Temporal In office 4 March 1931 – 2 February 1970 Hereditary peerage Preceded by The 2nd Earl Russell Succeeded by The 4th Earl Russell Personal details Political party Labour (1922–1965) Other political affiliations Liberal (1907–1922) Signature Bertrand Arthur William Russell, 3rd Earl Russell , OM , FRS [ 7 ] (18 May 1872 – 2 February 1970) was a British philosopher, logician, mathematician, and public intellectual . He had influence on mathematics , logic , set theory , and various areas of analytic philosophy .

[ 8 ] He was one of the early 20th century's prominent logicians [ 8 ] and a founder of analytic philosophy , along with his predecessor Gottlob Frege , his friend and colleague G. E. Moore , and his student and protégé Ludwig Wittgenstein . Russell with Moore led the British "revolt against idealism ".

[ b ] Together with his former teacher A. N. Whitehead , Russell wrote Principia Mathematica , a milestone in the development of classical logic and a major attempt to reduce the whole of mathematics to logic (see logicism ). Russell's article " On Denoting " has been considered a "paradigm of philosophy".

[ 10 ] Russell was a pacifist who championed anti-imperialism and chaired the India League .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] He went to prison for his pacifism during World War I , [ 14 ] and initially supported appeasement against Adolf Hitler 's Nazi Germany , before changing his view in 1943, describing war as a necessary "lesser of two evils". In the wake of World War II , he welcomed American global hegemony in preference to either Soviet hegemony or no (or ineffective) world leadership, even if it were to come at the cost of using their nuclear weapons .

[ 15 ] He would later criticise Stalinist totalitarianism , condemn the United States' involvement in the Vietnam War , and become an outspoken proponent of nuclear disarmament .

[ 16 ] In 1950, Russell was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature "in recognition of his varied and significant writings in which he champions humanitarian ideals and freedom of thought ".

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] He was also the recipient of the De Morgan Medal (1932), Sylvester Medal (1934), Kalinga Prize (1957), and Jerusalem Prize (1963).

Biography [ edit ] Early life and background [ edit ] Bertrand Arthur William Russell was born at Ravenscroft , a country house in Trellech , Monmouthshire , [ a ] on 18 May 1872, into an influential and liberal family of the British aristocracy .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] His parents were Viscount and Viscountess Amberley . Lord Amberley consented to his wife's affair with their children's tutor, [ 21 ] [ 22 ] the biologist Douglas Spalding . Both were early advocates of birth control at a time when this was considered scandalous.

[ 23 ] Lord Amberley, a deist , asked the philosopher John Stuart Mill to act as Russell's secular godfather.

[ 24 ] Mill died the year after Russell's birth, but his writings later influenced Russell's life.

Russell as a 4-year-old Russell's paternal grandfather, Lord John Russell, later 1st Earl Russell (1792–1878), had twice been Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in the 1840s and 1860s.

[ 25 ] A member of Parliament since the early 1810s, he met with Napoleon Bonaparte in Elba .

[ 26 ] The Russells had been prominent in England for several centuries before this, coming to power and the peerage with the rise of the Tudor dynasty (see: Duke of Bedford ). They established themselves as one of the leading Whig families and participated in political events from the dissolution of the monasteries in 1536–1540 to the Glorious Revolution in 1688–1689 and the Great Reform Act in 1832.

[ 25 ] [ 27 ] Lady Amberley was the daughter of Lord and Lady Stanley of Alderley .

[ 16 ] Russell often feared the ridicule of his maternal grandmother, [ 28 ] one of the campaigners for education of women .

[ 29 ] Childhood and adolescence [ edit ] Russell as a schoolboy Russell had two siblings: brother Frank (seven years older), and sister Rachel (four years older). In June 1874, Russell's mother died of diphtheria , followed shortly by Rachel's death. In January 1876, his father died of bronchitis [ 30 ] after a long period of depression .

[ 31 ] : 14 Frank and Bertrand were placed in the care of Victorian paternal grandparents, who lived at Pembroke Lodge in Richmond Park . His grandfather, former Prime Minister Earl Russell , died in 1878, and was remembered by Russell as a kind old man in a wheelchair. His grandmother, the Countess Russell (née Lady Frances Elliot), was the central family figure for the rest of Russell's childhood and youth.

[ 16 ] [ 23 ] The Countess was from a Scottish Presbyterian family and petitioned the Court of Chancery to set aside a provision in Amberley's will requiring the children to be raised as agnostics. Despite her religious conservatism, she held progressive views in other areas (accepting Darwinism and supporting Irish Home Rule ), and her influence on Bertrand Russell's outlook on social justice and standing up for principle remained with him throughout his life. Her favourite Bible verse, "Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil", [ 32 ] became his motto. The atmosphere at Pembroke Lodge was one of frequent prayer, emotional repression and formality; Frank reacted to this with open rebellion, but the young Bertrand learned to hide his feelings.

Childhood home, Pembroke Lodge , Richmond Park, London Russell's adolescence was lonely and he contemplated suicide. He remarked in his autobiography that his interests in "nature and books and (later) mathematics saved me from complete despondency;" [ 33 ] only his wish to know more mathematics kept him from suicide.

[ 34 ] He was educated at home by a series of tutors.

[ 35 ] When Russell was eleven years old, his brother Frank introduced him to the work of Euclid , which he described in his autobiography as "one of the great events of my life, as dazzling as first love".

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] During these formative years, he also discovered the works of Percy Bysshe Shelley . Russell wrote: "I spent all my spare time reading him, and learning him by heart, knowing no one to whom I could speak of what I thought or felt, I used to reflect how wonderful it would have been to know Shelley, and to wonder whether I should meet any live human being with whom I should feel so much sympathy." [ 38 ] Russell claimed that beginning at age 15, he spent considerable time thinking about the validity of Christian religious dogma , which he found unconvincing.

[ 39 ] At this age, he came to the conclusion that there is no free will and, two years later, that there is no life after death. Finally, at the age of 18, after reading Mill's Autobiography , he abandoned the " First Cause " argument and became an atheist .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] He travelled to the continent in 1890 with an American friend, Edward FitzGerald , and with FitzGerald's family he visited the Paris Exhibition of 1889 and climbed the Eiffel Tower soon after it was completed.

[ 42 ] Education [ edit ] Russell at Trinity College, Cambridge , in 1893 Russell won a scholarship to read for the Mathematical Tripos at Trinity College, Cambridge , and began his studies there in 1890, [ 43 ] taking as coach Robert Rumsey Webb . He became acquainted with the younger George Edward Moore and came under the influence of Alfred North Whitehead , who recommended him to the Cambridge Apostles . He distinguished himself in mathematics and philosophy, graduating as seventh Wrangler in the former in 1893 and becoming a Fellow in the latter in 1895.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Early career [ edit ] See also: Axiom of reducibility Russell began his published work in 1896 with German Social Democracy , a study in politics that was an early indication of his interest in political and social theory. In 1896 he taught German social democracy at the London School of Economics .

[ 46 ] He was a member of the Coefficients dining club of social reformers set up in 1902 by the Fabian campaigners Sidney and Beatrice Webb .

[ 47 ] He now started a study of the foundations of mathematics at Trinity. In 1897, he wrote An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry (submitted at the Fellowship Examination of Trinity College) which discussed the Cayley–Klein metrics used for non-Euclidean geometry .

[ 48 ] He attended the first International Congress of Philosophy in Paris in 1900 where he met Giuseppe Peano and Alessandro Padoa . The Italians had responded to Georg Cantor , making a science of set theory ; they gave Russell their literature including the Formulario mathematico . Russell was impressed by the precision of Peano's arguments at the Congress, read the literature upon returning to England, and came upon Russell's paradox . In 1903 he published The Principles of Mathematics , a work on the foundations of mathematics. It advanced a thesis of logicism , that mathematics and logic are one and the same.

[ 49 ] At the age of 29, in February 1901, Russell underwent what he called a "sort of mystic illumination", after witnessing Whitehead 's wife's suffering in an angina attack. "I found myself filled with semi-mystical feelings about beauty and with a desire almost as profound as that of the Buddha to find some philosophy which should make human life endurable", Russell would later recall. "At the end of those five minutes, I had become a completely different person." [ 50 ] In 1905, he wrote the essay " On Denoting ", which was published in the philosophical journal Mind . Russell was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1908 .

[ 7 ] [ 16 ] The three-volume Principia Mathematica , written with Whitehead, was published between 1910 and 1913. This, along with the earlier The Principles of Mathematics , soon made Russell world-famous in his field. Russell's first political activity was as the Independent Liberal candidate in the 1907 by-election for the Wimbledon constituency , where he was not elected.

[ 51 ] In 1910, he became a lecturer at the University of Cambridge , Trinity College, where he had studied. He was considered for a fellowship, which would give him a vote in the college government and protect him from being fired for his opinions, but was passed over because he was "anti-clerical", because he was agnostic. He was approached by the Austrian engineering student Ludwig Wittgenstein , who started undergraduate study with him. Russell viewed Wittgenstein as a successor who would continue his work on logic. He spent hours dealing with Wittgenstein's various phobias and his bouts of despair. This was a drain on Russell's energy, but Russell continued to be fascinated by him and encouraged his academic development, including the publication of Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus in 1922.

[ 52 ] Russell delivered his lectures on logical atomism , his version of these ideas, in 1918, before the end of World War I . Wittgenstein was, at that time, serving in the Austrian Army and subsequently spent nine months in an Italian prisoner of war camp at the end of the conflict.

First World War [ edit ] Russell served on the National Committee of the No-Conscription Fellowship , shown here in May 1916 ( back right ).

[ 53 ] During World War I , Russell was one of the few people to engage in active pacifist activities . In 1916, due to his absence of allegiance to the war effort, he was dismissed from Trinity College following his conviction under the Defence of the Realm Act 1914 .

[ 54 ] He later described this, in Free Thought and Official Propaganda , as an illegitimate means the state used to violate freedom of expression. Russell championed the case of Eric Chappelow , a poet jailed and abused as a conscientious objector.

[ 55 ] Russell played a part in the Leeds Convention in June 1917, a historic event which saw well over a thousand "anti-war socialists" gather; many being delegates from the Independent Labour Party and the Socialist Party, united in their pacifist beliefs and advocating a peace settlement.

[ 56 ] The international press reported that Russell appeared with a number of Labour Members of Parliament (MPs), including Ramsay MacDonald and Philip Snowden , as well as former Liberal MP and anti-conscription campaigner, Professor Arnold Lupton . After the event, Russell told Lady Ottoline Morrell that, "to my surprise, when I got up to speak, I was given the greatest ovation that was possible to give anybody".

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] His conviction in 1916 resulted in Russell being fined £100 (equivalent to £7,100 in 2023), which he refused to pay in the hope that he would be sent to prison, but his books were sold at auction to raise the money. The books were bought by friends; he later treasured his copy of the King James Bible that was stamped "Confiscated by Cambridge Police".

A later conviction for publicly lecturing against inviting the United States to enter the war on the United Kingdom's side resulted in six months' imprisonment in Brixton Prison (see Bertrand Russell's political views ) in 1918 (he was prosecuted under the Defence of the Realm Act [ 59 ] ) [ 60 ] He later said of his imprisonment: I found prison in many ways quite agreeable. I had no engagements, no difficult decisions to make, no fear of callers, no interruptions to my work. I read enormously; I wrote a book, "Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy"... and began the work for "The Analysis of Mind". I was rather interested in my fellow-prisoners, who seemed to me in no way morally inferior to the rest of the population, though they were on the whole slightly below the usual level of intelligence as was shown by their having been caught.

[ 61 ] While he was reading Strachey 's Eminent Victorians chapter about Gordon he laughed out loud in his cell prompting the warder to intervene and reminding him that "prison was a place of punishment".

[ 62 ] Russell was reinstated to Trinity in 1919, resigned in 1920, was Tarner Lecturer in 1926 and became a Fellow again in 1944 until 1949.

[ 63 ] In 1924, Russell again gained press attention when attending a "banquet" in the House of Commons with well-known campaigners, including Arnold Lupton , who had been an MP and had also endured imprisonment for "passive resistance to military or naval service".

[ 64 ] G. H. Hardy on the Trinity controversy [ edit ] In 1941, G. H. Hardy wrote a 61-page pamphlet titled Bertrand Russell and Trinity (published later as a book by Cambridge University Press with a foreword by C. D. Broad ) in which he gave an authoritative account of Russell's 1916 dismissal from Trinity College, explaining that a reconciliation between the college and Russell had later taken place and gave details about Russell's personal life. Hardy writes that Russell's dismissal had created a scandal since the vast majority of the Fellows of the College opposed the decision. The ensuing pressure from the Fellows induced the Council to reinstate Russell. In January 1920, it was announced that Russell had accepted the reinstatement offer from Trinity and would begin lecturing in October. In July 1920, Russell applied for a one-year leave of absence; this was approved. He spent the year giving lectures in China and Japan. In January 1921, it was announced by Trinity that Russell had resigned and his resignation had been accepted. This resignation, Hardy explains, was voluntary and was not the result of another altercation.

The reason for the resignation, according to Hardy, was that Russell was going through a tumultuous time in his personal life with a divorce and subsequent remarriage. Russell contemplated asking Trinity for another one-year leave of absence but decided against it since this would have been an "unusual application" and the situation had the potential to snowball into another controversy. Although Russell did the right thing, in Hardy's opinion, the reputation of the College suffered with Russell's resignation since the 'world of learning' knew about Russell's altercation with Trinity but not that the rift had healed. In 1925, Russell was asked by the Council of Trinity College to give the Tarner Lectures on the Philosophy of the Sciences; these would later be the basis for one of Russell's best-received books according to Hardy: The Analysis of Matter , published in 1927.

[ 65 ] In the preface to the Trinity pamphlet, Hardy wrote: I wish to make it plain that Russell himself is not responsible, directly or indirectly, for the writing of the pamphlet.... I wrote it without his knowledge and, when I sent him the typescript and asked for his permission to print it, I suggested that, unless it contained misstatement of fact, he should make no comment on it. He agreed to this... no word has been changed as the result of any suggestion from him.

Between the wars [ edit ] In August 1920, Russell travelled to Soviet Russia as part of an official delegation sent by the British government to investigate the effects of the Russian Revolution .

[ 66 ] He wrote a four-part series of articles, titled "Soviet Russia—1920", for the magazine The Nation .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] He met Vladimir Lenin and had an hour-long conversation with him. In his autobiography, he mentions that he found Lenin disappointing, sensing an "impish cruelty" in him and comparing him to "an opinionated professor". He cruised down the Volga on a steamship. His experiences destroyed his previous tentative support for the revolution. He subsequently wrote a book, The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism , [ 69 ] about his experiences on this trip, taken with a group of 24 others from the UK, all of whom came home thinking well of the Soviet regime, despite Russell's attempts to change their minds. For example, he told them that he had heard shots fired in the middle of the night and was sure that these were clandestine executions, but the others maintained that it was only cars backfiring.

[ citation needed ] Russell with his children, John and Kate Russell's lover Dora Black , a British author, feminist and socialist campaigner, visited Soviet Russia independently at the same time; in contrast to his reaction, she was enthusiastic about the Bolshevik revolution .

[ 69 ] The following year, Russell, accompanied by Dora, visited Peking (as Beijing was then known outside of China) to lecture on philosophy for a year.

[ 35 ] He went with optimism and hope, seeing China as then being on a new path.

[ 70 ] Other scholars present in China at the time included John Dewey [ 71 ] and Rabindranath Tagore , the Indian Nobel-laureate poet.

[ 35 ] Before leaving China, Russell became gravely ill with pneumonia , and incorrect reports of his death were published in the Japanese press.

[ 71 ] When the couple visited Japan on their return journey, Dora took on the role of spurning the local press by handing out notices reading "Mr. Bertrand Russell, having died according to the Japanese press, is unable to give interviews to Japanese journalists".

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Apparently they found this harsh and reacted resentfully.

[ citation needed ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Russell supported his family during this time by writing popular books explaining matters of physics , ethics, and education to the layman.

Bertrand Russell in 1924 From 1922 to 1927 the Russells divided their time between London and Cornwall , spending summers in Porthcurno .

[ 76 ] In the 1922 and 1923 general elections Russell stood as a Labour Party candidate in the Chelsea constituency , but only on the basis that he knew he was unlikely to be elected in such a safe Conservative seat, and he was unsuccessful on both occasions.

After the birth of his two children, he became interested in education, especially early childhood education . He was not satisfied with the old traditional education and thought that progressive education also had some flaws; [ 77 ] as a result, together with Dora, Russell founded the experimental Beacon Hill School in 1927. The school was run from a succession of different locations, including its original premises at the Russells' residence, Telegraph House, near Harting , West Sussex. During this time, he published On Education, Especially in Early Childhood . On 8 July 1930, Dora gave birth to her third child Harriet Ruth. After he left the school in 1932, Dora continued it until 1943.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] In 1927 Russell met Barry Fox (later Barry Stevens) , who became a known Gestalt therapist and writer in later years.

[ 80 ] They developed an intense relationship, and in Fox's words: "...

for three years we were very close." [ 81 ] Fox sent her daughter Judith to Beacon Hill School.

[ 82 ] From 1927 to 1932 Russell wrote 34 letters to Fox.

[ 83 ] Upon the death of his elder brother Frank, in 1931, Russell became the 3rd Earl Russell .

Russell's marriage to Dora grew tenuous, and it reached a breaking point over her having two children with an American journalist, Griffin Barry.

[ 79 ] They separated in 1932 and finally divorced. On 18 January 1936, Russell married his third wife, an Oxford undergraduate named Patricia ("Peter") Spence , who had been his children's governess since 1930. Russell and Peter had one son, Conrad Sebastian Robert Russell , 5th Earl Russell, who became a historian and one of the leading figures in the Liberal Democrat party.

[ 16 ] Russell returned in 1937 to the London School of Economics to lecture on the science of power.

[ 46 ] During the 1930s, Russell became a friend and collaborator of V. K. Krishna Menon , then President of the India League , the foremost lobby in the United Kingdom for Indian independence.

[ 13 ] Russell chaired the India League from 1932 to 1939.

[ 84 ] Second World War [ edit ] Russell's political views changed over time, mostly about war. He opposed rearmament against Nazi Germany . In 1937, he wrote in a personal letter: "If the Germans succeed in sending an invading army to England we should do best to treat them as visitors, give them quarters and invite the commander and chief to dine with the prime minister." [ 85 ] In 1940, he changed his appeasement view that avoiding a full-scale world war was more important than defeating Hitler. He concluded that Adolf Hitler taking over all of Europe would be a permanent threat to democracy. In 1943, he adopted a stance toward large-scale warfare called "relative political pacifism": "War was always a great evil, but in some particularly extreme circumstances, it may be the lesser of two evils." [ 86 ] [ 87 ] Before World War II, Russell taught at the University of Chicago , later moving on to Los Angeles to lecture at the UCLA Department of Philosophy .

[ 88 ] He was appointed professor at the City College of New York (CCNY) in 1940, but after a public outcry the appointment was annulled by a court judgment that pronounced him "morally unfit" to teach at the college because of his opinions, especially those relating to sexual morality , detailed in Marriage and Morals (1929). The matter was taken to the New York Supreme Court by Jean Kay who was afraid that her daughter would be harmed by the appointment, though her daughter was not a student at CCNY.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Many intellectuals, led by John Dewey , protested at his treatment.

[ 90 ] Albert Einstein 's oft-quoted aphorism that "great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds" originated in his open letter, dated 19 March 1940, to Morris Raphael Cohen , a professor emeritus at CCNY, supporting Russell's appointment.

[ 91 ] Dewey and Horace M. Kallen edited a collection of articles on the CCNY affair in The Bertrand Russell Case . Russell soon joined the Barnes Foundation , lecturing to a varied audience on the history of philosophy ; these lectures formed the basis of A History of Western Philosophy . His relationship with the eccentric Albert C. Barnes soon soured, and he returned to the UK in 1944 to rejoin the faculty of Trinity College.

[ 92 ] Later life [ edit ] See also: 1950 Nobel Prize in Literature Russell in 1954 Russell participated in many broadcasts over the BBC , particularly The Brains Trust and for the Third Programme , on various topical and philosophical subjects. By this time Russell was known outside academic circles, frequently the subject or author of magazine and newspaper articles, and was called upon to offer opinions on a variety of subjects, even mundane ones. En route to one of his lectures in Trondheim , Russell was one of 24 survivors (out of 43 passengers) of an aeroplane crash in Hommelvik in October 1948. He said he owed his life to smoking since the people who drowned were in the non-smoking part of the plane.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] A History of Western Philosophy (1945) became a best-seller and provided Russell with a steady income for the remainder of his life.

In 1942, Russell argued in favour of a moderate socialism , capable of overcoming its metaphysical principles. In an inquiry on dialectical materialism , launched by the Austrian artist and philosopher Wolfgang Paalen in his journal DYN , Russell said: "I think the metaphysics of both Hegel and Marx plain nonsense—Marx's claim to be 'science' is no more justified than Mary Baker Eddy 's. This does not mean that I am opposed to socialism." [ 95 ] In 1943, Russell expressed support for Zionism : "I have come gradually to see that, in a dangerous and largely hostile world, it is essential to Jews to have some country which is theirs, some region where they are not suspected aliens, some state which embodies what is distinctive in their culture".

[ 96 ] In a speech in 1948, Russell said that if the USSR 's aggression continued, it would be morally worse to go to war after the USSR possessed an atomic bomb than before it possessed one, because if the USSR had no bomb the West's victory would come more swiftly and with fewer casualties than if there were atomic bombs on both sides.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] At that time, only the United States possessed an atomic bomb, and the USSR was pursuing an aggressive policy towards the countries in Eastern Europe which were being absorbed into the Soviet Union's sphere of influence . Many understood Russell's comments to mean that Russell approved of a first strike in a war with the USSR, including Nigel Lawson , who was present when Russell spoke of such matters. Others, including Griffin , who obtained a transcript of the speech, have argued that he was explaining the usefulness of America's atomic arsenal in deterring the USSR from continuing its domination of Eastern Europe.

[ 93 ] Just after the atomic bombs exploded over Hiroshima and Nagasaki , Russell wrote letters, and published articles in newspapers from 1945 to 1948, stating clearly that it was morally justified and better to go to war against the USSR using atomic bombs while the United States possessed them and before the USSR did.

[ 99 ] In September 1949, one week after the USSR tested its first A-bomb, but before this became known, Russell wrote that the USSR would be unable to develop nuclear weapons because following Stalin's purges only science based on Marxist principles would be practised in the Soviet Union.

[ 100 ] After it became known that the USSR had carried out its nuclear bomb tests , Russell declared his position advocating the total abolition of atomic weapons.

[ 99 ] In 1948, Russell was invited by the BBC to deliver the inaugural Reith Lectures [ 101 ] —what was to become an annual series of lectures, still broadcast by the BBC. His series of six broadcasts, titled Authority and the Individual , [ 102 ] explored themes such as the role of individual initiative in the development of a community and the role of state control in a progressive society. Russell continued to write about philosophy. He wrote a foreword to Words and Things by Ernest Gellner , which was highly critical of the later thought of Ludwig Wittgenstein and of ordinary language philosophy .

Gilbert Ryle refused to have the book reviewed in the philosophical journal Mind , which caused Russell to respond via The Times . The result was a month-long correspondence in The Times between the supporters and detractors of ordinary language philosophy, which was ended when the paper published an editorial critical of both sides but agreeing with the opponents of ordinary language philosophy.

[ 103 ] In the King's Birthday Honours of 9 June 1949, Russell was awarded the Order of Merit , [ 104 ] and the following year he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature .

[ 16 ] [ 35 ] When he was given the Order of Merit, George VI was affable but embarrassed at decorating a former jailbird, saying, "You have sometimes behaved in a manner that would not do if generally adopted".

[ 105 ] Russell merely smiled, but afterwards claimed that the reply "That's right, just like your brother " immediately came to mind.

In 1950, Russell attended the inaugural conference for the Congress for Cultural Freedom , a CIA -funded anti-communist organisation committed to the deployment of culture as a weapon during the Cold War .

[ 106 ] Russell was one of the known patrons of the Congress until he resigned in 1956.

[ 107 ] In 1952, Russell was divorced by Spence, with whom he had been very unhappy.

[ citation needed ] Conrad, Russell's son by Spence, did not see his father between the time of the divorce and 1968 (at which time his decision to meet his father caused a permanent breach with his mother). Russell married his fourth wife, Edith Finch , soon after the divorce, on 15 December 1952. They had known each other since 1925, and Edith had taught English at Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, sharing a house for 20 years with Russell's old friend Lucy Donnelly . Edith remained with him until his death, and, by all accounts, their marriage was a happy, close, and loving one. Russell's eldest son John suffered from mental illness , which was the source of ongoing disputes between Russell and his former wife Dora.

[ citation needed ] In 1962 Russell played a public role in the Cuban Missile Crisis : in an exchange of telegrams with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev , Khrushchev assured him that the Soviet government would not be reckless.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Russell sent this telegram to President Kennedy : YOUR ACTION DESPERATE. THREAT TO HUMAN SURVIVAL. NO CONCEIVABLE JUSTIFICATION. CIVILIZED MAN CONDEMNS IT. WE WILL NOT HAVE MASS MURDER. ULTIMATUM MEANS WAR... END THIS MADNESS.

[ 110 ] According to historian Peter Knight, after JFK's assassination , Russell, "prompted by the emerging work of the lawyer Mark Lane in the US ... rallied support from other noteworthy and left-leaning compatriots to form a 'Who Killed Kennedy committee' in June 1964, members of which included Michael Foot MP, the wife of Tony Benn MP, the publisher Victor Gollancz , the writers John Arden and J. B. Priestley , and the Oxford history professor Hugh Trevor-Roper ." Russell published a highly critical article in The Minority of One weeks before the Warren Commission report was published, setting forth 16 Questions on the Assassination.

[ 111 ] Russell equated the Oswald case with the Dreyfus affair of late 19th-century France, in which the state convicted an innocent man. Russell also criticised the American press for failing to heed any voices critical of the official version.

[ 112 ] Political causes [ edit ] Main article: Political views of Bertrand Russell Bertrand Russell was opposed to war from a young age; his opposition to World War I was used as grounds for his dismissal from Trinity College at Cambridge. This incident fused two of his controversial causes, as he had failed to be granted fellow status which would have protected him from firing, because he was not willing to either pretend to be a devout Christian, or at least avoid admitting he was agnostic.

He later described the resolution of these issues as essential to freedom of thought and expression, citing the incident in Free Thought and Official Propaganda , where he explained that the expression of any idea, even the most obviously "bad", must be protected not only from direct State intervention but also economic leveraging and other means of being silenced: The opinions which are still persecuted strike the majority as so monstrous and immoral that the general principle of toleration cannot be held to apply to them. But this is exactly the same view as that which made possible the tortures of the Inquisition .

[ 113 ] Russell spent the 1950s and 1960s engaged in political causes primarily related to nuclear disarmament and opposing the Vietnam War . The 1955 Russell–Einstein Manifesto was a document calling for nuclear disarmament and was signed by eleven of the most prominent nuclear physicists and intellectuals of the time.

[ 114 ] In October 1960 " The Committee of 100 " was formed with a declaration by Russell and Michael Scott , entitled "Act or Perish", which called for a "movement of nonviolent resistance to nuclear war and weapons of mass destruction".

[ 115 ] In September 1961, at the age of 89, Russell was jailed for seven days in Brixton Prison for a "breach of the peace" after taking part in an anti-nuclear demonstration in London. The magistrate offered to exempt him from jail if he pledged himself to "good behaviour", to which Russell replied: "No, I won't." [ 116 ] [ 117 ] From 1966 to 1967, Russell worked with Jean-Paul Sartre and many other intellectual figures to form the Russell Vietnam War Crimes Tribunal to investigate the conduct of the United States in Vietnam. He wrote many letters to world leaders during this period.

Early in his life, Russell supported eugenicist policies. In 1894, he proposed that the state issue certificates of health to prospective parents and withhold public benefits from those considered unfit.

[ 118 ] In 1929, he wrote that people deemed "mentally defective" and "feebleminded" should be sexually sterilised because they "are apt to have enormous numbers of illegitimate children, all, as a rule, wholly useless to the community." [ 119 ] Russell was also an advocate of population control : [ 120 ] [ 121 ] The nations which at present increase rapidly should be encouraged to adopt the methods by which, in the West, the increase of population has been checked. Educational propaganda, with government help, could achieve this result in a generation. There are, however, two powerful forces opposed to such a policy: one is religion, the other is nationalism. I think it is the duty of all to proclaim that opposition to the spread of birth is appalling depth of misery and degradation, and that within another fifty years or so. I do not pretend that birth control is the only way in which population can be kept from increasing. There are others, which, one must suppose, opponents of birth control would prefer. War, as I remarked a moment ago, has hitherto been disappointing in this respect, but perhaps bacteriological war may prove more effective. If a Black Death could be spread throughout the whole world once in every generation survivors could procreate freely without making the world too full.

On 20 November 1948, in a public speech at Westminster School , addressing a gathering arranged by the New Commonwealth, Russell shocked some observers by suggesting that a preemptive nuclear strike on the Soviet Union was justified. Russell argued that war between the United States and the Soviet Union seemed inevitable, so it would be a humanitarian gesture to get it over with quickly and have the United States in the dominant position. Currently, Russell argued, humanity could survive such a war, whereas a full nuclear war after both sides had manufactured large stockpiles of more destructive weapons was likely to result in the extinction of the human race . Russell later relented from this stance, instead arguing for mutual disarmament by the nuclear powers.

In 1956, before and during the Suez Crisis , Russell expressed his opposition to European imperialism in the Middle East. He viewed the crisis as another reminder of the pressing need for an effective mechanism for international governance, and to restrict national sovereignty in places such as the Suez Canal area "where general interest is involved". At the same time the Suez Crisis was taking place, the world was also captivated by the Hungarian Revolution and the subsequent crushing of the revolt by intervening Soviet forces. Russell attracted criticism for speaking out fervently against the Suez war while ignoring Soviet repression in Hungary, to which he responded that he did not criticise the Soviets "because there was no need. Most of the so-called Western World was fulminating". Although he later feigned a lack of concern, at the time he was disgusted by the brutal Soviet response, and on 16 November 1956, he expressed approval for a declaration of support for Hungarian scholars which Michael Polanyi had cabled to the Soviet embassy in London twelve days previously, shortly after Soviet troops had entered Budapest .

[ 122 ] In November 1957 Russell wrote an article addressing US President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev , urging a summit to consider "the conditions of co-existence". Khrushchev responded that peace could be served by such a meeting. In January 1958 Russell elaborated his views in The Observer , proposing a cessation of all nuclear weapons production, with the UK taking the first step by unilaterally suspending its own nuclear weapons programme if necessary, and with Germany "freed from all alien armed forces and pledged to neutrality in any conflict between East and West". US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles replied for Eisenhower. The exchange of letters was published as The Vital Letters of Russell, Khrushchev, and Dulles .

[ 123 ] Russell was asked by The New Republic , a liberal American magazine, to elaborate his views on world peace. He urged that all nuclear weapons testing and flights by planes armed with nuclear weapons be halted immediately, and negotiations be opened for the destruction of all hydrogen bombs , with the number of conventional nuclear devices limited to ensure a balance of power. He proposed that Germany be reunified and accept the Oder-Neisse line as its border, and that a neutral zone be established in Central Europe, consisting at the minimum of Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia , with each of these countries being free of foreign troops and influence, and prohibited from forming alliances with countries outside the zone. In the Middle East, Russell suggested that the West avoid opposing Arab nationalism , and proposed the creation of a United Nations peacekeeping force to guard Israel's frontiers to ensure that Israel was prevented from committing aggression and protected from it. He also suggested Western recognition of the People's Republic of China , and that it be admitted to the UN with a permanent seat on the UN Security Council .

[ 123 ] He was in contact with Lionel Rogosin while the latter was filming his anti-war film Good Times, Wonderful Times in the 1960s. He became a hero to many of the youthful members of the New Left . In early 1963, Russell became increasingly vocal in his disapproval of the Vietnam War, and felt that the US government's policies there were near- genocidal . In 1963, he became the inaugural recipient of the Jerusalem Prize , an award for writers concerned with the freedom of the individual in society.

[ 124 ] In 1964, he was one of eleven world figures who issued an appeal to Israel and the Arab countries to accept an arms embargo and international supervision of nuclear plants and rocket weaponry.

[ 125 ] In October 1965, he tore up his Labour Party card because he suspected Harold Wilson 's Labour government was going to send troops to support the United States in Vietnam.

[ 16 ] Final years, death and legacy [ edit ] Plas Penrhyn in Penrhyndeudraeth Russell on a 1972 stamp of India In June 1955, Russell had leased Plas Penrhyn in Penrhyndeudraeth , Merionethshire, Wales and on 5 July of the following year it became his and Edith's principal residence.

[ 126 ] Bust of Russell in Red Lion Square Russell published his three-volume autobiography in 1967, 1968, and 1969. He made a cameo appearance playing himself in the anti-war Hindi film Aman , by Mohan Kumar , which was released in India in 1967. This was Russell's only appearance in a feature film.

[ 127 ] On 23 November 1969, he wrote to The Times newspaper saying that the preparation for show trials in Czechoslovakia was "highly alarming". The same month, he appealed to Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to support an international war crimes commission to investigate alleged torture and genocide by the United States in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War. The following month, he protested to Alexei Kosygin over the expulsion of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn from the Soviet Union of Writers .

On 31 January 1970, Russell issued a statement condemning "Israel's aggression in the Middle East", and in particular, Israeli bombing raids being carried out deep in Egyptian territory as part of the War of Attrition , which he compared to German bombing raids in the Battle of Britain and the US bombing of Vietnam. He called for an Israeli withdrawal to the pre- Six-Day War borders, stating "The aggression committed by Israel must be condemned, not only because no state has the right to annexe foreign territory, but because every expansion is an experiment to discover how much more aggression the world will tolerate." [ 128 ] This was Russell's final political statement or act. It was read out at the International Conference of Parliamentarians in Cairo on 3 February 1970, the day after his death.

[ 129 ] Russell died of influenza , just after 8 pm on 2 February 1970 at his home in Penrhyndeudraeth, aged 97.

[ 130 ] His body was cremated in Colwyn Bay on 5 February 1970 with five people present.

[ 131 ] In accordance with his will, there was no religious ceremony but one minute's silence; his ashes were later scattered over the Welsh mountains.

[ 132 ] Although he was born in Monmouthshire , and died in Penrhyndeudraeth in Wales, Russell identified as English.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] Later in 1970, on 23 October, his will was published showing he had left an estate valued at £69,423 (equivalent to £1.4 million in 2023).

[ 132 ] In 1980, a memorial to Russell was commissioned by a committee including the philosopher A. J. Ayer . It consists of a bust of Russell in Red Lion Square in London sculpted by Marcelle Quinton.

[ 136 ] Lady Katharine Jane Tait, Russell's daughter, founded the Bertrand Russell Society in 1974 to preserve and understand his work. It publishes the Bertrand Russell Society Bulletin , holds meetings and awards prizes for scholarship, including the Bertrand Russell Society Award.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] She also authored several essays about her father; as well as a book, My Father, Bertrand Russell , which was published in 1975.

[ 139 ] All members receive Russell: The Journal of Bertrand Russell Studies .

For the sesquicentennial of his birth, in May 2022, McMaster University's Bertrand Russell Archive, the university's largest and most heavily used research collection, organised both a physical and virtual exhibition on Russell's anti-nuclear stance in the post-war era, Scientists for Peace: the Russell-Einstein Manifesto and the Pugwash Conference , which included the earliest version of the Russell–Einstein Manifesto .

[ 140 ] The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation held a commemoration at Conway Hall in Red Lion Square, London, on 18 May, the anniversary of his birth.

[ 141 ] For its part, on the same day, La Estrella de Panamá published a biographical sketch by Francisco Díaz Montilla, who commented that "[if he] had to characterize Russell's work in one sentence [he] would say: criticism and rejection of dogmatism." [ 142 ] Bangladesh's first leader, Mujibur Rahman , named his youngest son Sheikh Russel in honour of Bertrand Russell.

Marriages and issue [ edit ] In 1889, Russell, at 17 years of age, met the family of Alys Pearsall Smith , an American Quaker five years his senior, who was a graduate of Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia .

[ 143 ] [ 31 ] : 37 He became a friend of the Pearsall Smith family. They knew him as "Lord John's grandson" and enjoyed showing him off.

[ 31 ] : 48 He fell in love with Alys, and contrary to his grandmother's wishes, married her on 13 December 1894. Their marriage began to fall apart in 1901 when it occurred to Russell, while cycling, that he no longer loved her.

[ 144 ] She asked him if he loved her, and he cruelly replied that he did not. Russell also disliked Alys's mother, finding her controlling and cruel. A lengthy period of separation began in 1911 with Russell's affair with Lady Ottoline Morrell , [ 145 ] and he and Alys finally divorced in 1921 to enable Russell to remarry.

[ 146 ] During his years of separation from Alys, Russell had affairs (often simultaneous) with a number of women, including Morrell and the actress Lady Constance Malleson .

[ 147 ] Some have suggested that at this point he had an affair with Vivienne Haigh-Wood , the English governess and writer, and first wife of T. S. Eliot .

[ 148 ] In 1921, his second marriage was to Dora Winifred Black MBE (died 1986), daughter of Sir Frederick Black. Dora was six months pregnant when the couple returned to England.

This was dissolved in 1935, having produced two children: John Conrad Russell, 4th Earl Russell (1921–1987) Lady Katharine Jane Russell (1923–2021), who married Rev. Charles Tait in 1948 and had issue Russell's third marriage was to Patricia Helen Spence (died 2004) in 1936, with the marriage producing one child: Conrad Sebastian Robert Russell, 5th Earl Russell (1937–2004), who became a historian and one of the leading figures in the Liberal Democrat party.

[ 16 ] Russell's third marriage ended in divorce in 1952. He married Edith Finch in the same year. They remained married at the time of his death in 1972, and Finch subsequently died in 1978.

[ 149 ] Titles, awards and honours [ edit ] Upon his brother's death in 1931, Russell became the 3rd Earl Russell of Kingston Russell , and the subsidiary title of Viscount Amberley of Amberley and of Ardsalla.

[ 150 ] He held both titles, and the accompanying seat in the House of Lords, until his death in 1970.

Honours and awards [ edit ] Country Date Award United Kingdom 1932 De Morgan Medal United Kingdom 1934 Sylvester Medal United Kingdom 1949 Order of Merit Sweden 1950 Nobel Prize in Literature United Nations 1957 Kalinga Prize Israel 1963 Jerusalem Prize Scholastic [ edit ] Date School/Association Award/Position 1893 Trinity College, Cambridge First Class Honours in Mathematics 1894 Trinity College, Cambridge First Class Honours in Philosophy [ 151 ] 1895 Trinity College, Cambridge Fellowship 1896 London School of Economics and Political Science Lecturer 1899, 1901, 1910, 1915 Trinity College, Cambridge Lecturer 1908 The Royal Society Fellowship 1911 Aristotelian Society President 1938 University of Chicago Visiting Professor of Philosophy 1939 University of California at Los Angeles Professor of Philosophy 1941-42 Barnes Foundation Lecturer 1944-49 Trinity College, Cambridge Fellowship 1949 Trinity College, Cambridge Lifetime Fellowship [ 152 ] Views [ edit ] This article is part of a series about Bertrand Russell Views on philosophy Views on society ( Peace Foundation ) Professorship of Philosophy Appointment court case Russell's paradox Peano–Russell notation Copleston–Russell debate Russell–Einstein Manifesto Russell Tribunal Russell's teapot Theory of descriptions Logical atomism v t e Philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Bertrand Russell's philosophical views Russell is credited with being one of the founders of analytic philosophy . He was impressed by Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716), and wrote on major areas of philosophy except aesthetics . He was prolific in the fields of metaphysics , logic and the philosophy of mathematics , the philosophy of language , ethics and epistemology . When Brand Blanshard asked Russell why he did not write on aesthetics, Russell replied that he did not know anything about it, though he hastened to add "but that is not a very good excuse, for my friends tell me it has not deterred me from writing on other subjects".

[ 153 ] On ethics, Russell wrote that he was a utilitarian in his youth, yet he later distanced himself from this view.

[ 154 ] For the advancement of science and protection of liberty of expression, Russell advocated The Will to Doubt , the recognition that all human knowledge is at most a best guess, that one should always remember: None of our beliefs are quite true; all have at least a penumbra of vagueness and error. The methods of increasing the degree of truth in our beliefs are well known; they consist in hearing all sides, trying to ascertain all the relevant facts, controlling our own bias by discussion with people who have the opposite bias, and cultivating a readiness to discard any hypothesis which has proved inadequate. These methods are practised in science, and have built up the body of scientific knowledge.
Every man of science whose outlook is truly scientific is ready to admit that what passes for scientific knowledge at the moment is sure to require correction with the progress of discovery; nevertheless, it is near enough to the truth to serve for most practical purposes, though not for all. In science, where alone something approximating to genuine knowledge is to be found, men's attitude is tentative and full of doubt.

[ 113 ] Religion [ edit ] Russell described himself in 1947 as an agnostic or an atheist : he found it difficult to determine which term to adopt, saying: Therefore, in regard to the Olympic gods , speaking to a purely philosophical audience, I would say that I am an Agnostic. But speaking popularly, I think that all of us would say in regard to those gods that we were Atheists. In regard to the Christian God , I should, I think, take exactly the same line.

[ 155 ] For most of his adult life, Russell maintained religion to be little more than superstition and, despite any positive effects, largely harmful to people. He believed that religion and the religious outlook serve to impede knowledge and foster fear and dependency, and to be responsible for much of our world's wars, oppression, and misery. He was a member of the advisory council of the British Humanist Association [ 156 ] and the president of Cardiff Humanists until his death.

[ 157 ] Society [ edit ] Main article: Bertrand Russell's political views Political and social activism occupied much of Russell's time for most of his life. Russell remained politically active almost to the end of his life, writing to and exhorting world leaders and lending his name to various causes. He was a prominent campaigner against Western intervention into the Vietnam War in the 1960s, writing essays and books, attending demonstrations, and even organising the Russell Tribunal in 1966 alongside other prominent philosophers such as Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir , which fed into his 1967 book War Crimes in Vietnam.

[ 158 ] Russell argued for a "scientific society", where war would be abolished, population growth would be limited, and prosperity would be shared.

[ 159 ] He suggested the establishment of a "single supreme world government" able to enforce peace, [ 160 ] claiming that "the only thing that will redeem mankind is co-operation".

[ 161 ] He was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution .

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] As a result, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt the Constitution for the Federation of Earth .

[ 164 ] Russell also expressed support for guild socialism , and commented positively on several socialist thinkers and activists.

[ 165 ] According to Jean Bricmont and Normand Baillargeon, "Russell was both a liberal and a socialist , a combination that was perfectly comprehensible in his time, but which has become almost unthinkable today. He was a liberal in that he opposed concentrations of power in all its manifestations, military, governmental, or religious, as well as the superstitious or nationalist ideas that usually serve as its justification. But he was also a socialist, even as an extension of his liberalism, because he was equally opposed to the concentrations of power stemming from the private ownership of the major means of production , which therefore needed to be put under social control (which does not mean state control)." [ 166 ] Russell was an active supporter of the Homosexual Law Reform Society , being one of the signatories of A. E. Dyson 's 1958 letter to The Times calling for a change in the law regarding male homosexual practices, which were partly legalised in 1967, when Russell was still alive.

[ 167 ] He expressed sympathy and support for the Palestinian people and was critical of Israel 's actions. He wrote in 1960 that, "I think it was a mistake to establish a Jewish State in Palestine, but it would be a still greater mistake to try to get rid of it now that it exists." [ 168 ] In his final written document, read aloud in Cairo three days after his death on 31 January 1970, he condemned Israel as an aggressive imperialist power, which "wishes to consolidate with the least difficulty what it has already taken by violence. Every new conquest becomes the new basis of the proposed negotiation from strength, which ignores the injustice of the previous aggression." In regards to the Palestinian people and refugees , he wrote that, "No people anywhere in the world would accept being expelled en masse from their own country; how can anyone require the people of Palestine to accept a punishment which nobody else would tolerate? A permanent just settlement of the refugees in their homeland is an essential ingredient of any genuine settlement in the Middle East ." [ 169 ] Russell advocated for a universal basic income . In his 1918 book Roads to Freedom , Russell wrote that " Anarchism has the advantage as regards liberty, Socialism as regards the inducement to work.  Can we not find a method of combining these two advantages? It seems to me that we can. [...] Stated in more familiar terms, the plan we are advocating amounts essentially to this: that a certain small income, sufficient for necessaries, should be secured to all, whether they work or not, and that a larger income – as much larger as might be warranted by the total amount of commodities produced – should be given to those who are willing to engage in some work which the community recognizes as useful...When education is finished, no one should be compelled to work, and those who choose not to work should receive a bare livelihood and be left completely free." [ 170 ] In "Reflections on My Eightieth Birthday" ("Postscript" in his Autobiography ), Russell wrote: "I have lived in the pursuit of a vision, both personal and social. Personal: to care for what is noble, for what is beautiful, for what is gentle; to allow moments of insight to give wisdom at more mundane times. Social: to see in imagination the society that is to be created, where individuals grow freely, and where hate and greed and envy die because there is nothing to nourish them. These things I believe, and the world, for all its horrors, has left me unshaken".

[ 171 ] Freedom of opinion and expression [ edit ] Russell supported freedom of opinion and was an opponent of both censorship and indoctrination. In 1928, he wrote: "The fundamental argument for freedom of opinion is the doubtfulness of all our belief... when the State intervenes to ensure the indoctrination of some doctrine, it does so because there is no conclusive evidence in favour of that doctrine ... It is clear that thought is not free if the profession of certain opinions make it impossible to make a living".

[ 172 ] In 1957, he wrote: "'Free thought' means thinking freely ... to be worthy of the name freethinker he must be free of two things: the force of tradition and the tyranny of his own passions." [ 173 ] Education [ edit ] Russell has presented ideas on the possible means of control of education in case of scientific dictatorship governments, of the kind of this excerpt taken from Chapter II "General Effects of Scientific Technique" of "The Impact of Science on society": [ 174 ] This subject will make great strides when it is taken up by scientists under a scientific dictatorship. Anaxagoras maintained that snow is black, but no one believed him. The social psychologists of the future will have a number of classes of school children on whom they will try different methods of producing an unshakable conviction that snow is black. Various results will soon be arrived at. First, that the influence of home is obstructive. Second, that not much can be done unless indoctrination begins before the age of ten. Third, that verses set to music and repeatedly intoned are very effective. Fourth, that the opinion that snow is white must be held to show a morbid taste for eccentricity. But I anticipate. It is for future scientists to make these maxims precise and discover exactly how much it costs per head to make children believe that snow is black, and how much less it would cost to make them believe it is dark grey. Although this science will be diligently studied, it will be rigidly confined to the governing class. The populace will not be allowed to know how its convictions were generated. When the technique has been perfected, every government that has been in charge of education for a generation will be able to control its subjects securely without the need of armies or policemen. As yet there is only one country which has succeeded in creating this politician's paradise. The social effects of scientific technique have already been many and important, and are likely to be even more noteworthy in the future. Some of these effects depend upon the political and economic character of the country concerned; others are inevitable, whatever this character may be.

He pushed his visionary scenarios even further into details, in Chapter III "Scientific Technique in an Oligarchy" of the same book, [ 175 ] stating as an example: In future such failures are not likely to occur where there is dictatorship. Diet, injections, and injunctions will combine, from a very early age, to produce the sort of character and the sort of beliefs that the authorities consider desirable, and any serious criticism of the powers that be will become psychologically impossible. Even if all are miserable, all will believe themselves happy, because the government will tell them that they are so.

Selected works [ edit ] Below are selected Russell's works in English, sorted by year of first publication: 1896.

German Social Democracy . London: Longmans, Green & Co.

[ 176 ] 1897.

An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry .

[ 177 ] Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1900.

A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1903.

The Principles of Mathematics .

[ 178 ] Cambridge University Press 1903.

A Free man's worship, and other essays .

[ 179 ] 1905.

On Denoting , Mind , Vol. 14.

ISSN 0026-4423 . Basil Blackwell 1910.

Philosophical Essays . London: Longmans, Green 1910–1913.

Principia Mathematica .

[ 180 ] (with Alfred North Whitehead ). 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1912.

The Problems of Philosophy .

[ 181 ] London: Williams and Norgate 1914.

Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method in Philosophy .

[ 182 ] Chicago and London: Open Court Publishing.

[ 183 ] 1916.

Principles of Social Reconstruction .

[ 184 ] London, George Allen and Unwin 1916.

Why Men Fight . New York: The Century Co 1916.

The Policy of the Entente, 1904–1914: a reply to Professor Gilbert Murray .

[ 185 ] Manchester: The National Labour Press 1916.

Justice in War-time . Chicago: Open Court 1917.

Political Ideals .

[ 186 ] New York: The Century Co.

1918.

Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays . London: George Allen & Unwin 1918.

Proposed Roads to Freedom: Socialism, Anarchism, and Syndicalism .

[ 187 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1919.

Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy .

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] London: George Allen & Unwin. ( ISBN 0-415-09604-9 for Routledge paperback) [ 190 ] 1920.

The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism .

[ 191 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1921.

The Analysis of Mind .

[ 192 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1922.

The Problem of China .

[ 193 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1922.

Free Thought and Official Propaganda , delivered at South Place Institute [ 113 ] 1923.

The Prospects of Industrial Civilization , in collaboration with Dora Russell. London: George Allen & Unwin 1923.

The ABC of Atoms , London: Kegan Paul. Trench, Trubner 1924.

Icarus; or, The Future of Science . London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner 1925.

The ABC of Relativity . London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner (revised and edited by Felix Pirani ) 1925.

What I Believe . London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner 1926.

On Education, Especially in Early Childhood . London: George Allen & Unwin 1927.

The Analysis of Matter . London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner 1927.

An Outline of Philosophy . London: George Allen & Unwin 1927.

Why I Am Not a Christian .

[ 194 ] London: Watts 1927.

Selected Papers of Bertrand Russell . New York: Modern Library 1928.

Sceptical Essays . London: George Allen & Unwin 1929.

Marriage and Morals . London: George Allen & Unwin 1930.

The Conquest of Happiness . London: George Allen & Unwin 1931.

The Scientific Outlook , [ 195 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1932.

Education and the Social Order , [ 196 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1934.

Freedom and Organization, 1814–1914 . London: George Allen & Unwin 1935.

In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays .

[ 197 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1935.

Religion and Science . London: Thornton Butterworth 1936.

Which Way to Peace?

. London: Jonathan Cape 1937.

The Amberley Papers: The Letters and Diaries of Lord and Lady Amberley , with Patricia Russell, 2 vols., London: Leonard & Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press; reprinted (1966) as The Amberley Papers. Bertrand Russell's Family Background , 2 vols., London: George Allen & Unwin 1938.

Power: A New Social Analysis . London: George Allen & Unwin 1940.

An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth . New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

[ 198 ] 1945.

The Bomb and Civilisation . Published in the Glasgow Forward on 18 August 1945 1946.

A History of Western Philosophy and Its Connection with Political and Social Circumstances from the Earliest Times to the Present Day [ 199 ] New York: Simon and Schuster 1948.

Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits . London: George Allen & Unwin 1949.

Authority and the Individual .

[ 200 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1950.

Unpopular Essays .

[ 201 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1951.

New Hopes for a Changing World . London: George Allen & Unwin 1952.

The Impact of Science on Society . London: George Allen & Unwin 1953.

Satan in the Suburbs and Other Stories . London: George Allen & Unwin 1954.

Human Society in Ethics and Politics . London: George Allen & Unwin 1954.

Nightmares of Eminent Persons and Other Stories .

[ 202 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1956.

Portraits from Memory and Other Essays .

[ 203 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1956.

Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901–1950 , edited by Robert C. Marsh. London: George Allen & Unwin 1957.

Why I Am Not A Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects , edited by Paul Edwards. London: George Allen & Unwin 1958.

Understanding History and Other Essays . New York: Philosophical Library 1958.

The Will to Doubt . New York: Philosophical Library 1959.

Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare .

[ 204 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1959.

My Philosophical Development .

[ 205 ] London: George Allen & Unwin 1959.

Wisdom of the West: A Historical Survey of Western Philosophy in Its Social and Political Setting , edited by Paul Foulkes. London: Macdonald 1960.

Bertrand Russell Speaks His Mind , Cleveland and New York: World Publishing Company 1961.

The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell , edited by R. E. Egner and L. E. Denonn. London: George Allen & Unwin 1961.

Fact and Fiction . London: George Allen & Unwin 1961.

Has Man a Future?

London: George Allen & Unwin 1963.

Essays in Skepticism . New York: Philosophical Library 1963.

Unarmed Victory . London: George Allen & Unwin 1965.

Legitimacy Versus Industrialism, 1814–1848 . London: George Allen & Unwin (first published as Parts I and II of Freedom and Organization, 1814–1914 , 1934) 1965.

On the Philosophy of Science , edited by Charles A. Fritz, Jr. Indianapolis: The Bobbs–Merrill Company 1966.

The ABC of Relativity . London: George Allen & Unwin 1967.

Russell's Peace Appeals , edited by Tsutomu Makino and Kazuteru Hitaka. Japan: Eichosha's New Current Books 1967.

War Crimes in Vietnam . London: George Allen & Unwin 1951–1969.

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell , [ 206 ] 3 vols., London: George Allen & Unwin. Vol. 2, 1956 [ 206 ] 1969.

Dear Bertrand Russell... A Selection of his Correspondence with the General Public 1950–1968 , edited by Barry Feinberg and Ronald Kasrils. London: George Allen and Unwin Russell was the author of more than sixty books and over two thousand articles.

[ 207 ] [ 208 ] Additionally, he wrote many pamphlets, introductions, and letters to the editor. One pamphlet titled, 'I Appeal unto Caesar': The Case of the Conscientious Objectors , ghostwritten for Margaret Hobhouse, the mother of imprisoned peace activist Stephen Hobhouse , allegedly helped secure the release from prison of hundreds of conscientious objectors .

[ 209 ] His works can be found in anthologies and collections, including The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell , which McMaster University began publishing in 1983. By March 2017, this collection of his shorter and previously unpublished works included 18 volumes, [ 210 ] and several more are in progress. A bibliography in three additional volumes catalogues his publications. The Russell Archives held by McMaster's William Ready Division of Archives and Research Collections possess over 40,000 of his letters.

[ 211 ] See also [ edit ] Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club Criticism of Jesus Joseph Conrad (Russell's impression) List of peace activists List of pioneers in computer science Logicomix , a graphic novel about the foundational quest in mathematics, the narrator of the story being Bertrand Russell and with his life as the main storyline Information Research Department Type theory Type system Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Though today in Wales, Monmouthshire 's status was ambiguous at the time and was even considered by some to be in England, which it borders.

^ Russell and G. E. Moore broke themselves free from British Idealism which, for nearly 90 years, had been dominating British philosophy . Russell would later recall that "with a sense of escaping from prison, we allowed ourselves to think that grass is green, that the sun and stars would exist if no one was aware of them ..." [ 9 ] References [ edit ] This article has an unclear citation style . The reason given is: Citation styles are inconsistent, a mix of CS1, plain text, and minimally-formatted links, sometimes with webarchive templates.

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Citations [ edit ] ^ Irvine, Andrew David (1 January 2015).

"Bertrand Russell" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 6 December 2016 .

^ Wettstein, Howard, " Frege-Russell Semantics?

", Dialectica 44 (1–2), 1990, pp. 113–135, esp. 115: "Russell maintains that when one is acquainted with something, say, a present sense datum or oneself, one can refer to it without the mediation of anything like a Fregean sense. One can refer to it, as we might say, directly ." ^ "Structural Realism" Archived 3 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine : entry by James Ladyman in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ "Russellian Monism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 30 July 2020 .

^ Dowe, Phil (10 September 2007).

"Causal Processes" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 November 2017 .

^ James Ward Archived 1 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine ( Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ) ^ a b Kreisel, G.

(1973).

"Bertrand Arthur William Russell, Earl Russell. 1872–1970" .

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

19 : 583– 620.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.1973.0021 .

ISSN 0080-4606 .

JSTOR 769574 .

^ a b Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "Bertrand Russell" Archived 9 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine , 1 May 2003.

^ Russell B, (1944) "My Mental Development", in, Paul Arthur Schilpp: The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell , New York: Tudor, 1951, pp. 3–20.

^ Ludlow, Peter.

"Descriptions, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2008 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.)" .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2018 . Retrieved 27 December 2008 .

^ Rempel, Richard (1979). "From Imperialism to Free Trade: Couturat, Halevy and Russell's First Crusade".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

40 (3). University of Pennsylvania Press: 423– 443.

doi : 10.2307/2709246 .

JSTOR 2709246 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1988) [1917].

Political Ideals . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-10907-8 .

^ a b Nasta, Susheila, ed. (2013).

India in Britain: South Asian Networks and Connections, 1858–1950 . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-230-39271-7 .

OCLC 802321049 .

^ Samoiloff, Louise Cripps.

C .L. R. James: Memories and Commentaries , p. 19. Associated University Presses, 1997.

ISBN 0-8453-4865-5 ^ Russell, Bertrand (October 1946).

"Atomic Weapon and the Prevention of War" .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 2/7–8, (1 October 1946) . p. 20.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 24 August 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g h "The Bertrand Russell oGallery" .

Russell.mcmaster.ca . 6 June 2011. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011 . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

^ The Nobel Prize in Literature 1950 — Bertrand Russell Archived 2 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 22 March 2013.

^ "British Nobel Prize Winners (1950)" . 13 April 2014.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2021 – via YouTube.

^ Hestler, Anna (2001).

Wales . Marshall Cavendish. p.

53 .

ISBN 978-0-7614-1195-6 .

^ Sidney Hook, "Lord Russell and the War Crimes Trial", Bertrand Russell: critical assessments , Vol. 1, edited by A. D. Irvine, New York 1999, p. 178.

^ "Bertrand Russell Is Dead; British Philosopher, 97" .

The New York Times . 3 February 1970.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 April 2022 .

^ "Douglas A. Spalding" .

Nature . 8 November 1877.

ISSN 1476-4687 .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 14 April 2022 .

^ a b Paul, Ashley.

"Bertrand Russell: The Man and His Ideas" . Archived from the original on 1 May 2006 . Retrieved 28 October 2007 .

^ Russell, Bertrand and Perkins, Ray (ed.) Yours faithfully, Bertrand Russell . Open Court Publishing, 2001, p. 4.

^ a b Bloy, Marjie.

"Lord John Russell (1792–1878)" .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2012 . Retrieved 28 October 2007 .

^ Life in the 1800s (23 April 2022), "My Grandfather Met Napoleon: Bertrand Russell Interview 1952 – Enhanced Video & Audio [60 fps]" , YouTube , archived from the original on 10 September 2024 , retrieved 2 May 2022 ^ G. E. Cokayne; Vicary Gibbs, H. A. Doubleday, Geoffrey H. White, Duncan Warrand and Lord Howard de Walden, eds. The Complete Peerage of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom, Extant, Extinct or Dormant, new ed. 13 volumes in 14. 1910–1959. Reprint in 6 volumes, Gloucester, UK: Alan Sutton Publishing, 2000.

^ Booth, Wayne C. (1974).

Modern Dogma and the Rhetoric of Assent . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-06572-3 . Retrieved 6 December 2012 .

^ Crawford, Elizabeth.

The Women's Suffrage Movement: A Reference Guide, 1866–1928 .

^ Brink, Andrew (1982).

"Death, Depression and Creativity: A Psychobiological Approach to Bertrand Russell" .

Mosaic: A Journal for the Interdisciplinary Study of Literature .

15 (1): 93.

ISSN 0027-1276 .

JSTOR 24777750 .

^ a b c Monk, Ray (1996).

Bertrand Russell: The Spirit of Solitude, 1872–1921 . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-82802-2 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 9 June 2024 .

^ Exodus 23:2 ^ The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell (Volume I, 1872–1914) George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1971, page 31; ^ Bertrand Russell (1998).

Autobiography . Psychology Press. p. 38.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ a b c d The Nobel Foundation (1950).

Bertrand Russell: The Nobel Prize in Literature 1950 Archived 4 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 11 June 2007.

^ Russell, Bertrand (2000) [1967].

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell: 1872–1914 . New York: Routledge. p. 30.

ISBN 978-1-317-83504-2 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 6 December 2018 .

^ Paul, Ashley.

"Bertrand Russell: The Man and His Ideas – Chapter 2" . Archived from the original on 1 January 2009 . Retrieved 6 December 2018 .

^ Bertrand Russell (1998).

Autobiography . Psychology Press. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ "1959 Bertrand Russell CBC interview" .

YouTube . 1959.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 28 October 2015 .

^ Bertrand Russell (1998). "2: Adolescence".

Autobiography . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

^ "Bertrand Russell on God" .

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation . 1959. Archived from the original on 26 January 2010 . Retrieved 8 March 2010 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (2000) [1967].

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell: 1872–1914 . New York: Routledge. p. 39.

^ "Russell, the Hon. Bertrand Arthur William (RSL890BA)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (October 2003).

"Alfred North Whitehead" . School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland . Retrieved 8 November 2007 .

^ Griffin, Nicholas ; Lewis, Albert C. (1990).

"Russell's Mathematical Education" .

Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London .

44 (1): 51– 71.

doi : 10.1098/rsnr.1990.0004 .

JSTOR 531585 .

^ a b "London School of Economics" . London School of Economics. 26 August 2015. Archived from the original on 15 October 2014.

^ Russell, Bertrand (2001). Ray Perkins (ed.).

Yours Faithfully, Bertrand Russell: Letters to the Editor 1904–1969 . Chicago: Open Court Publishing. p. 16.

ISBN 0-8126-9449-X . Retrieved 16 November 2007 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1897) An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry , p. 32, re-issued 1956 by Dover Books ^ "Bertrand Russell, biography" . Nobel Foundation.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 23 June 2010 .

^ Bertrand Russell (1998). "6: Principia Mathematica".

Autobiography . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ Craig, F. W. S., ed. (1974).

British Parliamentary Election Results: 1885–1918 . London: Macmillan Press.

ISBN 9781349022984 .

^ "Russell on Wittgenstein" .

Rbjones.com . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

^ Cyril Pearce (2004), " 'Typical' Conscientious Objectors — A Better Class of Conscience? No-Conscription Fellowship image management and the Manchester contribution 1916–1918", Manchester Region History Review , vol. 17, no. 1, p. 38 ^ Hochschild, Adam (2011).

"I Tried to Stop the Bloody Thing" .

The American Scholar .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2011 . Retrieved 10 May 2011 .

^ Caroline Moorehead , Bertrand Russell: A Life (1992), p. 247.

^ Scharfenburger, Paul (17 October 2012).

"1917" .

MusicandHistory.com . Archived from the original on 17 January 2012 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1995). "A Summer of Hope".

Pacifism and Revolution . Routledge. p. xxxiv.

^ "British Socialists – Peace Terms Discussed" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 5 June 1917.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 .

^ "The Brixton Letters" .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ Vellacott, Jo (1980).

Bertrand Russell and the Pacifists in the First World War . Brighton: Harvester Press.

ISBN 0-85527-454-9 .

^ Bertrand Russell (1998). "8: The First War".

Autobiography . Psychology Press. p. 256.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ The Selected Letters of Bertrand Russell by Bertrand Russell, Nicholas Griffin 2002, letter to Gladys Rinder in May 1918 ^ "Trinity in Literature" .

Trinity College Cambridge . Trinity College.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 3 August 2017 .

^ "M. P.'s Who Have Been in Jail To Hold Banquet" .

The Reading Eagle . 8 January 1924.

Archived from the original on 1 March 2021 . Retrieved 18 May 2014 .

^ G. H. Hardy (1970).

Bertrand Russell and Trinity . pp.

57– 8.

^ "Bertrand Russell (1872–1970)" . Farlex.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2008 . Retrieved 11 December 2007 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (31 July 1920). "Soviet Russia—1920".

The Nation . pp.

121– 125.

^ Russell, Bertrand (20 February 2008) [1920].

"Lenin, Trotzky and Gorky" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 20 August 2016 .

^ a b Russell, Bertrand The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism by Bertrand Russell Archived 12 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine , 1920 ^ Russell, Bertrand (1972).

The Problem of China . London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd. p. 252.

^ a b "Bertrand Russell Reported Dead" (PDF) .

The New York Times . 21 April 1921.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 December 2007 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (2000). "Uncertain Paths to Freedom: Russia and China, 1919–22". In Rempel, Richard A. (ed.).

The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell . Vol. 15. Routledge. lxviii.

ISBN 0-415-09411-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1998). "10: China".

Autobiography . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

It provided me with the pleasure of reading my obituary notices, which I had always desired without expecting my wishes to be fulfilled... As the Japanese papers had refused to contradict the news of my death, Dora gave each of them a type-written slip saying that as I was dead I could not be interviewed ^ "A man ahead of his time" . 29 September 2011. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021 . Retrieved 26 March 2021 .

^ Russell, Bertrand.

"The Problem of China" .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2021 .

^ Bertrand Russell (1998).

Autobiography . Psychology Press. p. 386.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ "A Conversation with Bertrand Russell (1952)" . Archived from the original on 24 November 2018 – via YouTube.

^ "Inside Beacon Hill: Bertrand Russell as Schoolmaster". Jespersen, Shirley ERIC# EJ360344, published 1987 ^ a b "Dora Russell" . 12 May 2007. Archived from the original on 19 January 2008 . Retrieved 17 February 2008 .

^ Kranz, D. (2011): "Barry Stevens: Leben Gestalten" Archived 25 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine . In: Gestaltkritik , 2/2011, p. 4–11.

^ Stevens, B. (1970): Don't Push the River . Lafayette, Cal. (Real People Press), p. 26.

^ Gorham, D. (2005): "Dora and Bertrand Russell and Beacon Hill School", in: Russell: The Journal of Bertrand Russell Studies , n.s. 25, (summer 2005), p. 39–76, p. 57.

^ Spadoni, C. (1981): "Recent Acquisitions: Correspondence", in: Russell: The Journal of Bertrand Russell Studies , Vol 1, Iss. 1, Article 6, 43–67.

^ Nasta, Susheila.

"India League" .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 16 June 2020 .

^ "Museum Of Tolerance Acquires Bertrand Russell's Nazi Appeasement Letter" .

Losangeles.cbslocal.com . 19 February 2014.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2017 .

^ Russell, Bertrand, "The Future of Pacifism", The American Scholar, (1943) 13: 7–13.

^ Bertrand Russell (1998). "12: Later Years of Telegraph House".

Autobiography . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

I found the Nazis utterly revolting – cruel, bigoted, and stupid. Morally and intellectually they were alike odious to me. Although I clung to my pacifist convictions, I did so with increasing difficulty. When, in 1940, England was threatened with invasion, I realised that, throughout the First War, I had never seriously envisaged the possibility of utter defeat. I found this possibility unbearable, and at last consciously and definitely decided that I must support what was necessary for victory in the Second War, however difficult victory might be to achieve, and however painful in its consequences ^ a b Bertrand Russell Rides Out Collegiate Cyclone Archived 30 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine Life , Vol. 8, No. 14, 1 April 1940 ^ McCarthy, Joseph M. (May 1993).

The Russell Case: Academic Freedom vs. Public Hysteria (PDF) . Educational Resources Information Center. p. 9.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Leberstein, Stephen (November–December 2001).

"Appointment Denied: The Inquisition of Bertrand Russell" . Academe. Archived from the original on 23 January 2015 . Retrieved 17 February 2008 .

^ Einstein quotations and sources.

Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 9 July 2009.

^ "Bertrand Russell" . 2006. Archived from the original on 12 February 2008 . Retrieved 17 February 2008 .

^ a b Griffin, Nicholas , ed. (2002).

The Selected Letters of Bertrand Russell . Routledge. p. 660.

ISBN 0-415-26012-4 .

^ Bertrand Russell (1998).

Autobiograph y . Psychology Press. p. 512.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ Russell to Edward Renouf, assistant of Wolfgang Paalen , 23 March 1942 (Succession Wolfgang Paalen, Berlin); this letter is cited in DYN , No. 2, Mexico, July–August 1942, p. 52.

^ "Bertrand Russell On Zionism" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 September 2014 .

^ "Bertrand Russell and Preventive War" (PDF) .

Plymouth.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2017 . Retrieved 29 March 2017 .

^ "A philosopher's letters – Love, Bertie" .

The Economist . 21 July 2001.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2009 . Retrieved 5 August 2006 .

^ a b Clark, Ronald William (1976).

The life of Bertrand Russell . Knopf.

ISBN 978-0394490595 .

^ He wrote: "There is reason to think Stalin will insist on a new orthodoxy in atomic physics, since there is much in quantum theory that runs contrary to Communist dogma. An atomic bomb' made on Marxist principles would probably not explode because, after all, Marxist science was that of a hundred years ago. For those who fear the military power of Russia there is, therefore, some reason to rejoice in the muzzling of Russian science." Russell, Bertrand "Stalin Declares War on Science" Review of Langdon-Davies, Russia Puts Back the Clock , Evening Standard (London), 7 September 1949, p. 9.

^ "Radio 4 Programmes – The Reith Lectures" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2016 . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

^ "Radio 4 Programmes – The Reith Lectures: Bertrand Russell: Authority and the Individual: 1948" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

^ T. P. Uschanov, The Strange Death of Ordinary Language Philosophy Archived 14 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . The controversy has been described by the writer Ved Mehta in Fly and the Fly Bottle (1963).

^ "No. 38628" .

The London Gazette (Supplement). 3 June 1949. p. 2796.

^ Ronald W. Clark, Bertrand Russell and His World, p. 94. (1981) ISBN 0-500-13070-1 ^ Frances Stonor Saunders, "The Cultural Cold War: The CIA and the World of Arts and Letters." New York Press, 1999. Print.

^ Frances Stonor Saunder, ""The Cultural Cold War: The CIA And the World of Arts and Letters." New York Press, 1999. Print.

^ Russell and the Cuban missile crisis Archived 7 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine , by Al Seckel , California Institute of Technology // Russell: The Journal of Bertrand Russell Studies Archived 17 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine , McMaster University , Vol 4 (1984), Issue 2, Winter 1984–85, pp. 253–261 Archived 17 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sanderson Beck (2003–2005).

"Pacifism of Bertrand Russell and A. J. Muste" .

World Peace Efforts Since Gandhi . Sanderson Beck.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2012 . Retrieved 24 June 2012 .

^ John H. Davis.

The Kennedys: Dynasty and Disaster . S. P. Books. p. 437.

^ Feinberg, Barry; Kasrils, Ronald (1983).

Bertrand Russell's America . Vol. 2. Boston: South End Press. p. 211.

^ Peter Knight, The Kennedy Assassination , Edinburgh University Press Ltd., 2007, p. 77.

^ a b c Russell, Bertrand.

"Free Thought and Official Propaganda" .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2018 . Retrieved 14 May 2019 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ Russell, Bertrand; Albert Einstein (9 July 1955).

"Russell Einstein Manifesto" . Archived from the original on 1 August 2009 . Retrieved 17 February 2008 .

^ "Nonviolent Direct Action: The Committee of 100 and Extinction Rebellion" . 16 October 2020.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 24 November 2023 .

^ Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation, Bertrand Russell, 1872–1970 [1970], p. 12 ^ Russell, Bertrand (1967).

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, Vol. 3 . Little, Brown. p. 157.

^ Griffin, Nicholas (2002).

The Selected Letters of Bertrand Russell: The Private Years, 1884–1914 . Routledge. p. 588.

ISBN 978-0-415-26014-5 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 5 April 2021 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1929).

Marriage and Morals . H. Liverwright.

^ Pandey, V. C. (2005).

Population Education . Gyan Publishing House. p. 211.

ISBN 978-81-8205-176-8 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (2016).

The Impact of Science on Society . London; New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-64115-0 .

^ Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell (Psychology Press, 2005) ^ a b Yours Faithfully, Bertrand Russell (pp. 212–213).

^ "Jerusalem International Book Fair" . Jerusalembookfair.com. Archived from the original on 22 January 2008 . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

^ "Bertrand Russell Appeals to Arabs and Israel on Rocket Weapons" . Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 26 February 1964.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 5 January 2014 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (2012). Andrew G. Bone (ed.).

The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell Volume 29: Détente Or Destruction, 1955–57 . Abingdon: Routledge. p. iii.

ISBN 978-0-415-35837-8 .

^ "Aman (1967)" . IMDb.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2017 . Retrieved 30 June 2018 .

^ Siddiqui, M. S. (23 May 2021).

" "Bertrand Russell's Last Message" on Israel and Palestine" .

Heritage Times .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2024 . Retrieved 26 May 2024 .

^ "Bertrand Russell's Last Message" .

Connexions.org . 31 January 1970.

Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2017 .

^ The Guardian – 3 February 1970 ^ The Guardian – Page 7–6 February 1970 ^ a b Russell, 1970, p.

Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine at probatesearch.service.gov.uk. Retrieved 29 August 2015.

^ Waters, Ivor (1983). "The Rise and Fall of Monmouthshire".

Chepstow Packets . Moss Rose Press. p. 44.

ISBN 0-906134-21-8 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (2014).

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell . Routledge. p. 434.

ISBN 978-1-317-83503-5 .

^ Russell, Bertrand.

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell 1914–1944 (PDF) . pp. 184, 253, 292, 380.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 May 2021.

^ "Bertrand Russell Memorial".

Mind .

353 : 320. 1980.

^ "Bertrand Russell Society Award" . 9 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "The Bertrand Russell Society" .

The Bertrand Russell Society .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 May 2019 .

^ My Father, Bertrand Russell . National Library of Australia. 1975.

ISBN 978-0-15-130432-5 . Retrieved 28 May 2010 .

^ Lipari, Nicole (12 May 2022).

"New exhibit celebrates 150 years of Bertrand Russell" .

Daily News .

McMaster University . Archived from the original on 12 May 2022 . Retrieved 18 May 2022 .

^ "Bertrand Russell 150 | Celebration of the 150th anniversary of the birth of Bertrand Russell" .

Spokesman Books .

Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation . 11 May 2022.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2022 . Retrieved 18 May 2022 .

^ Díaz Montilla, Francisco (18 May 2022).

"150 años con Bertrand Russell" [150 Years with Bertrand Russell].

La Estrella de Panamá (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 18 May 2022 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (2000) [1967].

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell: 1872–1914 . New York: Routledge. p. 72.

ISBN 978-1-317-83504-2 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ Bertrand Russell (1998).

Autobiography . Psychology Press. p. 150.

ISBN 978-0-415-18985-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ Moran, Margaret (31 December 1991). "Bertrand Russell Meets His Muse: the Impact of Lady Ottoline Morrell (1911-12)".

Russell: The Journal of Bertrand Russell Studies .

11 (2). Project MUSE.

doi : 10.15173/russell.v11i2.1807 (inactive 1 July 2025).

ISSN 1913-8032 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Russell, Bertrand (2002).

Griffin, Nicholas (ed.).

The Selected Letters of Bertrand Russell: The Public Years, 1914–1970 . Psychology Press. p. 230.

ISBN 978-0-415-26012-1 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 16 July 2018 .

^ Kimball, Roger (September 1992).

"Love, logic & unbearable pity: The private Bertrand Russell" .

The New Criterion . Archived from the original on 5 December 2006 . Retrieved 15 November 2007 .

^ Monk, Ray (September 2004).

"Russell, Bertrand Arthur William, third Earl Russell (1872–1970)" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/35875 . Retrieved 14 March 2008 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) (subscription required) ^ Morris, Susan (2020).

Debrett's Peerage and Baronetage 2019 . eBook Partnership. p. 4218.

ISBN 978-1999767051 .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 27 December 2021 .

^ "Earl Russell Dies: British Statesman" (PDF) .

The New York Times . 5 March 1931. p. 5.

^ "Where Was Bertrand Russell Educated" .

www.britannica.com .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ "Bertrand Russell" .

plato.stanford.edu . 1995.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2023 . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ Blanshard, in Paul Arthur Schilpp , ed., The Philosophy of Brand Blanshard , Open Court, 1980, p. 88, quoting a private letter from Russell.

^ The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell , London: Routledge, 2000 [London: Allen and Unwin, 1969, Vol. 1], p. 39 ("It appeared to me obvious that the happiness of mankind should be the aim of all action, and I discovered to my surprise that there were those who thought otherwise. Belief in happiness, I found, was called Utilitarianism, and was merely one among a number of ethical theories. I adhered to it after this discovery, and was rash enough to tell my grandmother that I was a utilitarian." In a letter from 1902, in which Russell criticised utilitarianism, he wrote: "I may as well begin by confessing that for many years it seemed to me perfectly self-evident that pleasure is the only good and pain the only evil. Now, however, the opposite seems to me self-evident. This change has been brought about by what I may call moral experience." Ibid, p. 161).

^ Russell, Bertrand (1947).

"Am I An Atheist or an Agnostic?" .

Encyclopedia of Things . Archived from the original on 22 June 2005 . Retrieved 6 July 2005 .

: "I never know whether I should say 'Agnostic' or whether I should say 'Atheist'.... As a philosopher, if I were speaking to a purely philosophic audience I should say that I ought to describe myself as an Agnostic, because I do not think that there is a conclusive argument by which one prove (sic) that there is not a God. On the other hand, if I am to convey the right impression to the ordinary man in the street I think I ought to say that I am an Atheist." ^ "20th Century Humanism" .

Humanists UK .

Archived from the original on 6 December 2023 . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ 'Humanist News', March 1970 [ not specific enough to verify ] ^ "War Crimes in Vietnam" .

NYU Press .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 12 May 2023 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1952).

"Conclusions" .

The Impact of Science on Society . New York, Columbia University Press.

^ Russell, Bertrand (1936).

Which Way to Peace?

(Part 12) . M. Joseph Ltd. p. 173.

^ Russell, Bertrand (1954).

Human Society in Ethics and Politics . London: G. Allen & Unwin. p.

212 .

^ "Letters from Thane Read asking Helen Keller to sign the World Constitution for world peace. 1961" .

Helen Keller Archive . American Foundation for the Blind.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 July 2023 .

^ "Letter from World Constitution Coordinating Committee to Helen, enclosing current materials" .

Helen Keller Archive . American Foundation for the Blind.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

^ "Preparing earth constitution | Global Strategies & Solutions | The Encyclopedia of World Problems" .

The Encyclopedia of World Problems | Union of International Associations (UIA) . Archived from the original on 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 15 July 2023 .

^ Kleene, G. A. (1920).

"Bertrand Russell on Socialism" .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

34 (4): 756– 762.

doi : 10.2307/1885165 .

JSTOR 1885165 .

^ Bricmont, Jean; Norm; Europe, BaillargeonTopics: History Marxism Philosophy Socialism Places: Europe Soviet UnionWestern (1 July 2017).

"Monthly Review | Bertrand Russell and the Socialism That Wasn't" .

Monthly Review .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 12 May 2023 .

^ Gay and Lesbian Humanist Association (2 November 1997).

"Lesbian and Gay Rights: The Humanist and Religious Stances" . Archived from the original on 10 June 2002 . Retrieved 17 February 2008 .

^ "The Bertrand Russell Society Quarterly – November 2003" .

www.lehman.edu .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 12 May 2023 .

^ Siddiqui, M. S. (23 May 2021).

" "Bertrand Russell's Last Message" on Israel and Palestine" .

Heritage Times .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 12 May 2023 .

^ "A short history of the Basic Income idea | BIEN — Basic Income Earth Network" .

basicincome.org . 22 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 3 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 May 2023 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1968).

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell: 1944–1969 . Little, Brown. p. 330.

Published separately as 'Reflections on My Eightieth Birthday' in Portraits from Memory .

^ Skeptical Essays , 1928, ISBN 978-0-415-32508-0 ^ Understanding History and other Essays.

^ Russell, Bertrand (1953).

"General Effects of Scientific Technique" .

The Impact of Science on Society . New York, AMS Press. Archived from the original on 18 January 2023 . Retrieved 10 August 2022 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1953).

"Scientific Technique in an Oligarchy" .

The Impact of Science on Society . New York, AMS Press. Archived from the original on 18 January 2023 . Retrieved 10 August 2022 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1896). Russell, Alys (ed.).

German Social Democracy . London: Longmans, Green & Co.

– via Internet Archive.

^ "An essay on the foundations of geometry" .

Internet Archive . Cambridge, University press. 1897.

^ "The Principles of Mathematics" . fair-use.org.

Archived from the original on 2 July 2010 . Retrieved 6 October 2005 .

^ Free man's worship, and other essays , London : Unwin Books, 1976, ISBN 0048240214 ^ Principia mathematica, by Alfred North Whitehead ... and Bertrand Russell . 2005.

Archived from the original on 29 July 2013 . Retrieved 11 September 2009 – via umich.edu.

^ "The Problems of Philosophy" . ditext.com.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2005 . Retrieved 2 August 2007 .

^ "Our Knowledge of the External World" .

Internet Archive . George Allen & Unwin.

^ "Our Knowledge of the External World" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 1 April 2020 .

^ "Principles of social reconstruction" .

Internet Archive . 1916.

^ Russell, Bertrand (14 May 2019).

"The Policy of the Entente 1904–1914: A Reply to Professor Gilbert Murray" . National Labour Press.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 May 2019 – via Google Books.

^ Political Ideals – via Project Gutenberg.

^ Proposed Roads to Freedom .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2020 . Retrieved 28 August 2020 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ Klement, Kevin C.

"Russell's Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy" .

umass.edu .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2010 .

^ Pfeiffer, G. A.

(1920).

"Review: Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy by Bertrand Russell" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society .

27 (2): 81– 90.

doi : 10.1090/s0002-9904-1920-03365-3 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "Introduction to mathematical philosophy" .

Internet Archive . 1920.

^ The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 August 2020 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ The Analysis of Mind .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 28 August 2020 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ The Problem of China .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 August 2020 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ "Why I Am Not A Christian" . positiveatheism.org. Archived from the original on 19 November 2006.

^ "The Scientific Outlook" .

Internet Archive . George Allen And Unwin Limited. 1954.

^ "Education and the Social Order" .

Internet Archive .

^ "In Praise of Idleness By Bertrand Russell" . zpub.com. Archived from the original on 22 August 2019 . Retrieved 4 November 2001 .

^ An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth at archive.org ^ "Western Philosophy" .

Internet Archive .

^ "Authority and the individual" .

Internet Archive .

^ "Unpopular Essays" .

Internet Archive . Simon and Schuster. 1950.

^ "Nightmares of Eminent Persons And Other Stories" .

Internet Archive . The Bodley Head. 1954.

^ "Portraits From Memory And Other Essays" .

Internet Archive . Simon and Schuster. 1956.

^ "Common Sense And Nuclear Warfare" .

Internet Archive . Simon and Schuster. 1959.

^ "My Philosophical Development" .

Internet Archive . Simon and Schuster. 1959.

^ a b "The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell 1872 1914" .

Internet Archive . Little, Brown and company. 1951.

^ Charles Pigden in Bertrand Russell, Russell on Ethics: Selections from the Writings of Bertrand Russell , Routledge (2013), p. 14 ^ Klagge, James C., ed. (2001).

Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy . Cambridge University Press. p. 12.

^ Hochschild, Adam (2011).

To end all wars: a story of loyalty and rebellion, 1914–1918 . Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. pp.

270–272 .

ISBN 978-0-618-75828-9 .

^ "McMaster University: The Bertrand Russell Research Centre" .

Russell.humanities.mcmaster.ca . 6 March 2017. Archived from the original on 1 July 2020 . Retrieved 11 October 2019 .

^ "Bertrand Russell Archives Catalogue Entry and Research System" .

McMaster University Library . The William Ready Division of Archives and Research Collections.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 5 February 2016 .

General and cited sources [ edit ] Primary sources [ edit ] 1900, Sur la logique des relations avec des applications à la théorie des séries , Rivista di matematica 7 : 115–148.

1901, On the Notion of Order , Mind (n.s.) 10 : 35–51.

1902, (with Alfred North Whitehead ), On Cardinal Numbers , American Journal of Mathematics 24 : 367–384.

1948, BBC Reith Lectures: Authority and the Individual A series of six radio lectures broadcast on the BBC Home Service in December 1948.

Secondary sources [ edit ] John Newsome Crossley.

A Note on Cantor's Theorem and Russell's Paradox , Australian Journal of Philosophy 51, 1973, 70–71.

Ivor Grattan-Guinness .

The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940 . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000.

Alan Ryan.

Bertrand Russell: A Political Life , New York: Oxford University Press, 1981.

Further reading [ edit ] Russell, Bertrand (1924).

Icarus, or, The future of science (PDF) . New York: E.P. Dutton & Co.

Books about Russell's philosophy [ edit ] Alfred Julius Ayer .

Russell , London: Fontana, 1972.

ISBN 0-00-632965-9 . A lucid summary exposition of Russell's thought.

Elizabeth Ramsden Eames.

Bertrand Russell's Theory of Knowledge , London: George Allen and Unwin, 1969.

OCLC 488496910 . A clear description of Russell's philosophical development.

Celia Green .

The Lost Cause: Causation and the Mind-Body Problem , Oxford: Oxford Forum, 2003.

ISBN 0-9536772-1-4 Contains a sympathetic analysis of Russell's views on causality .

A. C. Grayling .

Russell: A Very Short Introduction , Oxford University Press, 2002.

Nicholas Griffin .

Russell's Idealist Apprenticeship , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.

A. D. Irvine, ed.

Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments , 4 volumes, London: Routledge, 1999. Consists of essays on Russell's work by many distinguished philosophers.

Michael K. Potter.

Bertrand Russell's Ethics , Bristol: Thoemmes Continuum, 2006. A clear and accessible explanation of Russell's moral philosophy.

P. A. Schilpp, ed.

The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell , Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University, 1944.

John Slater.

Bertrand Russell , Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1994.

Biographical books [ edit ] A. J. Ayer.

Bertrand Russell , New York: Viking Press, 1972, reprint ed. London: University of Chicago Press, 1988, ISBN 0-226-03343-0 Andrew Brink.

Bertrand Russell: A Psychobiography of a Moralist , Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International, Inc., 1989, ISBN 0-391-03600-9 Ronald W. Clark .

The Life of Bertrand Russell , London: Jonathan Cape, 1975, ISBN 0-394-49059-2 Ronald W. Clark.

Bertrand Russell and His World , London: Thames & Hudson, 1981, ISBN 0-500-13070-1 Rupert Crawshay-Williams .

Russell Remembered , London: Oxford University Press, 1970. Written by a close friend of Russell's John Lewis .

Bertrand Russell: Philosopher and Humanist , London: Lawerence & Wishart, 1968 Ray Monk .

Bertrand Russell: Mathematics: Dreams and Nightmares , London: Phoenix, 1997, ISBN 0-7538-0190-6 Ray Monk.

Bertrand Russell: The Spirit of Solitude, 1872–1920 Vol. I, New York: Routledge, 1997, ISBN 0-09-973131-2 Ray Monk.

Bertrand Russell: The Ghost of Madness, 1921–1970 Vol. II, New York: Routledge, 2001, ISBN 0-09-927275-X Caroline Moorehead.

Bertrand Russell: A Life , New York: Viking, 1993, ISBN 0-670-85008-X George Santayana . "Bertrand Russell", in Selected Writings of George Santayana , Norman Henfrey (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, I, 1968, pp. 326–329 Peter Stone et al.

Bertrand Russell's Life and Legacy . Wilmington: Vernon Press, 2017.

Katharine Tait .

My Father Bertrand Russell , New York: Thoemmes Press, 1975 Alan Wood , Bertrand Russell: The Passionate Sceptic , London: George Allen & Unwin, 1957.

External links [ edit ] Bertrand Russell at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Works by Bertrand Russell in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Bertrand Russell at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Bertrand Russell at the Internet Archive Works by Bertrand Russell at the Biodiversity Heritage Library Works by Bertrand Russell at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) "Bertrand Russell's Logic" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The Bertrand Russell Society BBC Face to Face interview with Bertrand Russell and John Freeman , broadcast 4 March 1959 Bertrand Russell on Nobelprize.org including the Nobel Lecture, 11 December 1950 "What Desires Are Politically Important?" Interview with Ray Monk at Today , 18 May 2022 (from 2:58:35) Peerage of the United Kingdom Preceded by Frank Russell Earl Russell 1931–1970 Succeeded by John Russell v t e Bertrand Russell British philosopher, logician, and social critic Philosophy Views on philosophy Copleston–Russell debate Logical atomism Russell's teapot Theory of descriptions Views on society Russell–Einstein Manifesto Russell Tribunal Mathematics Peano–Russell notation Russell's paradox Works The Principles of Mathematics (1903) " On Denoting " (1905) Principia Mathematica (1910–1913) The Problems of Philosophy (1912) Why Men Fight (1916) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919) " Free Thought and Official Propaganda " (1922) " Why I Am Not a Christian " (1927) Marriage and Morals (1929) In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays (1935) Power: A New Social Analysis (1938) A History of Western Philosophy (1945) My Philosophical Development (1959) Family Alys Pearsall Smith (wife, 1894–1921) Dora Russell (wife, 1921–1935) Patricia Russell (wife, 1936–1951) Edith Finch Russell (wife, 1952–1970) John Russell, 4th Earl Russell (son) Conrad Russell, 5th Earl Russell (son) Frank Russell, 2nd Earl Russell (brother) John Russell, Viscount Amberley (father) Katharine Russell, Viscountess Amberley (mother) John Stuart Mill (godfather) John Russell, 1st Earl Russell (paternal grandfather) Henrietta Stanley, Baroness Stanley of Alderley (maternal grandmother) Related Appointment court case Earl Russell Peace Foundation Professorship of Philosophy Category: Works by Bertrand Russell Links to related articles v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Guild socialism Concepts Direct democracy Economic democracy Guilds Workers' control Workers' self-management Workplace democracy People G. D. H. Cole S. G. Hobson Arthur Penty Karl Polanyi Lionel Robbins Bertrand Russell R. H. Tawney Rafael Uribe Uribe Ernst Wigforss Organisations National Guilds League Fabian Society Blue Labour Related topics Anarcho-syndicalism Council communism Corporatism Distributism Libertarian socialism Market socialism Mutualism (economic theory) National syndicalism Socialism Syndicalism v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo v t e Laureates of the Nobel Prize in Literature 1901–1920 1901 : Sully Prudhomme 1902 : Theodor Mommsen 1903 : Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson 1904 : Frédéric Mistral / José Echegaray 1905 : Henryk Sienkiewicz 1906 : Giosuè Carducci 1907 : Rudyard Kipling 1908 : Rudolf Eucken 1909 : Selma Lagerlöf 1910 : Paul Heyse 1911 : Maurice Maeterlinck 1912 : Gerhart Hauptmann 1913 : Rabindranath Tagore 1914 1915 : Romain Rolland 1916 : Verner von Heidenstam 1917 : Karl Gjellerup / Henrik Pontoppidan 1918 1919 : Carl Spitteler 1920 : Knut Hamsun 1921–1940 1921 : Anatole France 1922 : Jacinto Benavente 1923 : W. B. Yeats 1924 : Władysław Reymont 1925 : George Bernard Shaw 1926 : Grazia Deledda 1927 : Henri Bergson 1928 : Sigrid Undset 1929 : Thomas Mann 1930 : Sinclair Lewis 1931 : Erik Axel Karlfeldt ( posthumously ) 1932 : John Galsworthy 1933 : Ivan Bunin 1934 : Luigi Pirandello 1935 1936 : Eugene O'Neill 1937 : Roger Martin du Gard 1938 : Pearl S. Buck 1939 : Frans Eemil Sillanpää 1940 1941–1960 1941 1942 1943 1944 : Johannes V. Jensen 1945 : Gabriela Mistral 1946 : Hermann Hesse 1947 : André Gide 1948 : T. S. Eliot 1949 : William Faulkner 1950 : Bertrand Russell 1951 : Pär Lagerkvist 1952 : François Mauriac 1953 : Winston Churchill 1954 : Ernest Hemingway 1955 : Halldór Laxness 1956 : Juan Ramón Jiménez 1957 : Albert Camus 1958 : Boris Pasternak 1959 : Salvatore Quasimodo 1960 : Saint-John Perse 1961–1980 1961 : Ivo Andrić 1962 : John Steinbeck 1963 : Giorgos Seferis 1964 : Jean-Paul Sartre (declined award) 1965 : Mikhail Sholokhov 1966 : Shmuel Yosef Agnon / Nelly Sachs 1967 : Miguel Ángel Asturias 1968 : Yasunari Kawabata 1969 : Samuel Beckett 1970 : Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 1971 : Pablo Neruda 1972 : Heinrich Böll 1973 : Patrick White 1974 : Eyvind Johnson / Harry Martinson 1975 : Eugenio Montale 1976 : Saul Bellow 1977 : Vicente Aleixandre 1978 : Isaac Bashevis Singer 1979 : Odysseas Elytis 1980 : Czesław Miłosz 1981–2000 1981 : Elias Canetti 1982 : Gabriel García Márquez 1983 : William Golding 1984 : Jaroslav Seifert 1985 : Claude Simon 1986 : Wole Soyinka 1987 : Joseph Brodsky 1988 : Naguib Mahfouz 1989 : Camilo José Cela 1990 : Octavio Paz 1991 : Nadine Gordimer 1992 : Derek Walcott 1993 : Toni Morrison 1994 : Kenzaburō Ōe 1995 : Seamus Heaney 1996 : Wisława Szymborska 1997 : Dario Fo 1998 : José Saramago 1999 : Günter Grass 2000 : Gao Xingjian 2001–2020 2001 : V. S. Naipaul 2002 : Imre Kertész 2003 : J. M. Coetzee 2004 : Elfriede Jelinek 2005 : Harold Pinter 2006 : Orhan Pamuk 2007 : Doris Lessing 2008 : J. M. G. Le Clézio 2009 : Herta Müller 2010 : Mario Vargas Llosa 2011 : Tomas Tranströmer 2012 : Mo Yan 2013 : Alice Munro 2014 : Patrick Modiano 2015 : Svetlana Alexievich 2016 : Bob Dylan 2017 : Kazuo Ishiguro 2018 : Olga Tokarczuk 2019 : Peter Handke 2020 : Louise Glück 2021–present 2021 : Abdulrazak Gurnah 2022 : Annie Ernaux 2023 : Jon Fosse 2024 : Han Kang 2025 : to be determined v t e 1950 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Otto Diels (Germany) Kurt Alder (Germany) Literature ( 1950 ) Bertrand Russell (Great Britain) Peace Ralph Bunche (United States) Physics C. F. Powell (Great Britain) Physiology or Medicine Philip Showalter Hench (United States) Edward Calvin Kendall (United States) Tadeusz Reichstein (Poland/Switzerland) Nobel Prize recipients 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 v t e De Morgan Medallists Arthur Cayley (1884) James Joseph Sylvester (1887) Lord Rayleigh (1890) Felix Klein (1893) S. Roberts (1896) William Burnside (1899) A. G. Greenhill (1902) H. F. Baker (1905) J. W. L. Glaisher (1908) Horace Lamb (1911) J. Larmor (1914) W. H. Young (1917) E. W. Hobson (1920) P. A. MacMahon (1923) A. E. H. Love (1926) Godfrey Harold Hardy (1929) Bertrand Russell (1932) E. T. Whittaker (1935) J. E. Littlewood (1938) Louis Mordell (1941) Sydney Chapman (1944) George Neville Watson (1947) A. S. Besicovitch (1950) E. C. Titchmarsh (1953) G. I. Taylor (1956) W. V. D. Hodge (1959) Max Newman (1962) Philip Hall (1965) Mary Cartwright (1968) Kurt Mahler (1971) Graham Higman (1974) C. Ambrose Rogers (1977) Michael Atiyah (1980) K. F. Roth (1983) J. W. S. Cassels (1986) D. G. Kendall (1989) Albrecht Fröhlich (1992) W. K. Hayman (1995) R. A. Rankin (1998) J. A. Green (2001) Roger Penrose (2004) Bryan John Birch (2007) Keith William Morton (2010) John Griggs Thompson (2013) Timothy Gowers (2016) Andrew Wiles (2019) v t e Recipients of the Sonning Prize Winston Churchill (1950) Albert Schweitzer (1959) Bertrand Russell (1960) Niels Bohr (1961) Alvar Aalto (1962) Karl Barth (1963) Dominique Pire (1964) Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi (1965) Laurence Olivier (1966) Willem Visser 't Hooft (1967) Arthur Koestler (1968) Halldór Laxness (1969) Max Tau (1970) Danilo Dolci (1971) Karl Popper (1973) Hannah Arendt (1975) Arne Næss (1977) Hermann Gmeiner (1979) Dario Fo (1981) Simone de Beauvoir (1983) William Heinesen (1985) Jürgen Habermas (1987) Ingmar Bergman (1989) Václav Havel (1991) Krzysztof Kieślowski (1994) Günter Grass (1996) Jørn Utzon (1998) Eugenio Barba (2000) Mary Robinson (2002) Mona Hatoum (2004) Ágnes Heller (2006) Renzo Piano (2008) Hans Magnus Enzensberger (2010) Orhan Pamuk (2012) Michael Haneke (2014) Lars von Trier (2018) Svetlana Alexievich (2021) Marina Abramović (2023) v t e Anti-nuclear movement Protests and groups Anti-nuclear organizations Anti-nuclear power groups Anti-nuclear protests Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament Greenpeace International Association of Lawyers against Nuclear Arms International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons International Day against Nuclear Tests International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War Mayors for Peace Nuclear Information and Resource Service Nevada Desert Experience Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign Peace Action and SANE Physicians for Social Responsibility Pembina Institute Sortir du nucléaire World Uranium Hearing By country Australia Austria Canada France Germany India Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Philippines Poland Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States People Tadatoshi Akiba Daniel Berrigan Albert Bigelow Helen Caldicott Norman Cousins Gordon Edwards Albert Einstein Randall Forsberg John Gofman Jim Green Paul Gunter Otto Hahn Nobuto Hosaka Jackie Hudson Kate Hudson Ole Kopreitan David Lange Amory Lovins Bernard Lown Caroline Lucas Freda Meissner-Blau Gregory Minor Hermann Joseph Muller Kenzaburō Ōe Linus Pauling Mike Pentz C. F. Powell Adi Roche Joseph Rotblat Bertrand Russell Jens Scheer Jonathan Schell Albert Schweitzer Christopher Weeramantry Media Books about nuclear issues Films about nuclear issues Nuclear holocaust fiction Nuclear weapons in popular culture Songs about nuclear war and weapons Related topics Anti-war movement Bikini Atoll Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists Defence Secretariat 19 France and weapons of mass destruction Göttingen Manifesto History of the anti-nuclear movement Advisory opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons Lists of nuclear disasters and radioactive incidents Mainau Declaration Nuclear-Free Future Award Nuclear-free zone Nuclear power debate Nuclear power phase-out Nuclear weapons convention Nuclear weapons debate Peace activists Otto Hahn Peace Medal Peace movement Peace camp Russell–Einstein Manifesto Stockholm International Peace Research Institute Nuclear Power? No Thanks The Bomb Category v t e Critique of work Historical persons Abbie Hoffman Edward Bellamy Alfredo M. Bonanno André Gorz Bob Black Günther Anders Guy Debord Heinrich Böll Ivan Illich Mikhail Bakunin Paul Lafargue Walter Benjamin Antonio Negri Bertrand Russell Friedrich Nietzsche Henry David Thoreau Herbert Marcuse Jerry Rubin Josef Pieper Karl Marx Max Stirner Max Weber Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Raoul Vaneigem Renzo Novatore Zo d'Axa Contemporary persons Franco Berardi L. Susan Brown Madeleine Bunting David Graeber Michael Hardt Maurizio Lazzarato Claus Peter Ortlieb Roland Paulsen Jeremy Rifkin Penelope Rosemont Mark Slouka Nick Srnicek Claire Wolfe John Zerzan Terminology and related topics 996 working hour system Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy Autonomism Bare minimum Monday Bullshit job Career catfishing Coffee badging Corporatocracy Conscious quitting Cycle of poverty Dolce far niente Effects of overtime Eight-hour day Employee ghosting Extermination through labour Career cushioning Careerism Flextime Forced labour Four-day workweek Funemployment Ghost job Uberisation / Gig worker Glass cliff Happiness economics Honeymoon-hangover effect Hush trip Infinite workday Job crafting Job cuffing Jobless employed Karoshi Loud quitting Neijuan Microretirement Occupational burnout Occupational safety and health Occupational stress Orange S.A. suicides Overwork Performance punishment Post-work society Precariat Presenteeism Digital presenteeism Productivity theater Professional abuse Protestant work ethic Psychological safety Quick quitting Quiet hiring Quiet promotion Quiet quitting Quiet thriving Lazy girl job Rage applying Refusal of work Resenteeism Right to rest and leisure Sampo generation Sunday scaries Six-hour day Tang ping Technological unemployment Toxic workplace Narcissism Psychopathy Wage slavery Work ethic Workaholic Working poor Work–life interface Theater, movies, music and art À Nous la Liberté Office Space Swedish Public Freedom Service " Take This Job and Shove It " The Future of Work and Death The Main Thing Is Work!

The Working Class Goes to Heaven Yama—Attack to Attack Literature Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Bartleby, the Scrivener Bonjour paresse Bullshit Jobs The Conquest of Bread Critique of Economic Reason Fight Club Future Primitive and Other Essays In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays Inventing the Future Manifesto Against Work New Escapologist On the Poverty of Student Life The Society of the Spectacle Steal This Book The Abolition of Work The End of Work The Human Use of Human Beings The Idler The Revolution of Everyday Life The Right to Be Lazy The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy Communities R/antiwork CrimethInc.

Situationist International See also Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Job strain v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e World Constitutional Convention call signatories Constitution for the Federation of Earth World Constitution Coordinating Committee Thane Read Philip Isely Margaret Isely Georgia Lloyd Countries Costa Rica Pakistan Senegal Sierra Leone Tanzania Heads of government Presidents Edgar Faure Francisco Orlich Bolmarcich José Figueres Ferrer Julius Nyerere Léopold Sédar Senghor Muhammad Ayub Khan Otilio Ulate Blanco Vice-presidents Jaramogi Oginga Odinga Prime Ministers Clement Attlee Milton Margai Tetsu Katayama Governors Culbert Olson Hiroo Ōhara Mayors E.C. Quaye Setsuo Yamada Shinzo Hamai Politicians International Cornelis Berkhouwer National Ahmed Ebrahim Haroon Jaffer Akira Kazami B. Satya Narayan Reddy Chiyo Sakakibara Diwan Chaman Lall Ezequiel Padilla Peñaloza Gerhard Jahn Hisato Ichimada Henry Usborne Ichirō Kiyose Inder Kumar Gujral Irène de Lipkowski John Foster Kanaiyalal Maneklal Munshi Kenzō Matsumura Komla Agbeli Gbedemah Lewis Silkin N. G. Ranga Pascoal Ranieri Mazzilli Patrick Wolrige-Gordon William Beveridge Religious leaders Abbé Pierre Dana McLean Greeley George MacLeod John Collins Martin Niemöller Michael Scott Nobel laureates Physics Alfred Kastler C. F. Powell Hideki Yukawa Max Born Chemistry Frederick Sanger (twice) Otto Hahn Physiology or Medicine Albert Szent-Györgyi Dickinson W. Richards Hermann Joseph Muller Macfarlane Burnet Literature Bertrand Russell Salvatore Quasimodo Peace John Boyd Orr Joseph Rotblat Multiple Linus Pauling (Chemistry & Peace) Scientists Charles C. Price Edward Condon Edris Rice-Wray Carson Harlow Shapley Jean Orcel Pitirim Sorokin Priyadaranjan Ray René Dumont Wilder Penfield Human rights activists Martin Luther King Jr.

Humanitarians André and Magda Trocmé (Righteous Among the Nations) Brock Chisholm Veterans Hugh B. Hester Varied fields Arthur Ernest Bishop (inventor) David Alfaro Siqueiros (Social realist) E. M. L. Odjidja (teacher) Edward J. Sparling (educator) Erich Kahler (scholar) Gregorio Bermann (humanist) Gerard Piel (science editor) Henri Laugier (scholar) Hugh J. Schonfield (scholar & pacifist) Kaoru Ōta (union leader) Kay Boyle (writer) Lloyd Morain (humanist) Mark Van Doren (writer & scholar) Maurício Campos de Medeiros (teacher) Oscar Niemeyer (architect) Ōuchi Hyōei (economist) Rameshwari Nehru (social worker) Satish Gujral (artist) Shigeri Yamataka (feminist) Sophia Wadia (theosophist) Stanley Slotkin (businessman) Stuart Hall (cultural theorist) Tamaki Uemura ( YWCA executive) Tano Jōdai (teacher & pacifist) Toyohiko Kagawa (pacifist) Related World Committee for a World Constitutional Convention Provisional World Parliament Other World constitution World government World federalism Source: [1] [2] [3] [4] Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH Google Scholar MathSciNet Artists MusicBrainz FID People Trove 2 3 Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tmhsq
Cached time: 20250818020529
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.935 seconds
Real time usage: 3.483 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 37016/1000000
Revision size: 153381/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1153386/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 308588/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 839430/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.609/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27187999/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2663.671      1 -total
 36.36%  968.529      2 Template:Reflist
 19.35%  515.423      1 Template:Navboxes
 17.81%  474.310      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 12.56%  334.594     63 Template:Cite_book
 12.09%  322.026     76 Template:Cite_web
  9.16%  243.959      1 Template:World_Constitutional_Convention_call_signatories
  5.95%  158.558     24 Template:Navbox
  4.69%  124.812      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
  4.25%  113.265      1 Template:Birth_date Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4163:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818020529 and revision id 1306396634. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bertrand_Russell&oldid=1306396634 " Categories : Bertrand Russell 1872 births 1970 deaths 19th-century atheists 20th-century atheists 19th-century British writers 19th-century British mathematicians 19th-century British philosophers 20th-century British writers 20th-century British mathematicians 20th-century British philosophers Academics of the London School of Economics Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge Analytic philosophers Anti–Vietnam War activists Atheist philosophers British atheism activists British anti–World War I activists Consequentialists Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament British critics of Christianity Critics of religions Critics of work and the work ethic De Morgan Medallists Deaths from influenza European democratic socialists Earls in the Peerage of the United Kingdom Empiricists British agnostics British anti-communists British anti-fascists British anti–nuclear weapons activists British atheists British essayists British historians of philosophy British humanists British logicians British mathematicians British Nobel laureates British pacifists British people of Scottish descent British people of Welsh descent British philosophers British prisoners and detainees British republicans British sceptics British socialists British political writers British political commentators British epistemologists Fellows of the Royal Society Fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge Free love advocates Infectious disease deaths in Wales Jerusalem Prize recipients John F. Kennedy conspiracy theorists Kalinga Prize recipients Liberal socialism Linguistic turn Members of the Order of Merit Nobel laureates in Literature People from Monmouthshire Philosophers of language Philosophers of mathematics Presidents of the Aristotelian Society Prisoners and detainees of the United Kingdom Richmond Park Russell family Set theorists University of California, Los Angeles faculty University of Chicago faculty Utilitarians The Nation (U.S. magazine) people Atheism in the United Kingdom Nonviolence advocates Anti-Stalinist left Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing London Gazette template with parameter supp set to y CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages containing links to subscription-only content Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2020 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from November 2020 Use dmy dates from July 2023 Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Wikipedia references cleanup from September 2023 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2023 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links BHL ID same as Wikidata Articles with Biodiversity Heritage Library links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 14:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bertrand Russell 125 languages Add topic

