Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terrain 2 Statistics 3 Extreme points 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 Notes Toggle the table of contents Geography of the Gambia 17 languages Asturianu Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hausa Italiano Polski Português Русский Shqip Suomi Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Climate of the Gambia ) Map of the Gambia Location of the Gambia (in circle) Enlargeable, detailed map of the Gambia Satellite image of The Gambia The Gambia is a very small and narrow African country with the border based on the Gambia River . The country is less than 48 kilometres (30 mi) wide at its greatest width. The country's present boundaries were defined in 1889 after an agreement between the United Kingdom and France. It is often claimed by Gambians that the distance of the borders from the Gambia River corresponds to the area that British naval cannon of the time could reach from the river's channel. However, there is no historical evidence to support the story, and the border was actually delineated using careful surveying methods by the Franco-British boundary commission.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Gambia is almost an enclave of Senegal and is the smallest country on mainland Africa.

Terrain [ edit ] The grassy flood plain of the Gambia river contains Guinean mangroves near the coast, and becomes West Sudanian savanna upriver inland.

Statistics [ edit ] Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and Senegal Geographic coordinates : 13°28′N 16°34′W ﻿ / ﻿ 13.467°N 16.567°W ﻿ / 13.467; -16.567 Area: total: 11,295 km 2 land: 10,000 km 2 water: 1,295 km 2 comparative: slightly less than Jamaica ; slightly less than twice the size of Delaware Land boundaries: total: 749 km border countries: Senegal 749 km Coastline: 80 km Maritime claims: territorial sea: 12 nmi (22.2 km; 13.8 mi) contiguous zone: 18 nmi (33.3 km; 20.7 mi) exclusive fishing zone: 200 nmi (370.4 km; 230.2 mi) continental shelf: extent not specified Köppen–Geiger climate classification map at 1-km resolution for the Gambia (1991–2020) Climate: tropical; hot, rainy season (June to November); cooler, dry season (November to May) Terrain: floodplain of the Gambia River , flanked by low hills Elevation extremes: lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m highest point: at least 53 m according to The World Factbook and a 1966 map by U.S.

National Imagery and Mapping Agency , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] 64 m based on SRTM data calculated by peakbagger.com between Sabi and the Senegalese village Vélingara ( 13°13′18″N 14°09′35″W ﻿ / ﻿ 13.22159°N 14.15974°W ﻿ / 13.22159; -14.15974 ﻿ ( Highest point of Gambia, calculated based on SRTM data by peakbagger.com ) ), [ 6 ] located in a sandstone plateau at the border with Senegal [ 7 ] Natural resources: fish, clay, silica sand, titanium ( rutile and ilmenite ), tin , zircon Land use: arable land: 43.48% permanent crops: 0.49% other: 56.03% (2011) Irrigated land: 50 km 2 (2011) Total renewable water resources: 8 km 3 (2011) Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural): total: 0.09 km 3 /yr (41%/21%/39%) per capita: 65.77 m 3 /yr (2005) Current issues: deforestation , desertification , prevalence of water-borne diseases, drought (rainfall has dropped by 30% in the last 30 years) Environment - party to international agreements on: biodiversity , climate change , Kyoto Protocol , desertification, endangered species , hazardous wastes, law of the sea , ozone layer protection, ship pollution, wetland , whaling Extreme points [ edit ] This is a list of the extreme points of the Gambia, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

Northernmost point – unnamed location on the border with Senegal immediately south of the Senegalese village of Keur Mali Makham , Central River Division Easternmost point – unnamed point on the border with Senegal near the village of Sembagne , Upper River Division Southernmost point – the point at which the border with Senegal enters the Atlantic Ocean at the mouth of the Allahein River , Western Division Westernmost point - Bijol Islands , Western Division Westernmost point (mainland) - Solifor Point , Western Division Gallery [ edit ] Fishing boats in Bakau, Gambia Children swimming near Lamin Lodge.

The river.

River bird A market.

The Spotted hyena is part of the Gambian fauna.

Wild hippopotamus in the Gambia River .

See also [ edit ] The Gambia Districts of the Gambia Farasuto Forest Community Nature Reserve, the Gambia References [ edit ] This article incorporates public domain material from The World Factbook .

CIA .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Donald R. Wright (2004).

The World and a Very Small Place: A History of Globalization in Niumi, The Gambia (New York: M.E. Sharp) p. 151–152.

^ Craig Emms and Linda Barnett (2001).

Bradt Travel Guide for The Gambia (Chalford, UK: Bradt Travel Guides).

^ Global Environment Facility , United Nations Environment Programme (eds.): The Gambia’s Second National Communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change [ permanent dead link ] . Banjul, November 2012, p. 32.

^ The World Factbook : The Gambia . Chapter Geography and map .

^ On a 1966 map, two points close to Jah Kunda and Nyamanari are indicated with 174 feet, thus 53 m. Source: West Africa, Joint Operations Graphic 1:250,000: map ND 28-11 Tambacounda, Senegal (11MB). U.S.

National Imagery and Mapping Agency . Map data from 1966.

^ "Gambia High Point" .

peakbagger.com .

.

^ Malanding S. Jaiteh, Baboucarr Sarr: Climate Change and Development in the Gambia: Challenges to Ecosystem Goods and Services , p. 1–3. Map based on: The Gambia 50,000 database 2003 topographic data. Department of Local Government and Lands.

v t e Geography of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e Climate of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geography_of_the_Gambia&oldid=1305732077#Climate " Category : Geography of the Gambia Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World Factbook This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geography of the Gambia 17 languages Add topic

