Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Birth and early life 1.2 Education and early career 1.3 Prouille 1.3.1 The Vision of Mary and the rosary 1.4 Foundation of the Dominicans 1.5 Later life 2 Inquisition 3 Cord of Saint Dominic 4 Toponymy 5 Veneration 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Saint Dominic 64 languages العربية Asturianu Aymar aru Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Malti مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Founder of the Dominican Order (1170–1221) "Saint Sunday" redirects here. For about, see Saint Sunday (disambiguation) . For the village in Cornwall, see St Dominic, Cornwall . For places named after Saint Dominic, or other saints named Dominic, see St Dominic (disambiguation) .

Saint Dominic OP Santo Domingo de Guzmán , portrait by the Portuguese-Spanish painter Claudio Coello in 1670 Born Domingo Félix de Guzmán y Aza 8 August 1170 Caleruega , Kingdom of Castile Died 6 August 1221 (1221-08-06) (aged 50) Bologna , Kingdom of Italy , Holy Roman Empire Venerated in Catholic Church Anglican Communion Lutheranism Canonized 3 July 1234, Rieti Cathedral by Pope Gregory IX Major shrine Basilica of San Domenico Feast 8 August 24 May ( translation of relics ) 4 August (pre-1970 General Roman Calendar ) Attributes Dominican habit and rule, rosary , dog, star above his head, lilies, staff, with a torch in its mouth Patronage Astronomers , Natural Sciences ; Archdiocese of Fuzhou ; astronomy ; Dominican Republic ; Santo Domingo Pueblo , Valletta , Birgu ( Malta ), Campana, Calabria , Managua Saint Dominic , OP ( Spanish : Santo Domingo ; 8 August 1170 – 6 August 1221), also known as Dominic de Guzmán ( Spanish: [ɡuθˈman] ), was a Castilian Catholic priest and the founder of the Dominican Order . He is the patron saint of astronomers and natural scientists , and he and his order are traditionally credited with spreading and popularizing the rosary .

Life [ edit ] Birth and early life [ edit ] Dominic was born in Caleruega , halfway between Osma and Aranda de Duero in Old Castile , Spain .

[ 1 ] He was named after Saint Dominic of Silos . The Benedictine abbey of Santo Domingo de Silos lies a few miles north of Caleruega.

In the earliest narrative source, by Jordan of Saxony , Dominic's parents are not named. The story is told that before his birth his barren mother made a pilgrimage to the Abbey at Silos , and dreamt that a dog leapt from her womb carrying a flaming torch in its mouth, and seemed to set the earth on fire. This story is likely to have emerged when his order became known, after his name, as the Dominican order, Dominicanus in Latin, and a play on words interpreted as Domini canis : "Dog of the Lord." [ 2 ] Jordan adds that Dominic was brought up by his parents and a maternal uncle who was an archbishop.

[ 3 ] The failure to name his parents is not unusual, since Jordan wrote a history of the Order's early years, rather than a biography of Dominic. A later source of the 13th century gives their names as Juana and Felix.

[ 4 ] Nearly a century after Dominic's birth, the local author Rodrigo de Cerrato asserted that Dominic's father was an honored and wealthy man in his village.

[ 5 ] The travel narrative of Pero Tafur , written circa 1439 (about a pilgrimage to Dominic's tomb in Italy), states that Dominic's father belonged to the family de Guzmán , and that his mother belonged to the Aça or Aza family.

[ 6 ] Dominic's mother, Joan of Aza , was beatified by Pope Leo XII in 1829. His older brother, Manés was also beatified by Pope Gregory XVI on 1834.

Education and early career [ edit ] A picture of St Dominic accompanied by Simon de Montfort raising the crucifix against the Cathars by Daniel van den Dyck At fourteen years of age, Dominic was sent to the Premonstratensian monastery of Santa María de La Vid and subsequently transferred for further studies in the schools of Palencia.

[ 7 ] In Palencia, he devoted six years to the arts and four to theology .

[ 8 ] At some point in time he also joined Santa María de La Vid.

[ 7 ] In 1191, when Spain was desolated by famine, [ 8 ] young Dominic gave away his money and sold his clothes, furniture, and even precious manuscripts to feed the hungry. Dominic reportedly told his astonished fellow students, "Would you have me study off these dead skins when men are dying of hunger?" [ 9 ] At the age of 24, Dominic was ordained as a priest and joined the canonry of the Cathedral of Osma .

[ 10 ] In 1198, Don Martin de Bazan, the Bishop of Osma , having reformed the chapter, made Dominic the subprior of the chapter.

[ 11 ] Diego de Acebo succeeded Bazan as Bishop of Osma in 1201. In 1203 or 1204, Dominic accompanied Diego on a diplomatic mission for Alfonso VIII , King of Castile , to secure a bride in Denmark for crown prince Ferdinand.

[ 12 ] The envoys traveled to Denmark via Aragon and the south of France . The marriage negotiations ended successfully, but the princess died before leaving for Castile.

[ 13 ] During their return journey, they met with Cistercian monks who had been sent by Pope Innocent III to preach against the Cathars , a religious sect with gnostic and dualistic beliefs which the Catholic Church deemed heretical. Dominic and Diego de Acebo attributed the Cistercians' lack of success to their extravagance and pomp compared to the asceticism of the Cathars. Dominic and Diego decided to adopt a more ascetic way of life and began a program in the south of France to convert the Cathars.

[ 11 ] Prouille [ edit ] The vision of St. Dominic receiving the rosary from the Virgin by Bernardo Cavallino In late 1206, Acebo and his group established themselves at the Monastery of Our Lady of Prouille in France . Bishop Foulques of Toulouse allowed them to use the church. The house was intended partly as a refuge for women who had previously lived in Cathar religious houses, and partly the first established base of operations.

[ 14 ] The first nuns of Prouille lived for several months at Fanjeaux, because the buildings at Prouille were not yet habitable. Dominic gave them the Rule of St. Augustine .

Catholic-Cathar debates were held at Verfeil , Pamiers and Montréal .

[ 15 ] Ordered by the Pope to return to his diocese, Diego de Acebo died at Osma in December 1207, leaving Dominic alone in his mission.

[ 10 ] The Vision of Mary and the rosary [ edit ] Based on a Dominican tradition, in 1208 Dominic experienced a vision of the Blessed Virgin Mary in the church at Prouille, during which she gave him a rosary .

[ 16 ] This gave rise to the title Our Lady of the Rosary .

[ 17 ] The prayer beads were well-known at the time; it was not the beginning of rosary devotion, but Dominicans contributed much to its spread. For centuries the rosary has been at the heart of the Dominican Order .

Pope Pius XI stated, that the rosary is "the principle and foundation on which the Order of St. Dominic rests for perfecting the lives of its members and obtaining the salvation of others." [ 18 ] Foundation of the Dominicans [ edit ] In 1215, Dominic with six followers moved into a house given them by Peter Seila of Toulouse .

[ 19 ] Dominic saw the need for a new type of organization to address the spiritual needs of the growing cities of the era, one that would combine dedication and systematic education, with more organizational flexibility than either monastic orders or the secular clergy. He subjected himself and his companions to the monastic rules of prayer and penance ; Bishop Foulques of Toulouse gave them written authority to preach throughout his territory.

[ 20 ] Also in 1215, the year of the Fourth Lateran Council , Dominic, and Foulques went to Rome to secure the approval of Pope Innocent III . Dominic returned to Rome a year later and was finally granted written authority in December 1216 by the new pope, Honorius III , for him to form the Ordo Praedicatorum ("Order of Preachers").

[ 11 ] In the winter of 1216–1217, at the house of Ugolino de' Conti , Dominic first met William of Montferrat , who joined Dominic as a friar in the Order of Preachers and remained a close friend.

[ 21 ] Later life [ edit ] Cecilia Cesarini , who was received by Dominic into his new order, in her old age described him as "...thin and of middle height. His face was handsome and somewhat fair. He had reddish hair and beard and beautiful eyes ... His hands were long and fine and his voice pleasingly resonant. He never got bald, though he wore the full tonsure , which was mingled with a few grey hairs." [ 22 ] Saint Dominic in prayer by El Greco Although he traveled extensively to maintain contact with his growing brotherhood of friars, [ 23 ] Dominic made his headquarters in Rome.

[ 24 ] In 1219, Pope Honorius III invited Dominic and his companions to take up residence at the ancient Roman basilica of Santa Sabina , which they did by early 1220. Before that time the friars had a temporary residence in Rome at the convent of San Sisto Vecchio , which Honorius III had given to Dominic circa 1218, intending it to become a convent for a reformation of nuns at Rome under Dominic's guidance. The official foundation of the Dominican convent at Santa Sabina with its studium conventuale , the first Dominican studium in Rome, occurred with the legal transfer of property from Pope Honorius III to the Order of Preachers on 5 June 1222, though the brethren had taken up residence there already in 1220.

[ 25 ] The studium at Santa Sabina was the forerunner of the studium generale at Santa Maria sopra Minerva . The latter would be transformed in the 16th century into the College of Saint Thomas ( Latin : Collegium Divi Thomæ ), and then in the 20th century into the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum sited at the convent of Saints Dominic and Sixtus .

Dominic arrived in Bologna on 21 December 1218.

[ 26 ] A convent was established at the Mascarella church by Reginald of Orleans .

[ 27 ] Soon afterward they had to move to the church of San Nicolò of the Vineyards.

[ 28 ] Dominic settled in this church and held the first two General Chapters of the order there.

[ 29 ] According to Guiraud, Dominic abstained from meat, [ 30 ] "observed stated fasts and periods of silence", [ 31 ] "selected the worst accommodations and the meanest clothes", and "never allowed himself the luxury of a bed".

[ 32 ] "When traveling, he beguiled the journey with spiritual instruction and prayers".

[ 33 ] Guiraud also states that Dominic frequently traveled barefoot and that "rain and other discomforts elicited from his lips nothing but praises to God".

[ 34 ] Dominic died at the age of fifty-one, according to Guiraud "exhausted with the austerities and labors of his career".

[ 35 ] He had reached the convent of St Nicholas at Bologna , Italy , "weary and sick with a fever".

[ 35 ] Guiraud states that Dominic "made the monks lay him on some sacking stretched upon the ground" [ 35 ] and that "the brief time that remained to him was spent in exhorting his followers to have charity, to guard their humility, and to make their treasure out of poverty".

[ 36 ] He died at noon on 6 August 1221.

[ 10 ] His body was moved to a simple sarcophagus in 1233.

[ 37 ] Under the authority of Pope Gregory IX , Dominic was canonized in 1234. In 1267 Dominic's remains were moved to the shrine , made by Nicola Pisano and his workshop for the Church of St. Dominic in Bologna .

[ 38 ] Inquisition [ edit ] St Dominic presiding over an Auto da fe , by Pedro Berruguete , c. 1495 [ 39 ] Dominic is commonly but apocryphally associated with the Inquisition . Historical sources from Dominic's own time period reveal nothing about his involvement in the Inquisition.

[ 40 ] Dominic died in 1221, and the office of the Inquisition was not established until 1231 in Lombardy and 1234 in Languedoc.

[ 41 ] Canon 27 of the Third Council of the Lateran of 1179 stressed the duty of princes to repress heresy and condemned "the Brabantians, Aragonese, Basques, Navarrese, and others who practice such cruelty toward Christians that they respect neither churches nor monasteries, spare neither widows nor orphans, neither age nor sex, but after the manner of pagans, destroy and lay waste everything".

[ 42 ] This was followed in 1184 by a decretal of Pope Lucius III , Ad abolendam . This decreed that bishops were to investigate the presence of heresy within their respective dioceses. Practices and procedures of episcopal inquisitions could vary from one diocese to another, depending on the resources available to individual bishops and their relative interest or disinterest. Convinced that Church teaching contained revealed truth, the first recourse of bishops was that of persuasio . Through discourse, debates, and preaching, they sought to present a better explanation of Church teaching. This approach often proved very successful.

[ 43 ] In 1231 Pope Gregory IX appointed a number of Papal Inquisitors, mostly Dominicans and Franciscans , for the various regions of Europe. As mendicants , they were accustomed to travel. Unlike the haphazard episcopal methods, the papal inquisition was thorough and systematic, keeping detailed records. This tribunal or court functioned in France, Italy and parts of Germany and had virtually ceased operation by the early fourteenth century.

[ 44 ] In the 15th century, the Spanish Inquisition commissioned the artist Pedro Berruguete to depict Dominic presiding at an auto da fé . Thus, the Spanish inquisitors promoted a historical legend for the sake of auto-justification.

[ 45 ] Reacting against the Spanish tribunals, 16th- and 17th-century Protestant polemicists developed and perpetuated the legend of Dominic the Inquisitor.

[ 46 ] This image gave German Protestant critics of the Catholic Church an argument against the Dominican Order whose preaching had proven to be a formidable opponent in the lands of the Reformation.

[ 47 ] As Edward Peters notes, "In Protestant historiography of the sixteenth century a kind of anti-cult of St. Dominic grew up." [ 46 ] Cord of Saint Dominic [ edit ] The Cord (belt) of Saint Dominic is a Catholic sacramental which reminds the wearer of the protection of Saint Dominic.

[ 48 ] The history of the cord is associated with the miraculous image of Saint Dominic in Soriano , the perimeter of which painting defines the length of the cord.

[ 49 ] The beginning of the prayer "O wonderful hope" is written on the cord.

[ 50 ] According to the tradition, if someone wishes to receive grace from Saint Dominic, they should wear it all the time.

[ 51 ] Infertile couples use the cord to pray for intercession of Saint Dominic for the gift of offspring from God.

[ 52 ] Toponymy [ edit ] The Dominican Republic and its capital Santo Domingo are named after Saint Dominic.

Veneration [ edit ] The Arca di San Domenico is a shrine containing the remains of Saint Dominic, located in the Basilica of San Domenico in Bologna.

The feast of Saint Dominic is celebrated with great pomp and devotion in Malta , in the old city of Birgu and the capital city of Valletta .

Pope Pius V , a Dominican friar himself, aided the Knights of St. John to build Valletta.

[ 53 ] The Pattern of Urlaur is an annual festival held on 4 August at Urlaur, Kilmovee , County Mayo since medieval times, to commemorate the feast day of Saint Dominic.

[ 54 ] The following dates are all feasts dedicated to Saint Dominic observed by Catholics depending on location and tradition: 25 January – commemoration of translation of relics to Church of Saint Roch 15 February – commemoration of the skull translation (1383), [ 55 ] 24 May – commemoration of first translation (1233), [ 56 ] [ 55 ] 5 June – commemoration of second translation (1267) [ 57 ] 3 July – commemoration of canonization anniversary (1234) [ 57 ] 3 August – main commemoration (Australia) [ 58 ] 4 August – commemoration by ( Traditional Roman Catholics ), [ 56 ] 6 August – commemoration of death anniversary , [ 59 ] 7 August – main commemoration ( Diocese of Sosnowiec , 8 August - anniversary of the dedication of cathedral church) [ 60 ] 8 August – main commemoration, [ 61 ] 15 September – commemoration of apparition of Saint Dominic in Soriano (traditional date) [ 62 ] 25 September – commemoration of apparition of Saint Dominic in Soriano (modern date) [ 63 ] 11 November – commemoration of third translation (1411) [ 55 ] Dominic is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 8 August .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] See also [ edit ] St. Dominic's Cathedral in Fuzhou : First established by Spanish Dominicans in 1864.

Mother Marie-Anastasie Everton F.C.

, originally named Saint Domingo's F.C.

Religiosam vitam Nos attendentes Saint Dominic in Soriano , a miraculous painting of 1530 Saint Dominic, patron saint archive San Domenico di Guzman , a 1997 oratorio based on Dominic's life Statues of Madonna, Saint Dominic and Thomas Aquinas, Charles Bridge References [ edit ] ^ "Saint Dominic", Franciscan Media ^ Walsh, Michael J., "Jane of Aza", A New Dictionary of Saints , Liturgical Press, 2007 ISBN 9780814631867 ^ Libellus de principiis , 4.

^ Pedro Ferrando, "Legenda Sancti Dominici, 4." ^ Cerrato, Rodrigo de Vita S. Dominico .

He also said Dominic had the divine gift of speaking in tongues . Quote: "I am well aware that we are reaping these material goods, but we are not sowing spiritual goods in them; we are kneeling and asking God to help us understand them and to be able to speak to them so that we can proclaim the Word of God to them." As quoted in "San Domenico: poliglotta all'occorrenza" (in Italian). 5 June 2015. Archived from the original on 3 March 2025.

^ Pero Tafur, Andanças e viajes (tr. Malcolm Letts, p. 31). Tafur's book is dedicated to a member of the de Guzmán family.

^ a b Hook, Walter Farquhar (1848).

An ecclesiastical biography, containing the lives of ancient fathers and modern divines, interspersed with notices of heretics and schismatics, forming a brief history of the church in every age . Vol. 4. London: F. and J. Rivington ; Parker, Oxford; J. and J. J. Deighton, Cambridge; T. Harrison, Leeds. p. 467.

^ a b Guiraud 1913 , p. 7.

^ Thomsett, Michael C., The Inquisition: A History ,(McFarland, 2010), p. 54 ^ a b c "St. Dominic of Guzmán, priest, Founder of the Order of The Preachers – Information on the Saint of the Day – Vatican News" .

www.vaticannews.va . Retrieved 31 October 2020 .

^ a b c O'Connor, John Bonaventure (1913).

"St. Dominic" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company . Retrieved 31 October 2020 .

^ Jordan of Saxony , Libellus de principiis pp. 14–20; Gérard de Frachet, Chronica prima [MOPH 1.321].

^ "Saint Dominic", Lay Dominicans Archived 13 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ William Westcott Kibler, Medieval France: An Encyclopedia (Routledge 1995), s.v.

"Dominican order".

^ Duvernoy, Jean (1976), Guillaume de Puylaurens, Chronique 1145–1275: Chronica magistri Guillelmi de Podio Laurentii , Paris: CNRS, ISBN 2-910352-06-4 pp. 52-3, 56-7.

^ Catherine Beebe, St. Dominic and the rosary ISBN 0-89870-518-5 ^ Robert Feeney, The Rosary: The Little Summa ISBN 0-9622347-1-0 ^ History of the Dominicans Archived 5 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine (2014) Dominican Shrine of St. Jude, New Priory Press ^ Guiraud 1913 , pp. 65–66.

^ French translation of Foulques' 1215 letter Archived 11 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 137.

^ "Life of St. Dominic", Dominicans of Canada ^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 129.

^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 91.

^ Pierre Mandonnet, OP (1948) St. Dominic and His Work Archived 18 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Translated by Sister Mary Benedicta Larkin, OP, B. Herder Book Co., St. Louis/London, Chapter III, note 50: "If the installation at Santa Sabina does not date from 1220, at least it is from 1221. The official grant was made only in June 1222 (Bullarium OP, I, 15). But the terms of the bull show that there had been a concession earlier. Before that concession, the Pope said that the friars had no hospitium in Rome. At that time St. Sixtus was no longer theirs; Conrad of Metz could not have alluded to St. Sixtus, therefore, when he said in 1221: "The Pope has conferred on them a house in Rome" (Laurent no. 136). It is possible that the Pope was waiting for the completion of the building that he was having done at Santa Sabina, before giving the title to the property, on 5 June 1222, to the new Master of the Order, elected not many days before." Accessed 20 May 2012.

^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 112.

^ Guiraud 1913 , pp. 111–113.

^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 115.

^ Guiraud 1913 , pp. 126, 140.

^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 156.

^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 116.

^ Guiraud 1913 , pp. 130, 176.

^ Guiraud 1913 , pp. 130–132.

^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 130.

^ a b c Guiraud 1913 , p. 172.

^ Guiraud 1913 , pp. 173–175.

^ Guiraud 1913 , pp. 175, 181.

^ Guiraud 1913 , p. 181.

^ * Page of the painting at Prado Museum .

^ See Bernard Hamilton (1981) The Medieval Inquisition , pp. 36–37, New York: Holmes & Meier; Simon Tugwell [ Wikidata ] (1982) Early Dominicans: Selected Writings , p. 114, note 90, Ramsey, New Jersey: Paulist Press ^ Guy Bedouelle (1981) St. Dominic: The Grace of the Word , p. 185, San Francisco: Ignatius Press ^ Sullivan, Karen.

Truth and the heretic: crises of knowledge in medieval French literature , (University of Chicago Press, 2005) p. 120 ^ Peters, Edward (1988).

Inquisition . Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-06630-8 ^ " "Medieval Inquisition", Univ. of St. Thomas" . Archived from the original on 2 June 2013 . Retrieved 9 May 2020 .

^ Edward Peters (1988) Inquisition , p. 223, New York: The Free Press ^ a b Peters, Inquisition , p.223 ^ Peters, Inquisition , p. 129 ^ Dominikanie.pl.

"O pasku – Mniszki dominikańskie na Gródku" (in Polish) . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ "Pasek św. Dominika" .

Przewodnik Katolicki (in Polish) . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ "Contemplata aliis Tradere" . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ "Pasek św. Dominika – historia oraz świadectwa szczęśliwych matek" .

PCH24.pl (in Polish). 21 August 2014 . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ portalu, Redakcja (8 August 2017).

"Dla pragnących potomstwa - Pasek św. Dominika" .

Stacja7.pl (in Polish) . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ Robert Feeney.

"St. Dominic and the Rosary" . Catholic.net. Archived from the original on 8 June 2008 . Retrieved 11 July 2008 .

^ "Kilkelly, County Mayo", Mayo Ireland ^ a b c "Capilla y Sepulcro" .

dominicos.org (in Spanish). 13 December 2016 . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ a b Zeno.

"Lexikoneintrag zu »Dominicus, S. (7)«. Vollständiges Heiligen-Lexikon, Band 1. ..." www.zeno.org (in German) . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ a b "San Domenico di Guzman" .

Santiebeati.it . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ "Liturgical Calendar — Australia (2021)" .

www.gcatholic.org . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ "Dominik" .

DEON.pl (in Polish) . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ Provect.

"Kalendarz liturgiczny - sierpień - Diecezja Sosnowiecka" .

Kalendarz liturgiczny - sierpień - Diecezja Sosnowiecka . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ Catholic Church (2004).

Martyrologium Romanum (2004) .

^ "Santuario San Domenico in Soriano" .

it-it.facebook.com (in Italian) . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ Lippini, P. (1992).

Piccolo breviario (in Italian). Edizioni Studio Domenicano.

ISBN 978-88-7094-107-4 .

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ Lesser Feasts and Fasts 2018 . Church Publishing, Inc. 17 December 2019.

ISBN 978-1-64065-235-4 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bedouelle, Guy (1995).

Saint Dominic: The Grace of the Word . Ignatius Press.

ISBN 0-89870-531-2 .

An excerpt is available online: "The Holy Inquisition: Dominic and the Dominicans" Finn, Richard (2016).

Dominic and the Order of Preachers . London: Catholic Truth Society.

ISBN 9781784691011 . Retrieved 20 February 2016 .

Goergen, Donald J. (2016).

Saint Dominic: The Story of a Preaching Friar . New York: The Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-08091-4954-4 .

Guiraud, Jean (1913).

Saint Dominic . Duckworth.

Francis C. Lehner, ed., St Dominic: biographical documents . Washington: Thomist Press, 1964 Full text McGonigle, Thomas; Zagano, Phyllis (2006).

The Dominican Tradition . Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press.

ISBN 978-0-8146-1911-7 .

Pierre Mandonnet, M. H. Vicaire, St. Dominic and His Work . Saint Louis, 1948 Full text at Dominican Central Catholic Encyclopedia: St. Dominic by John B. O'Conner, 1909.

Tugwell, Simon (1982).

Early Dominicans: Selected Writings . New York: Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-0-8091-2414-5 .

Vicaire, M.H. (1964).

Saint Dominic and his Times . Translated by Kathleen Pond. Green Bay, Wisconsin: Alt Publishing.

ASIN B0000CMEWR .

Wishart, Alfred Wesley (1900).

A Short History of Monks and Monasteries . Freely available eText.

Project Gutenberg .

Friedrich Wilhelm Bautz (1975). "Saint Dominic". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 1. Hamm: Bautz. cols. 1356–1358.

ISBN 3-88309-013-1 .

Guy Bedouelle: Dominikus – Von der Kraft des Wortes.

Styria, Graz/ Wien/ Köln 1984, ISBN 3-222-11513-3 .

Jean-René Bouchet: Dominikus: Gefährte der Verirrten.

from the Franz. von Michael Marsch. publisher's current texts, Heiligenkreuztal, 1989, ISBN 3-921312-37-X .

Peter Dyckhoff: Mit Leib und Seele beten . Illustrations and text of a mediaeval manuscript about the new form of prayer by Saint Dominic.

ISBN 3-451-28231-3 .

Paul D. Hellmeier: Dominikus begegnen . St.Ulrich Verlag, Augsburg, 2007, ISBN 978-3-936484-92-2 .

Wolfram Hoyer (ed.): Jordan von Sachsen . Von den Anfängen des Predigerordens.

(Dominikanische Quellen und Zeugnisse; Vol. 3). Benno, Leipzig, 2002, ISBN 3-7462-1574-9 .

Meinolf Lohrum: Dominikus.

Benno, Leipzig, 1987, ISBN 3-7462-0047-4 .

Meinolf Lohrum: Dominikus. Beter und Prediger.

M. Grünewald, Mainz, 1990, ISBN 3-7867-1136-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saint Dominic .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Dominic de Guzman Wikiquote has quotations related to Saint Dominic .

"Website of Dominicans Friars ( Ordo Predicatorum , OP)" .

"Founder Statue in St Peter's Basilica" . Archived from the original on 12 January 2018.

" "Here followeth of St. Dominic" in the Golden Legend " .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2018.

(translation by W. Caxton , First Edition in 1483) " Saint Dominic " in the Ecumenical Lexicon of Saints v t e Order of Preachers A list of all the congregations, notable members, priories, churches, and convents of the Order of Preachers (Dominicans) Members of the Dominican Order Beatified Dominicans Agnes of Jesus Diana degli Andalò Andrea Franchi Fra Angelico Simone Ballachi Pope Benedict XI Pauline Jaricot Benvenuta Bojani Lucy Brocadelli Jose Gabriel del Rosario Brochero Matthew Carrieri Catherine of Racconigi Chiara Gambacorti Antonio della Chiesa Columba of Rieti Hyacinthe-Marie Cormier Domenico Spadafora John Dominici Margareta Ebner Emilia Bicchieri Augustine Fangi Francisco Martín Fernández de Posadas Pier Giorgio Frassati Peter González Buzád Hahót Humbert of Romans John of Vercelli Jordan of Saxony Ana of the Angels Monteagudo Manés de Guzmán Margaret of Castello Maria Bagnesi Ascensión Nicol y Goñi Osanna of Mantua Nicola Paglia Maddalena Panattieri Luke Spicola of Pontecorvo Marie Poussepin Stephana de Quinzanis Bernardo Scammacca Sebastian Maggi Henry Suso Raymond of Capua Reginald of Orleans Villana de' Botti Congregations of Nuns Congregation of the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament Dominican Nuns of the Holy Cross Convent, Regensburg Dominican Nuns of the Perpetual Rosary Dominicans of the Monastery of the Angels, Karachi Dominicans of the Monastery of the Heart of Jesus, Lockport Congregations of Sisters Adrian Dominican Sisters Dominican Sisters of Ilanz Dominican Sisters of Blauvelt Dominican Sisters of Hawthorne Dominican Sisters of Peace Dominican Sisters of St. Catherine of Siena Dominican Sisters of St. Cecilia Dominican Sisters of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Dominican Sisters of the Immaculate Conception Dominican Sisters of Grand Rapids Dominican Sisters of San Rafael Dominican Sisters of Mary, Mother of the Eucharist Dominican Sisters of Sparkill Racine Dominican Sisters Sinsinawa Dominican Sisters Dominican Bishops Diego de Aguilar (bishop) Johannes Alberti (bishop) Jose Advincula Nicolò Albertini Albertus Magnus Bernardo de Albuquerque Domingo de Alzola Andrea Franchi Rodolfo Fontiveros Beltran Teodoro Bacani Jr.

Rufino Sescon Napoleon Sipalay José S. Palma Socrates Villegas Antoninus of Florence Giacomo Balardi Arrigoni Carlos Azpiroz Costa Daniele Barboli Frank Leo Giovanni Battista Natali Archangelo de' Bianchi Franciscus Buratti James Burke Martín Cabeza de Vaca Francisco de la Cámara y Raya Thomas Cammerota Ambrosius Capello Tomás de Cárdenas Andrew of Carniola Bartolomé de las Casas Alfonso de la Cerda Jerónimo Clavijo Jean-Paul Vesco Antonio Cogorno R. Luke Concanen John Connolly Gregorio Cruz Edward Celestin Daly Vincent Darius Agustín Dávila Padilla Michael James Dempsey Joseph Augustine Di Noia Giulio Doffi John Dominici Jean-Paul Vesco Vincenzo de Doncelli Alberto Drago Vincenzo Ercolano Georg Fabri Edward Fenwick Felipe Fernandez de Pardo Anthony Fisher Eustache Fontana Serafino Fortibraccia Ambrosio Fracassini Felipe Galindo Chávez y Pineda Johannes de Galonifontibus John III of Soltaniyeh Ludovico Giamagna Andrés González Pietro de Gozzo Thomas Grace Alfonso Guerra Antonio de Hervias Jean Heysterbach John Howden Guy of Ibelin Henrik Kalteisen Thomas C. Kelly Edward Thaddeus Lawton Giorgio Lazzari Bartolomé de Ledesma Reginaldo de Lizárraga Jerónimo de Loayza Eustachio Locatelli Umberto Locati Bartolomeo Lopaci Juan Lópe Giovanni Marquet Martin of Opava Bartolomé Martinez Menacho y Mesa Pascase Maupair Stefan Antonin Mdzewski Godfried van Mierlo Paolo Isaresi della Mirandola Hermann Molitoris Antonio de Monroy Alonso de Montúfar Munio of Zamora Francisco Naranjo Girolamo Michele Nichesola Berthold von Oberg Michael Padrolo Dionysius Part Alberto Pascaleo Richard Payl Pedro de la Peña Vicente de Peraza Paolo Pico Sigfried Piscator Ponsa Antonio Ponticorona Agostino Quinzio Juan Ramírez de Arellano Miguel Ramírez de Salamanca Raphael Riva Cristóbal Rodríguez Juárez Giovanni Romano Reginaldo Romero Heinrich von Rübenach Abel de Saint-Brieuc Hugh of Saint-Cher Juan de Salamanca Thomas, bishop of Finland Thomas of Mancasola Tommaso da San Cipriano Peter Sanz Christoph Schönborn Tommaso Scotti Pedro Silva y Tenorio Juan Solano John Sproten Luigi Suppa Johannes Tideln Miguel de Torres Pablo de Torres Burchard Tuberflug Domingo de Ulloa Domingo Valderrama y Centeno Antonio de Valdivieso Vicente de Valverde Vincente de Valverde Vitas John of Wildeshausen Juan de Witte Hoos Pedro Xague Dominican Cardinals Nicolò Albertini Michael Browne Yves Congar John Dominici Andreas Frühwirth Hugh of Saint-Cher Christoph Schönborn Jose Advincula Juan de Torquemada Jean-Paul Vesco Frank Leo Timothy Radcliffe Dominican Martyrs Anna Abrikosova Luis Cancer Francis Ferdinand de Capillas Buzád Hahót John of Cologne Martyrs of Gorkum Paul and Ninety Companions Peter Sanz 17 Thomasian Martyrs Dominican Missionaries Jerónimo de Loayza Luise Radlmeier Peter Sanz Juan Solano Vincente de Valverde José Álvarez Fernández Leo Hofstee Dominican Mystics Agnes of Jesus Albertus Magnus Benvenuta Bojani Lucy Brocadelli Catherine of Racconigi Catherine of Siena Columba of Rieti Christina Ebner Margareta Ebner Mary of Jesus de León y Delgado Louis of Granada Osanna of Mantua Stephana de Quinzanis Catherine of Ricci Rose of Lima Elsbeth Stagel Henry Suso Thomas Aquinas Simone Weil Dominican Nuns Anna Abrikosova Agnes of Denmark Agnes of Jesus Agnes of Montepulciano Diana degli Andalò Concepción Argüello La Beata de Piedrahita Sister Bertranda Infanta Branca, Lady of Guadalajara Violante do Ceo Chiara Gambacorti Teresa Chikaba Anna Vittoria Dolara Augusta Theodosia Drane Christina Ebner Margareta Ebner Stephanie Gorodets Elizabeth of Töss Emilia Bicchieri Patricia Fresen Irmengard of Oettingen Marion Irvine Catherine Jarrige Joanna, Princess of Portugal Theresa Kugel Saint Margaret of Fontana Margaret of Hungary Juliana Morell Osanna of Cattaro Lea Ráskay Bartolomea Riccoboni Nora Rubashova Elsbeth Stagel Yolanda of Vianden Maria Petra Giordano Dominican Popes Pope Benedict XI Pope Benedict XIII Pope Innocent V Pope Pius V Dominican Saints Agnes of Montepulciano Albertus Magnus Antoninus of Florence Louis Bertrand Francis Ferdinand de Capillas Catherine of Siena Saint Dominic Vincent Ferrer Marie-Alphonsine Danil Ghattas Hyacinth of Poland John of Cologne John Macias Margaret of Hungary Martyrs of Gorkum Paul and Ninety Companions Pope Pius V Martin de Porres Raymond of Penyafort Rose of Lima Peter Sanz Thomas Aquinas Zdislava Berka Dominican Scholars Francisco Burgoa Jean Maurice Fiey Bede Jarrett Stjepan Krasić Raymond-Joseph Loenertz Martin of Opava Jean de Menasce Luise Radlmeier Lea Ráskay Antonin Sertillanges Rose Thering Dominican Sisters Anna Abrikosova Mother Mary Alphonsa Lucy Brocadelli Columba of Rieti Carol Gilbert Jackie Hudson Mary of Jesus de León y Delgado Margaret MacCurtain Ascensión Nicol y Goñi Ardeth Platte Stephana de Quinzanis Luise Radlmeier Catherine of Ricci Rose Thering Marjorie Tuite Rose Whitty Dominican Theologians Nicholas Bayard Catherine of Siena Yves Congar Joseph Augustine Di Noia Marcel-Jacques Dubois Luis Galiana y Cervera Henrik Kalteisen John Lutterell Aidan Nichols Paulus Hungarus Juan de Torquemada Benedict T. Viviano Dominican Tertiaries Francis Amherst Simone Ballachi Benvenuta Bojani Jose Gabriel del Rosario Brochero Catherine of Racconigi Catherine of Siena Pier Giorgio Frassati Pauline Jaricot Martin Grabmann Margaret of Castello Maria Bagnesi Osanna of Mantua Rose of Lima Villana de' Botti Lorenzo Ruíz of Manila Dominican Churches, Convents, and Monasteries Dominican Churches Basilica of San Sisto Vecchio Basilica of Santa Maria Novella Basilica of St Dominic, Valletta Blessed Sacrament Church, Seattle Church of St Catherine, Saint Petersburg Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, Košice Church of St. Vincent Ferrer, Manhattan Dominican Church, Lviv Dominican Church and Convent of St. James, Sandomierz Dominican Church and Convent of the Assumption of Mary, Tarnobrzeg Dominican Church, Vienna Église Saint-Cannat Monastery Church, Sighișoara Nuestra Señora del Rosario y Santo Domingo, Montevideo Our Lady of Pompei Church, Victoria, Gozo Predigerkirche Zürich San Domenico Maggiore San Domenico, Palermo San Giacomo Apostolo, Forlì Sant'Anastasia, Verona Santa Maria di Castello Santa Maria della Pietà, Palermo Santa Maria sopra Minerva Santa Sabina Santi Giovanni e Paolo, Venice Santissima Trinità a Via Condotti Santo Domingo, Mexico City St. Andrew's Church, Cologne St Cuthbert's Church, Durham St Dominic's Priory Church St. Paul's Church, Antwerp St. Hyacinth's Church, Warsaw Dominican Convents Convent of San Domenico, Fiesole Convento de Santo Tomás Dominican Church and Convent of St. James, Sandomierz Dominican Church and Convent of the Assumption of Mary, Tarnobrzeg Dominican Convent, Ilanz Dominican Convent, Zaragoza Predigerkloster St. Catherine's Priory, Roskilde Schlehdorf Abbey Skänninge Abbey St. John's Priory, Kalmar Wettenhausen Abbey Dominican Monasteries Ballindoon Friary Black Friars' Monastery of Stockholm Burrishoole Friary Corpus Christi Monastery Couvent des Jacobins de la rue Saint-Honoré Couvent des Jacobins de la rue Saint-Jacques Dominican Priory, Viborg Flavigny Abbey Holbæk Priory Kirchberg convent Liebenau monastery Matris Domini Monastery Monastère de Chalais North Abbey, Youghal Notre-Dame-de-Prouille Monastery Oetenbach nunnery Our Lady's Priory, Aarhus Priory of the Immaculate Conception Paulinerkirche, Leipzig Rue Saint-Dominique Sainte Marie de La Tourette Santa Catalina Monastery Sligo Abbey St. Agnes' Priory, Gavnø St Catherine's Monastery, Bremen St. Catherine's Monastery, Tallinn St. Catherine's Priory, Roskilde St. Catherine's Priory, Ribe St. Catherine Monastery, Olomouc Töss Monastery Weesen Abbey Dominican Education Colleges and Universities Albertus Magnus College Angelicum College Aquinas College, Michigan Aquinas College, Tennessee Aquinas Institute of Theology Aquinas University Barry University Caldwell University Colegio de San Juan de Letran Dominican College, New York Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology Dominican University, Illinois Dominican University of California Edgewood College Holy Trinity University Molloy College Mount Saint Mary College Providence College St. Catharine College St. Mary's Dominican College St. Thomas Aquinas College Siena Heights University Pontifical Universities Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas University of Santo Tomas Schools Albertus Magnus High School Angelicum School Iloilo Aquinas High School, New York Aquinas School Blackfriars Priory School Cabra Dominican College Dominican Academy Dominican Convent High School, Harare Dominican Convent High School, Bulawayo Dominican Convent Primary School, Bulawayo Dominican College Sion Hill Dominican College, Fortwilliam Dominican College, Portstewart Dominican High School, Whitefish Bay Dominican International School Dominican School Manila Edgewood High School of the Sacred Heart Fenwick High School (Oak Park, Illinois) Flintridge Sacred Heart Academy Frassati Catholic High School Immaculate Conception Academy (San Francisco, California) Marian Catholic High School (Illinois) Maryknoll School of Lupon Mount de Sales Academy (Catonsville, Maryland) Mount Saint Dominic Academy Newbridge College Queen of Peace High School, Illinois Regina Dominican High School Rosarian Academy Rosary High School, Aurora Rosaryhill School Sacred Heart High School (California) San Gabriel Mission High School Santa Catalina School Saint Agnes Academy, Texas Saint Dominic Academy Saint John Paul the Great Catholic High School (Virginia) Saint Michael Academy, Catarman Santa Sabina College Siena College, Camberwell Siena College of Quezon City Siena College of Taytay St Catherine's Academy St Catherine's School, Germiston St Dominic's Catholic School for Girls, Boksburg St Dominic's Chishawasha St Dominic's College, Henderson St Dominic's Grammar School St Dominic's Grammar School for Girls St Dominic's Priory School, Stone St Dominic's Priory College, Adelaide St Dominic's Sixth Form College St John's High School, Harare St Joseph's School, Oamaru St Mary's Dominican High School St Rose's Senior High School, Akwatia St Vincent Ferrer High School Superior Institute of Religious Sciences of St. Thomas Aquinas Trinity Catholic College, Dunedin, New Zealand Trinity High School (River Forest, Illinois) Catholicism portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Portals : Biography Catholicism Saints Spain Italy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saint_Dominic&oldid=1304759899 " Categories : 1170 births 1221 deaths People from the Province of Burgos Spanish Dominicans Dominican saints Spanish Christian theologians Founders of Catholic religious communities Spanish Roman Catholic saints Marian visionaries Dominican spirituality 13th-century Christian saints Burials at the Basilica of San Domenico Pre-Reformation saints of the Lutheran liturgical calendar Pre-Reformation Anglican saints Masters of the Order of Preachers Medieval Spanish theologians 13th-century Roman Catholic theologians Anglican saints Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia without Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 00:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Saint Dominic 64 languages Add topic

