Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Work 4 On gnosticism Toggle On gnosticism subsection 4.1 Immanentizing the eschaton 4.2 Critique of rationalism and phenomenology 4.3 Spiritual revival 5 Reception 6 Selected bibliography 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 9.1 Primary literature 9.2 Primary sources 9.3 Secondary literature 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Eric Voegelin 34 languages አማርኛ Aragonés Asturianu Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1901–1985) Eric Voegelin Born Erich Hermann Wilhelm Vögelin ( 1901-01-03 ) January 3, 1901 Cologne , Kingdom of Prussia , German Empire Died January 19, 1985 (1985-01-19) (aged 84) Stanford, California , U.S.

Education Alma mater University of Vienna Doctoral advisor Hans Kelsen [ 2 ] Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Perennial philosophy [ 1 ] Main interests Consciousness existence history political science spirituality Anamnesis (philosophy) Notable ideas Metaxy as the permanent place where man is in-between two poles of existence [ 3 ] Criticism of Gnosticism " Don't immanentize the eschaton " This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Eric Voegelin (born Erich Hermann Wilhelm Vögelin , German: [ˈføːgəliːn] ; January 3, 1901 – January 19, 1985) was a German-American political philosopher . He was born in Cologne , and educated in political science at the University of Vienna , where he became an associate professor of political science in the law faculty. In 1938, he and his wife fled from the Nazi forces which had entered Vienna . They emigrated to the United States, where they became citizens in 1944. He spent most of his academic career at Louisiana State University , the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich and the Hoover Institution of Stanford University .

Early life [ edit ] Voegelin was born in Cologne on January 3, 1901. His parents moved to Vienna in 1910, and he eventually studied at the University of Vienna . The advisers on his dissertation were Hans Kelsen and Othmar Spann . After his habilitation there in 1928, he taught political theory and sociology . In Austria, Voegelin began lasting friendships with Alfred Schütz [ 4 ] and with Friedrich Hayek .

[ 5 ] Career [ edit ] As a result of the Anschluss in 1938, Voegelin was fired from his job. Narrowly avoiding arrest by the Gestapo and after a brief stay in Switzerland , he arrived in the United States. He taught at various universities before he joined Louisiana State University 's Department of Government in 1942. Voegelin remained in Baton Rouge until 1958, when he accepted an offer by Munich 's Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich to fill Max Weber 's former chair in political science , which had been unoccupied since Weber's death in 1920. In Munich, he founded the Institut für Politische Wissenschaft . Voegelin returned to the United States in 1969 to join Stanford University 's Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace as Henry Salvatori Fellow. There he continued his work until his death. He was a member of the Philadelphia Society .

[ 6 ] Although some have found his books obscure, according to his student Ellis Sandoz , he was a "wonderfully lucid lecturer with the gift of explaining with complete intelligibility the most abstruse theories to the comprehension and fascination" of his students.

[ 7 ] Work [ edit ] In his later life Voegelin worked to account for the endemic political violence of the twentieth century, in an effort variously referred to as a philosophy of politics, history, or consciousness . In Voegelin's Weltanschauung , he "blamed a flawed utopian interpretation of Christianity for spawning totalitarian movements like Nazism and Communism." [ 8 ] Voegelin eschewed any ideological labels or categorizations that readers and followers attempted to impose on his work. Nevertheless, his work came to the forefront during the Cold War and was adopted mainly by conservatives .

Voegelin published scores of books, essays, and reviews in his lifetime. An early work was Die politischen Religionen (1938; The Political Religions ), on totalitarian ideologies as political religions due to their structural similarities to religion . He wrote the multi-volume (English-language) Order and History , which began publication in 1956 and remained incomplete at the time of his death 29 years later. His 1951 Charles Walgreen lectures, published as The New Science of Politics , is sometimes seen as a prolegomenon to this series, and remains his best known work.  He left many manuscripts unpublished, including a history of political ideas, which has since been published in eight volumes.

Order and History was originally conceived as a five-volume examination of the history of order occasioned by Voegelin's personal experience of the disorder of his time. The first three volumes, Israel and Revelation , The World of the Polis , and Plato and Aristotle , appeared in rapid succession in 1956 and 1957 and focused on the evocations of order in the ancient Near East and Greece.

Voegelin then encountered difficulties which slowed down the publication. This, combined with his university administrative duties and work related to the new institute, meant that seventeen years separated the fourth from the third volume. His new concerns were indicated in the 1966 German collection Anamnesis: Zur Theorie der Geschichte und Politik . The fourth volume, The Ecumenic Age , appeared in 1974. It broke with the chronological pattern of the previous volumes by investigating symbolizations of order ranging in time from the Sumerian King List to Hegel . Work on the final volume, In Search of Order , occupied Voegelin's final days and it was published posthumously in 1987.

[ original research?

] One of Voegelin's main points in his later work is that our experience of transcendence conveys a sense of order. Although transcendence can never be fully defined or described, it may be conveyed in symbols. A particular sense of transcendent order serves as a basis for a particular political order. A philosophy of consciousness can therefore become a philosophy of politics. Insights may become fossilised as dogma.

Voegelin is more interested in the ontological issues that arise from these experiences than the epistemological questions of how we know that a vision of order is true or not. For Voegelin, the essence of truth is trust. All philosophy begins with experience of the divine. Since God is experienced as good, one can be confident that reality is knowable. Given the possibility of knowledge, Voegelin holds there are two modes: intentionality and luminosity.  Visions of order belong to the latter category. The truth of any vision is confirmed by its orthodoxy, by what Voegelin jokingly calls its lack of originality.

Voegelin's work does not fit in any standard classifications, although some of his readers [ who?

] have found similarities in it to contemporaneous works by, for example, Hans Jonas , Ernst Cassirer , Martin Heidegger , and Hans-Georg Gadamer . Voegelin often invents terms or uses old ones in new ways. However, there are patterns in his work with which the reader can quickly become familiar.

According to Ellis Sandoz, Voegelin may well be America's leading philosopher, and is rightly compared with the premier minds of our century and, perhaps, of the millennia.

[ 7 ] Thomas Altizer has said that Order and History "may someday be  perceived as the most important work of Old  Testament scholarship ever written in  the United States,"  adding that it  is noteworthy  that  it  was  written  by  a  political scientist and  philosopher.

[ 9 ] Among indications of growing engagement with Voegelin's work are the 305 page international bibliography published in 2000 by Munich's Wilhelm Fink Verlag ; the presence of dedicated research centers at universities in the United States, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom; the appearance of recent translations in languages ranging from Portuguese to Japanese; and the publishing of a 34 volume collection of his primary works by the University of Missouri Press and various primary and secondary works offered by the Eric-Voegelin-Archiv of Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität .

On gnosticism [ edit ] This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In his The New Science of Politics , Order and History , and Science, Politics and Gnosticism , Voegelin opposed what he believed to be unsound Gnostic influences in politics.

Eugene Webb stated that Voegelin understood " gnosis " as a purported direct, immediate apprehension or vision of truth without the need for critical reflection; the special gift of a spiritual and cognitive elite [ 10 ] and "gnosticism" as A type of thinking that claims absolute cognitive mastery of reality. Relying as it does on a claim to gnosis, gnosticism considers its knowledge not subject to criticism. Gnosticism may take transcendentalizing (as in the case of the Gnostic movement of late antiquity) or immanentizing forms (as in the case of Marxism).

[ 11 ] Accordingly, Voegelin distinguished between ancient and modern gnosticisms: whereas the former sought salvation in a realm transcending the actual world, the "modern" form aimed to change it immanently (see below).

Apart from the Classical Christian writers against heresy, his sources on Gnosticism were secondary since the texts of the Nag Hammadi library were not yet widely available. For example, Voegelin used Hans Urs von Balthasar , Henri de Lubac , and Hans Jonas .

[ 12 ] Voegelin perceived similarities between ancient Gnosticism and modernist political theories, particularly Communism and Nazism . He identified the root of the Gnostic impulse as alienation , that is, a sense of disconnection from society and a belief that this lack is the result of the inherent disorder, or even evil, of the world. That alienation has two effects: The first is the belief that the disorder of the world can be transcended by extraordinary insight, learning, or knowledge, called a Gnostic Speculation by Voegelin (he claimed that the Gnostics themselves referred to that as gnosis ).

The second is the desire to implement and or create a policy to actualize the speculation, or Immanentize the eschaton : to create a sort of heaven on earth within history.

According to Voegelin, the Gnostics really reject the Christian eschaton of the kingdom of God and replace it with a human form of salvation through esoteric ritual or practice.

[ citation needed ] The primary feature that characterizes a tendency as gnostic for Voegelin is that it is motivated by the notion that the world and humanity can be fundamentally transformed and perfected through the intervention of a chosen group of people (an elite), a man-god, or men-Gods. The Übermensch is the chosen one who has a kind of special knowledge (like magic or science) about how to perfect human existence.

[ citation needed ] That stands in contrast to a notion of redemption that is achieved through the reconciliation of mankind with the divine.

Marxism , therefore, qualifies as "gnostic" because it purports that the perfect society on earth can be established once capitalism has been overthrown by the proletariat. Likewise, Nazism is seen as "gnostic" because it posits that utopia can be achieved by attaining racial purity once the master race has freed itself of the racially inferior and the degenerate.

[ citation needed ] In both cases specifically analyzed by Voegelin, the totalitarian impulse is derived from the alienation of the individuals from the rest of society. That leads to a desire to dominate ( libido dominandi ), which has its roots in the Gnostic's conviction of the imperative of his vision but also in his lack of concord with a large body of his society. As a result, there is very little regard for the welfare of those who are harmed by the resulting politics, which ranges from coercive to calamitous (such as the English proverb: "You have to crack a few eggs to make an omelet" or its Russian variety: "When you chop wood, chips fly").

[ citation needed ] Immanentizing the eschaton [ edit ] Main article: Immanentize the eschaton One of his most quoted passages (by such figures as William F. Buckley Jr.

) [ 13 ] is: The problem of an eidos in history, hence, arises only when a Christian transcendental fulfillment becomes immanentized.  Such an immanentist hypostasis of the eschaton , however, is a theoretical fallacy.

[ 14 ] From this comes the catchphrase : "Don't immanentize the eschaton !", which simply means: "Do not try to make that which belongs to the afterlife happen here and now" or "Don't try to create Heaven on Earth." When Voegelin uses the term gnosis negatively, it is to reflect the word as found in the Manichaeism and Valentinianism of antiquity. As it is later then immanentized (or manifest) in modernity in the wake of Joachim of Fiore and in the various ideological movements outlined in his works.

[ 15 ] Voegelin also builds on the term "Gnosticism" as it is defined by Hans Jonas in his The Gnostic Religion , in reference to Heidegger 's Gnosticism, which is to have an understanding and control over reality that makes mankind as powerful as the role of God in reality.

Voegelin was arguing from a Hellenistic position that good gnosis is derived from pistis (faith) and that the pagan tradition made a false distinction between faith and noesis . Furthermore, the dualist perspective was the very essence of gnosticism via the misuse of noema and caused a destructive division between the internal and external world in human consciousness . To reconcile the internal ( subjective ) and external ( objective ) world of consciousness was the restoration of order.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Critique of rationalism and phenomenology [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2022 ) Spiritual revival [ edit ] Voegelin's work does not lay out a program of reform or offer a doctrine of recovery from what he termed the "demono-maniacal" in modern politics. However, interspersed in his writings is the idea of a spiritual recovery of the primary experiences of divine order.  He was not interested so much in what religious dogmas might result in personal salvation but rather a recovery of the human in the classical sense of the daimonios aner (Plato's term for "the spiritual man"). He did not speculate on the institutional forms in which a spiritual recovery might take place but expressed confidence that the current 500-year cycle of secularism would come to an end because he stated that "you cannot deny the human forever." [ citation needed ] In an essay published in 1965, [ 18 ] Voegelin suggested that the Soviet Union would collapse from within because of its historical roots in philosophy and Christianity. Later, at an informal talk given at University College, Dublin, Ireland in 1972, [ 19 ] Voegelin suggested the Soviet Union might collapse by 1980 because of its failure to succeed in its domestic commitments and external political challenges.

Reception [ edit ] Eugene Webb criticized Voegelin's conception of gnosis and his analysis of Gnosticism in general. In the article "Voegelin's Gnosticism Reconsidered," Webb explained that Voegelin's concept of Gnosticism was conceived "not primarily to describe ancient phenomena but to help us understand some modern ones for which the evidence is a great deal clearer." [ 20 ] [ page needed ] Webb continues, "the category (of Gnosticism) is of limited usefulness for the purpose to which he put it… and the fact that the idea of Gnosticism as such has become so problematic and complex in recent years must at the very least undercut Voegelin's effort to trace a historical line of descent from ancient sources to the modern phenomena he tried to use them to illuminate." [ 20 ] [ page needed ] Because Voegelin applied the concept of gnosis to a wide array of ideologies and movements such as Marxism, communism, National Socialism, progressivism, liberalism, and humanism, [ 21 ] critics have proposed that Voegelin's concept of Gnosis lacks theoretical precision.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Therefore, Voegelin's gnosis can, according to the critics, hardly serve as a scientific basis for an analysis of political movements. Rather, they claim, the term "Gnosticism" as used by Voegelin is more of an invective just as "when on the lowest level of propaganda those who do not conform with one's own opinion are smeared as communists." [ 24 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] Über die Form des amerikanischen Geistes , Tübingen 1928 Rasse und Staat .

Mohr Siebeck , Tübingen 1933 Die Rassenidee in der Geistesgeschichte von Ray bis Carus .

Junker & Dünnhaupt Berlin 1933 Der autoritäre Staat , Wien 1936 Die politischen Religionen .

Bermann Fischer , Stockholm 1939.

[ 25 ] Neuauflage München 1996 The New Science of Politics. An Introduction , Chicago University Press, Chicago 1952 Order and History , 5 Bde. Baton Rouge 1956–1987 Wissenschaft, Politik und Gnosis , München 1959, English translation: Science, Politics and Gnosticism , Regnery Publishing Inc., Washington DC, 1968 Anamnesis. Zur Theorie der Geschichte und Politik , München 1966 From Enlightment to Revolution , Durham 1975 Autobiographische Reflexionen , Hg.

Peter J. Opitz . München 1994 Das Volk Gottes. Sektenbewegungen und der Geist der Moderne , München 1994 Der Gottesmord. Zur Genese und Gestalt der modernen politischen Gnosis , München 1999 Ordnung und Geschichte , 10 Bde. Hg.

Dietmar Herz & Peter Opitz, München 2001–2005 Die Neue Wissenschaft der Politik , München 2004 Anamnesis. Zur Theorie von Geschichte und Politik , Freiburg 2005 Das Drama des Menschseins , Passagen, Wien 2007 ISBN 978-3851657241 Das Jüngste Gericht Friedrich Nietzsches.

Matthes & Seitz, Berlin 2007, ISBN 978-3882218879 Conversations with Eric Voegelin , Mitschrift von vier Vorlesungen in Montreal in den Jahren 1965, 1967, 1970, 1976. Thomas More Institute, Montreal 1980 Briefwechsel 1939–1949: Eric Voegelin und Hermann Broch , In: Sinn und Form, Heft 2/2008 , S. 149–174 Briefwechsel, Eric Voegelin und Karl Löwith , In: Sinn und Form, Heft 6/2007 , S. 764–794 Realitätsfinsternis . Übers. Dora Fischer-Barnicol, Hg. und Nachwort Peter J.Opitz. Matthes & Seitz, Berlin 2010 ISBN 978-3882216967 Was ist Geschichte?

Übers. Dora Fischer-Barnicol, Hg. und Vorwort Peter J.Opitz. Matthes & Seitz, Berlin 2015 ISBN 978-3882210460 Glaube und Wissen. Der Briefwechsel zwischen Eric Voegelin und Leo Strauss von 1934 bis 1964.

Hg. Peter J. Opitz; Wilhelm Fink, München 2010 ISBN 978-3770549672 Luther und Calvin. Die große Verwirrung.

Hg. Peter J. Opitz. Wilhelm Fink, München 2011, ISBN 978-3770551590 Die Natur des Rechts.

Übers. und Nachwort Thomas Nawrath. Matthes & Seitz Berlin, Berlin 2012, ISBN 978-3882216172 Rezension Die Ursprünge des Totalitarismus, Rezension zu Arendts Totalitarismus-Buch, in: Über den Totalitarismus. Texte Hannah Arendts aus den Jahren 1951 und 1953.

S. 33–42. Übers. Ursula Ludz. Hg. Ingeborg Nordmann.

HAIT , Dresden 1998 ISBN 3931648176 [ 26 ] The Collected Works of Eric Voegelin Volume 1: On the Form of the American Mind, edited by Jürgen Gebhardt and Barry Cooper Volume 2: Race and State, edited by Klaus Vondung Volume 3: The History of the Race Idea: From Ray to Carus, edited by Klaus Vondung Volume 4: The Authoritarian State: An Essay on the Problem of the Austrian State, edited by Gilbert Weiss Volume 5: Modernity without Restraint: The Political Religions; The New Science of Politics; and Science, Politics, and Gnosticism, edited by Manfred Henningsen Volume 6: Anamnesis: On the Theory of History and Politics, edited by David Walsh Volume 7: Published Essays, 1922–1928, Edited by Thomas W. Heilke and John von Heyking Volume 8: Published Essays, 1929–1933, edited by Thomas W. Heilke and John von Heyking Volume 9: Published Essays, 1934–1939, edited by Thomas W. Heilke Volume 10: Published Essays, 1940–1952, edited by Ellis Sandoz Volume 11: Published Essays, 1953–1965, edited by Ellis Sandoz Volume 12: Published Essays, 1966–1985, edited by Ellis Sandoz Volume 13: Selected Book Reviews, edited by Jodi Cockerill and Barry Cooper Volume 14: Order and History, Volume I, Israel and Revelation, edited by Maurice P. Hogan Volume 15: Order and History, Volume II, The World of the Polis, edited by Athanasios Moulakis Volume 16: Order and History, Volume III, Plato and Aristotle, edited by Dante Germino Volume 17: Order and History, Volume IV, The Ecumenic Age, edited by Michael Franz Volume 18: Order and History, Volume V, In Search of Order, edited by Ellis Sandoz Volume 19: History of Political Ideas, Volume I, Hellenism, Rome, and Early Christianity, edited by Athanisios Moulakis Volume 20: History of Political Ideas, Volume II, The Middle Ages to Aquinas, edited by Peter von Sivers Volume 21: History of Political Ideas, Volume III, The Later Middle Ages, edited by David Walsh Volume 22: History of Political Ideas, Volume IV, Renaissance and Reformation, edited by David L. Morse and William M. Thompson Volume 23: History of Political Ideas, Volume V, Religion and the Rise of Modernity, edited by James L. Wiser Volume 24: History of Political Ideas, Volume VI, Revolution and the New Science, edited by Barry Cooper Volume 25: History of Political Ideas, Volume VII, The New Order and Last Orientation, edited by Jürgen Gebhardt and Thomas A. Hollweck Volume 26: History of Political Ideas, Volume VIII, Crisis and the Apocalypse of Man, edited by David Walsh Volume 27: Nature of the Law and Related Legal Writings, edited by Robert Anthony Pascal, James Lee Babin, and John William Corrington Volume 28: What Is History? And Other Late Unpublished Writings, edited by Thomas A. Hollweck and Paul Caringella Volume 29: Selected Correspondence, 1924–1949, edited with an introduction by Thomas Hollweck Volume 30: Selected Correspondence, 1950–1984, edited with an introduction by Thomas Hollweck Volume 31: Hitler and the Germans, edited by Detlev Clemens and Brendan Purcell Volume 32: The Theory of Governance and Other Miscellaneous Papers, 1921–1938, edited by William Petropulos and Gilbert Weiss Volume 33: The Drama of Humanity and Other Miscellaneous Papers, 1939–1985, edited by William Petropulos and Gilbert Weiss Volume 34: Autobiographical Reflections: Revised Edition, with a Voegelin Glossary and Cumulative Index, edited with introductions by Ellis Sandoz See also [ edit ] Leo Strauss References [ edit ] ^ David R. Cole , The Political Philosophy of Eric Voegelin and His Followers , Edwin Mellen Press, 2008, p. iv.

^ Christian Damböck (ed.), Influences on the Aufbau , Springer, 2015, p. 258.

^ Eric Voegelin, "Reason: The Classic Experience," in Voegelin, Published Essays, 1966–1985, vol. 12 of The Collected Works of Eric Voegelin, ed.

Ellis Sandoz (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1990), 289–290; Order and History, Volume IV: The Ecumenic Age, vol. 17 of The Collected Works of Eric Voegelin, ed. Michael Franz (Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 2000), 408.

^ Szakolczai, Arpad (January 25, 2013).

"Eric Voegelin and Alfred Schütz: A Friendship That Lasted a Lifetime" .

VoegelinView .

Archived from the original on October 4, 2020 . Retrieved September 9, 2015 .

^ Federici, Michael.

Eric Voegelin: The Restoration of Order , ISI Books, 2002, p. 1 ^ Distinguished members (PDF) , The Philadelphia society, archived from the original (PDF) on January 18, 2012 ^ a b Ellis Sandoz: "Eric Voegelin, January 3, 1901 – January 19, 1985", Political Science Reviewer 16 (1986).

^ McDonald, Marci (October 2004).

"The Man Behind Stephen Harper" .

The Walrus .

CA .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2014 . Retrieved January 18, 2013 .

^ Thomas J.J. Altizer: A New History and a New But Ancient God? A Review-Essay Journal of the American Academy of Religion , 1975 Vol. XLIII; Iss. 4. Archived from the original on 9 December 2021 on the Wayback Machine .

^ Webb 1981 , p. 282: 'According to Voegelin, the claim to gnosis may take intellectual, emotional, and volitional forms.' ^ Webb 1981 , p. 282 "'"A type of thinking that claims absolute cognitive mastery of reality. Relying as it does on a claim to gnosis, gnosticism considers its knowledge not subject to criticism. As a religious or quasi-religious movement, gnosticism may take transcendentalizing (as in the case of the Gnostic movement of late antiquity) or immanentizing forms (as in the case of Marxism)." [Webb 1981:282]'" ^ Voegelin, Eric (1989), Sandoz, Ellis ; Weiss, Gilbert; Petropoulos, William (eds.), The Collected Works , Louisiana State University Press, ISBN 0-80711826-5 .

^ Buckley Jr., William F.

Cancel Your Own Goddam Subscription: Notes & Asides from National Review , Basic Books, 2007, pp. 23–24 ^ Voegelin 1987 , p. 120.

^ Voegelin 1987 , chap. 4.

^ Voegelin, Eric, The ecumenic age, order & History , vol. 4, esp. Introduction & chap. 5.

^ Voegelin, Eric (2000), Franz, Michael (ed.), The collected works , vol. 17, University of Missouri Press .

^ "In Search of the Ground", Published Essays, 1953—1965 , p. 239 (Collected Works Vol 11) ^ Brendan Purcell (February 17, 2009).

"The Irish Dialogue with Eric Voegelin" .

Voegelin View .

Archived from the original on July 15, 2018 . Retrieved July 15, 2018 .

^ a b Webb 2005 .

^ Voegelin, Eric (1987).

The new science of politics : an introduction (pbk.) . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 128ff., 173ffn.

ISBN 978-0-22686114-2 .

OCLC 16992786 .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2023 . Retrieved December 21, 2022 .

^ Hans, Kelsen (April 2017).

Secular Religion A Polemic against the Misinterpretation of Modern Social Philosophy, Science and Politics as "New Religions" . Walter, Robert, Jabloner, Clemens, Zeleny, Klaus (2. Auflage ed.). Stuttgart: Franz-Steinerm.

ISBN 978-3-51511760-9 .

OCLC 988613915 .

^ Jabloner, Clemens (2013).

Secular religion : Rezeption und Kritik von Hans Kelsens Auseinandersetzung mit Religion und Wissenschaft . Wien: Manz. pp.

19– 42.

ISBN 9783214147556 .

OCLC 864572584 .

^ Kelsen, Hans; Voegelin, Eric (2004). Arnold, Eckhart (ed.).

A new science of politics : Hans Kelsen's reply to Eric Voegelin's "New science of politics" : a contribution to the critique of ideology . Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag. p. 107.

ISBN 978-3-11032737-3 .

OCLC 607253659 .

^ geplant: Wien 1938. Nach der Besetzung Österreichs durch die Deutschen in der schwedischen Firmen-Neugründung erschienen ^ Im Inhaltsverzeichnis ist Voegelins Originaltext nicht explizit genannt, sondern er steht lediglich unter einem summarischen Titel der Hg'in. Drei Teile auf deutsch: die Rezension selbst, Eine Antwort Arendts S. 42–51 und eine Abschließende Bemerkung Voegelins S. 51f. In einem Schluss-Kommentar geht die Hg'in auf die Unterschiede der beiden ein.  Die Originaltexte zuerst in Englisch: E. V., The origins of totalitarism, in: Review of Politics, Hg.

University of Notre Dame , South Bend, IN. Jg. 15, H. 1, 1953, pp. 68–76; sowie Arendt, A reply , pp. 76–84; und Voegelin, Concluding remarks, pp. 84s. Alle drei Teile auch im Reprint-Sammelband The crisis of modern times: Perspectives from the Review of Politics 1939–1962, Verlag: wie das Heft, 2007, ISBN 0268035067 , E. V. pp. 272–280; Arendt pp. 280–287; E. V. pp. 287–289 Further reading [ edit ] Primary literature [ edit ] All of Voegelin's writing is published as his Collected Works ( CW ), reviewed by Mark Lilla , " Mr. Casaubon in America " The New York Review of Books 54/11 (June 28, 2007): 29–31.

Primary sources [ edit ] The closest to an introduction to his thought in his own words is the Autobiographical Reflections .

Wagner, Gerhard; Weiss, Gilbert, eds. (2011), A Friendship That Lasted a Lifetime: The Correspondence Between Alfred Schutz and Eric Voegelin , Petropulos, William transl, University of Missouri Press , 240 pp.

Register of the Eric Voegelin papers 1901–1997 at the Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford University Stanford, CA, 2012 (120 PDFs).

Secondary literature [ edit ] Cooper, Barry: Eric Voegelin and the Foundations of Modern Political Science, University of Missouri Press, 1999.

Hund, Wulf D.: The Racism of Eric Voegelin . In: Journal of World Philosophies , 4, 2019, 2, pp. 1–22.

Federici, Michael: Eric Voegelin: The Restoration of Order , ISI Books 2002, basic introduction.

McAllister, Ted V: Leo Strauss, Eric Voegelin and The Search for a Postliberal Order' University Press of Kansas, 1995.

Sandoz, Ellis: The Voegelinian Revolution: A Biographical Introduction Louisiana State UP, 1981, advanced.

Trepanier, Lee,  and Steven F. McGuire, eds.

Eric Voegelin and the Continental Tradition: Explorations in Modern Political Thought (University of Missouri Press; 2011) 284 pp; essays on his relationship to Hegel, Schelling, Kierkegaard, Heidegger, and Gadamer.

Webb, Eugene (1981), Glossary of Voegelin terms online , p. 282, According to Voegelin, the claim to gnosis may take intellectual, emotional, and volitional forms.

.

Webb, Eugene: Eric Voegelin: Philosopher of History University of Washington Press, 1981.

——— (2005), "Voegelin's "Gnosticism" Reconsidered", Political Science Reviewer , 34 .

External links [ edit ] This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Quotations related to Eric Voegelin at Wikiquote Works by or about Eric Voegelin at the Internet Archive Eric Voegelin papers at the Hoover Institution Archives Eric-Voegelin-Archiv The Eric Voegelin Institute, LSU Archived December 19, 2020, at the Wayback Machine The Centre of Eric Voegelin Studies (EVS), Ghent University Eric Voegelin Study Page Voegelin—Research News Eric Voegelin-Bibliothek at FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg (Eric Voegelin Library) v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐qjq7w
Cached time: 20250817044548
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.158 seconds
Real time usage: 1.386 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10950/1000000
Revision size: 35825/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 336942/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24282/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 136073/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.626/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20812955/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  942.780      1 -total
 21.20%  199.865      1 Template:Conservatism_in_Germany
 17.17%  161.834      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 12.59%  118.739     46 Template:Lang
  9.31%   87.777      1 Template:Reflist
  6.12%   57.670      9 Template:Fix
  5.91%   55.756      1 Template:Short_description
  5.20%   49.026      9 Template:ISBN
  5.01%   47.188     75 Template:Smaller
  4.16%   39.249      1 Template:Social_and_political_philosophy Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:191431:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044548 and revision id 1276435901. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eric_Voegelin&oldid=1276435901 " Categories : 1901 births 1985 deaths German emigrants to the United States Christian anti-Gnosticism 20th-century German philosophers German political scientists People from Cologne People from the Rhine Province Perennial philosophy Emigrants from Austria after the Anschluss University of Vienna alumni Louisiana State University faculty Academic staff of the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich Hoover Institution people 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century German writers 20th-century American writers German male writers American critics of atheism Critics of Marxism World historians 20th-century American political scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2011 Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text Pages with German IPA All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from October 2007 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2017 Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2022 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Articles to be expanded from July 2022 All articles to be expanded Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2013 Wikipedia external links cleanup from March 2024 Articles with Internet Archive links Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 21:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eric Voegelin 34 languages Add topic

