Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Solar calendars 2 Lunisolar calendars 3 Lunar calendars 4 Leap seconds 5 Other uses 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Intercalation (timekeeping) 31 languages Afrikaans العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Македонски Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 日本語 Polski Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Insertion of a leap day, week, or month This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Intercalation" timekeeping – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Look up intercalation or embolism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Intercalation or embolism in timekeeping is the insertion of a leap day , week , or month into some calendar years to make the calendar follow the seasons or moon phases.

[ 1 ] Lunisolar calendars may require intercalations of days or months.

Solar calendars [ edit ] Further information: Intercalary month (Egypt) The solar or tropical year does not have a whole number of days (it is about 365.24 days), but a calendar year must have a whole number of days. The most common way to reconcile the two is to vary the number of days in the calendar year.

In solar calendars, this is done by adding an extra day ("leap day" or "intercalary day") to a common year of 365 days, about once every four years, creating a leap year that has 366 days ( Julian , Gregorian and Indian national calendars ).

The Decree of Canopus , issued by the pharaoh Ptolemy III Euergetes of Ancient Egypt in 239 BC, decreed a solar leap day system; an Egyptian leap year was not adopted until 25 BC, when the Roman Emperor Augustus instituted a reformed Alexandrian calendar .

In the Julian calendar , as well as in the Gregorian calendar , which improved upon it, intercalation is done by adding an extra day to February in each leap year. In the Julian calendar this was done every four years. In the Gregorian, years divisible by 100 but not 400 were exempted in order to improve accuracy. Thus, 2000 was a leap year; 1700, 1800, and 1900 were not.

Epagomenal [ 2 ] days are days within a solar calendar that are outside any regular month. Usually five epagomenal days are included within every year ( Egyptian , Coptic , Ethiopian , Mayan Haab' and French Republican Calendars ), but a sixth epagomenal day is intercalated every four years in some (Coptic, Ethiopian and French Republican calendars).

The Solar Hijri calendar , used in Iran, is based on solar calculations and is similar to the Gregorian calendar in its structure, and hence the intercalation, with the exception that its epoch is the Hijrah .

[ 3 ] The Bahá'í calendar includes enough epagomenal days (usually 4 or 5) before the last month ( علاء , ʿalāʾ ) to ensure that the following year starts on the March equinox . These are known as the Ayyám-i-Há .

Lunisolar calendars [ edit ] The solar year does not have a whole number of lunar months (it is about 365/29.5 = 12.37 lunations ), so a lunisolar calendar must have a variable number of months per year. Regular years have 12 months, but embolismic years insert a 13th "intercalary" or "leap" month or "embolismic" month every second or third year. Whether to insert an intercalary month in a given year may be determined using regular cycles such as the 19-year Metonic cycle ( Hebrew calendar and in the determination of Easter ) or using calculations of lunar phases ( Hindu lunisolar and Chinese calendars ). The Buddhist calendar adds both an intercalary day and month on a usually regular cycle.

Lunar calendars [ edit ] Further information: Nasi' and Islamic calendar § Astronomical considerations In principle, lunar calendars do not employ intercalation because they do not seek to synchronise with the seasons, and the motion of the moon is astronomically predictable. But religious lunar calendars rely on actual observation.

The Lunar Hijri calendar , the purely lunar calendar observed by most of Islam, depends on actual observation of the first crescent of the moon and thus has no intercalation. Each month still has either 29 or 30 days, but due to the variable method of observations employed, there is usually no discernible order in the sequencing of 29- or 30-day month lengths. Traditionally, the first day of each month is the day (beginning at sunset) of the first sighting of the hilal (crescent moon) shortly after sunset. If the hilal is not observed immediately after the 29th day of a month (either because clouds block its view or because the western sky is still too bright when the moon sets), then the day that begins at that sunset is the 30th.

[ 4 ] The tabular Islamic calendar , used in Iran, has 12 lunar months that usually alternate between 30 and 29 days every year, but an intercalary day is added to the last month of the year 12 times in a 33-year cycle. Some historians also linked the pre-Islamic practice of Nasi' to intercalation.

Leap seconds [ edit ] The International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service can insert or remove leap seconds from the last day of any month (June and December are preferred). These are sometimes described as intercalary.

[ 5 ] Other uses [ edit ] ISO 8601 includes a specification for a 52/53-week year. Any year that has 53 Thursdays has 53 weeks; this extra week may be regarded as intercalary, i.e. a leap week .

The xiuhpōhualli (year count) system of the Aztec calendar had five intercalary days after the eighteenth and final month, the nēmontēmi , in which the people fasted and reflected on the past year.

See also [ edit ] Lunisolar calendar Egyptian , Coptic , and Ethiopian calendars Iranian calendar Islamic calendar Mandaean calendar Celtic calendar Thai lunar calendar Bengali calendar Igbo calendar World Calendar Intercalated Games References [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Intercalary" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 683.

^ From ἐπαγόμενος, epagomenos (present participle passive of ἐπάγειν, epagein "to bring in") + -al ^ "Hijri-Shamsi Calendar" . Al Islam . Retrieved June 14, 2014 .

^ Chraibi, Khalid (16 August 2008).

"Issues in the Islamic Calendar" .

tabsir.net .

^ leap second by Merriam-Webster OnLine v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8r8bq
Cached time: 20250816085754
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.446 seconds
Real time usage: 0.581 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1073/1000000
Revision size: 6511/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 55115/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 930/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37076/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.318/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17153986/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  496.151      1 -total
 22.33%  110.784      1 Template:Lang
 22.16%  109.937      1 Template:Reflist
 18.37%   91.119      1 Template:Time_Topics
 17.72%   87.899      1 Template:Cite_EB1911
 14.60%   72.437      1 Template:Short_description
 11.84%   58.766      1 Template:Morerefs
 10.68%   52.993      1 Template:Ambox
  7.99%   39.647      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.61%   32.785      2 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15290:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816085754 and revision id 1299584182. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intercalation_(timekeeping)&oldid=1299584182 " Categories : Calendars Units of time Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 07:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intercalation (timekeeping) 31 languages Add topic

