Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Beliefs 3 Homoian Arianism 4 Struggles with orthodoxy Toggle Struggles with orthodoxy subsection 4.1 First Council of Nicaea 4.2 Condemnation by the Council of Nicaea 4.3 Aftermath of Nicaea 4.4 Council of Constantinople 5 Among medieval Germanic tribes 6 From the 5th to the 7th century 7 From the 16th to the 19th century 8 Today Toggle Today subsection 8.1 Jehovah's Witnesses 8.2 Iglesia ni Cristo 8.3 Other Socinian groups 8.4 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 8.5 Spiritism 8.6 Hebrew Roots 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Arianism 83 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Picard Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский سرائیکی Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Walon 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christological doctrine attributed to Arius "Arian" redirects here. For other uses, see Arian (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with the racialist ideology of Aryanism .

Part of a series of articles on Arianism History and theology Arius Acacians Anomoeanism Arian controversy Arian creeds First Council of Nicaea Gothic Christianity Gothic Bible ( Codex Argenteus ) Lucian of Antioch Semi-Arianism Arian leaders Acacius of Caesarea Aëtius of Antioch Demophilus of Constantinople Eudoxius of Antioch Eunomius of Cyzicus Eusebius of Nicomedia Eustathius of Sebaste George of Laodicea Wulfila Other Arians Asterius of Cappadocia Auxentius of Milan Auxentius of Durostorum Constantius II Gothic persecution of Christians Fritigern Alaric I Artemius Odoacer Theodoric the Great Modern semi-Arians Samuel Clarke Isaac Newton William Whiston Opponents Peter of Alexandria Achillas of Alexandria Alexander of Alexandria Hosius of Corduba Athanasius of Alexandria Paul I of Constantinople Nicholas of Myra Christianity portal v t e Part of a series on the History of Christian theology Background Christian theology Diversity in early Christian theology Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Early Christianity Proto-orthodox Christianity Timeline History of Christianity Template:History of Christianity Ecclesiastical polity Trinitarianism Nontrinitarianism Christology Paterology Pneumatology Mariology Biblical canon Deuterocanon Hermeneutics Theological hermeneutics African American Asian American Philosophical theology Christian philosophy Christian apologetics Persecution and tolerance Historical theology Ecumenical Creeds Apostles' Nicene Chalcedonian Athanasian Patristics and Councils Great church ante-Nicene period Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Cappadocian Fathers Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Augustine Nicaea Ephesus Chalcedon Post-Nicene development Heresy Monophysitism Monothelitism Byzantine Iconoclasm Gregory I Alcuin Photios East–West Schism Scholasticism Aquinas Anselm Palamas Reformation Martin Luther Theology 95 Theses John Calvin Radical Evangelicalism theology Five solae Book of Concord Arminianism English Counter- Trent Jansenism From the Reformation to the World Wars Natural Onto- Practical Pietism John Wesley Great Awakenings Holiness movement Restoration Movement Dispensationalism Covenant theology Existentialism Dogmatics Fundamental/foundational Liberal Catholic Anglo-Catholic Critical realism Political Since the World Wars Vatican II of religions Situational ethics Nouvelle théologie ( Ressourcement ) Death of God Postliberal  •  Narrative Continental philosophy Radical orthodoxy Neo-orthodoxy Reconciliation Analytic in Thomism Theopoetics Ecumenism Digital Systematic Biblical Constructive Eco- Environmental Public Contextualisation and Inculturation Indigenous church mission theory Sino-Christian Feminism in Feminist theology Asian Womanist New Queer Liberation Black Dalit Latin American Minjung Palestinian Postcolonial Fourth Great Awakening Christian Zionism Paleo-orthodoxy Dominion theology extraterrestrials Moderate Christianity Conservative Christianity Emerging church Progressive Christianity Confessing Movement Biotheology Theophysics Christianity portal v t e Arianism ( Koine Greek : Ἀρειανισμός , Areianismós ) [ 1 ] is a Christological doctrine which rejects the traditional notion of the Trinity and considers Jesus to be a creation of God, and therefore distinct from God. It is named after its major proponent, Arius ( c.

AD 256–336 ). It is considered heretical by most modern mainstream branches of Christianity.

[ 2 ] It is held by a minority of modern denominations, although some of these denominations hold related doctrines such as Socinianism , and some shy away from use of the term Arian due to the term's historically negative connotations. Modern denominations sometimes connected to the teaching include Jehovah's Witnesses , [ 3 ] some individual churches within the Churches of Christ (including the movement's founder Barton W. Stone ), [ 4 ] as well as some Hebrew Roots Christians and Messianic Jews (although many Messianic Jews also follow Nicene Christianity ).

[ 5 ] It is first attributed to Arius ( c.

AD 256–336 ), [ 1 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] a Christian presbyter who preached and studied in Alexandria , Egypt , [ 1 ] although it developed out of various pre-existing strands of Christianity which differed from later Nicene Christianity in their view of Christology. Arian theology holds that Jesus Christ is the Son of God , [ a ] [ b ] who was begotten by God the Father [ 6 ] with the difference that the Son of God did not always exist but was begotten/made [ c ] before time by God the Father; [ d ] therefore, Jesus was not coeternal with God the Father, [ 6 ] but nonetheless Jesus began to exist outside time.

[ e ] Arius' trinitarian theology, later given an extreme form by Aetius and his disciple Eunomius and called anomoean ('dissimilar'), asserts a total dissimilarity between the Son and the Father.

[ 10 ] Arianism holds that the Son is distinct from the Father and therefore subordinate to him.

[ 7 ] The term Arian is derived from the name Arius; it was not what the followers of Arius' teachings called themselves, but rather a term used by outsiders .

[ 11 ] The nature of Arius's and his supporters' teachings were opposed to the theological doctrines held by Homoousian Christians regarding the nature of the Trinity and the nature of Christ. Homoousianism and Arianism were contending interpretations of Jesus's divinity, both based upon the trinitarian theological orthodoxy of the time.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Homoousianism was formally affirmed by the first two ecumenical councils ; [ 13 ] since then, Arianism has been condemned as "the heresy or sect of Arius".

[ 14 ] Trinitarian (Homoousian) doctrines were vigorously upheld by Patriarch Athanasius of Alexandria , who insisted that Jesus (God the Son) was "same in being" or "same in essence" with God the Father. Arius dissented: "If the Father begat the Son, then he who was begotten had a beginning in existence, and from this it follows there was a time when the Son was not." [ 13 ] The ecumenical First Council of Nicaea of 325 declared Arianism to be a heresy.

[ 15 ] According to Everett Ferguson , "The great majority of Christians had no clear views about the nature of the Trinity and they did not understand what was at stake in the issues that surrounded it." [ 15 ] Arianism is also used to refer to other nontrinitarian theological systems of the 4th century, which regarded Jesus Christ —the Son of God, the Logos —as either a begotten creature of a similar or different substance to that of the Father, but not identical (as Homoiousian and Anomoeanism ) or as neither uncreated nor created in the sense other beings are created (as in semi-Arianism ).

Origin [ edit ] Main articles: Arian controversy and Diversity in early Christian theology Some early Christians whose beliefs would have fallen under 'orthodoxy' in the third and fourth centuries denied the eternal generation of the Son; they viewed the Son as having been begotten in time. These include Tertullian and Justin Martyr .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Tertullian is considered a pre-Arian. Among the other church fathers, Origen was accused of Arianism for using terms like "second God", and Patriarch Dionysius of Alexandria was denounced at Rome for saying that Son is a work and creature of God (i.e., a created being).

[ 18 ] However, the subordinationism of Origen is not identical to Arianism, and it has been generally viewed as closer to the Nicene-Constantinopolitan view of the Trinity.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Controversy over Arianism arose in the late 3rd century and persisted throughout most of the 4th century. It involved most church members—from simple believers, priests, and monks to bishops, emperors, and members of Rome's imperial family. Two Roman emperors, Constantius II and Valens , became Arians or semi-Arians , as did prominent Gothic , Vandal , and Lombard warlords both before and after the fall of the Western Roman Empire . The antipopes Felix II [ 21 ] and Ursinus [ f ] were Arian, and Pope Liberius was forced to sign the Arian Creed of Sirmium of 357—though the letter says he willingly agreed with Arianism.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Such a deep controversy within the early Church during this period could not have materialized without significant historical influences providing a basis for the Arian doctrines.

[ 26 ] An imagined portrait of Arius. Detail of a Cretan School icon , c. 1591, depicting the First Council of Nicaea Arius had been a pupil of Lucian of Antioch at Lucian's private academy in Antioch and inherited from him a modified form of the teachings of Paul of Samosata .

[ 27 ] Arius taught that God the Father and the Son of God did not always exist together eternally.

[ 28 ] Beliefs [ edit ] Little of Arius's own work survives except in quotations selected for polemical purposes by his opponents, and there is no certainty about what theological and philosophical traditions formed his thought.

[ 29 ] The influence from the One of Neoplatonism was widespread throughout the Eastern Roman Empire, and this influenced Arius.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Arius's basic premise is that only God is independent of existing. Since the Son is dependent, he must, therefore, be called a creature.

[ 35 ] Arians put forward a question for their belief: "Has God birthed Jesus willingly or unwillingly?" This question was used to argue that Jesus is dependent for his existence since Jesus exists only because God wants him to be.

[ 9 ] Arianism taught that the Logos was a divine being created by God the Father before the world's creation, serving as the medium for creation, and that the Son of God is subordinate to the Father.

[ 36 ] The concept of the Logos refers to an inner attribute of God associated with wisdom. Jesus is identified as the Logos due to a supposed resemblance to this inner aspect of God's nature.

[ 9 ] A verse from Proverbs was used that, according to Arianism, spoke of the creation of the Son by God: "The Lord created me at the beginning of his work." [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Therefore, they posited, the Son was rather the very first and the most perfect of God's creatures, and he was called "God" only by the Father's permission and power.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] The term "Son" is ambiguous, as Arians use adoptionist theology to support the belief that Jesus was created ex nihilo by the Father.

[ 9 ] Arians do not believe in the traditional doctrine of the Trinity .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] The letter of the Arian bishop Auxentius of Durostorum [ 43 ] regarding the Arian missionary Ulfilas ( c.

311 –383) gives an overview of Arian beliefs. Ulfilas, ordained by Arian bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia , became a missionary to the Goths and believed that God the Father, the "unbegotten" Almighty, is the only true God.

[ 44 ] According to Auxentius, Ulfilas believed the Son of God, Jesus, the "only-begotten god", [ 45 ] was begotten before time began.

[ 46 ] The Holy Spirit , he wrote, is the illuminating and sanctifying power of God. Using 1 Corinthians 8:5–6 as a proof text : Indeed, even though there may be so-called gods in heaven or on earth—as in fact there are many gods and many lords/masters—yet for us there is one God (Gk.

theos – θεός), the Father, from whom are all things and for whom we exist, and one Lord/Master ( kyrios – κύριος), Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and through whom we exist.

— 1 Corinthians 8:5–6 The creed of Ulfilas, which concludes the letter mentioned above, [ 43 ] distinguishes God the Father ("unbegotten"), who is the only true God, from the Son of God ("only-begotten") and the Holy Spirit, the illuminating and sanctifying power, which is neither God the Father nor the God the Son: I, Ulfila, bishop and confessor, have always so believed, and in this, the one true faith, I make the journey to my Lord; I believe in only one God the Father, the unbegotten and invisible, and in his only-begotten Son, our Lord/Master and God, the designer and maker of all creation, having none other like him. Therefore, there is one God of all, who is also God of our God; and in one Holy Spirit, the illuminating and sanctifying power, as Christ said after his resurrection to his apostles: "And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be clothed with power from on high" [ 47 ] and again "But ye shall receive power, when the Holy Ghost is come upon you"; [ 48 ] Neither God nor Lord, but the faithful minister of Christ; not equal, but subject and obedient in all things to the Son. And I believe the Son to be subject and obedient in all things to God the Father.

— Heather & Matthews 1991 , p. 143 A letter from Arius to the Arian Eusebius of Nicomedia (died 341) states the core beliefs of the Arians : Some of them say that the Son is an eructation, others that he is a production, others that he is also unbegotten. These are impieties to which we cannot listen, even though the heretics threaten us with a thousand deaths. But we say and believe and have taught, and do teach, that the Son is not unbegotten, nor in any way part of the unbegotten; and that he does not derive his subsistence from any matter; but that by his own will and counsel he has subsisted before time and before ages as perfect as God, only begotten and unchangeable, and that before he was begotten, or created, or purposed, or established, he was not. For he was not unbegotten. We are persecuted because we say that the Son has a beginning but that God is without beginning.

— Theodoret: Arius's Letter to Eusebius of Nicomedia, translated in Peters' Heresy and Authority in Medieval Europe , p. 41 Principally, the dispute between Trinitarianism and Arianism was about two questions: has the Son always existed eternally with the Father, or was the Son begotten at a certain time in the past?

is the Son equal to the Father or subordinate to the Father?

For Constantine , these were minor theological points that stood in the way of uniting the Empire, but for the theologians, it was of huge importance; for them, it was a matter of salvation.

[ 13 ] For the theologians of the 19th century, it was already obvious that, in fact, Arius and Alexander/Athanasius did not have much to quarrel about; the difference between their views was very small, and the end of the fight was by no means clear during their quarrel, both Arius and Athanasius suffering a great deal for their own views. Arius was the father of Homoiousianism , and Alexander was the father of Homoousianism , which Athanasius championed. For those theologians, it was clear that Arius, Alexander, and Athanasius were far from a true doctrine of the Trinity, which developed later, historically speaking.

[ 49 ] Guido M. Berndt and Roland Steinacher state clearly that the beliefs of Arius were acceptable ("not especially unusual") to a huge number of orthodox clergy; this is the reason why such a major conflict was able to develop inside the Church since Arius's theology received widespread sympathy (or at least was not considered to be overly controversial) and could not be dismissed outright as individual heresy.

[ 6 ] Homoian Arianism [ edit ] Arianism had several different variants, including Eunomianism and Homoian Arianism . Homoian Arianism is associated with Acacius and Eudoxius . Homoian Arianism avoided the use of the word ousia to describe the relation of Father to Son, and described these as "like" each other.

[ 50 ] Hanson lists twelve creeds that reflect the Homoian faith: [ 51 ] The Second Sirmian Creed of 357 The Creed of Nice (Constantinople) 360 The creed put forward by Acacius at Seleucia, 359 The Rule of Faith of Ulfilas The creed uttered by Ulfilas on his deathbed, 383 The creed attributed to Eudoxius The Creed of Auxentius of Milan , 364 The Creed of Germinius professed in correspondence with Ursacius of Singidunum and Valens of Mursa Palladius's rule of faith Three credal statements found in fragments, subordinating the Son to the Father Struggles with orthodoxy [ edit ] First Council of Nicaea [ edit ] Constantine burning Arian books, illustration from a compendium of canon law , c.

825 In 321, Arius was denounced by a synod at Alexandria for teaching a heterodox view of the relationship of Jesus to God the Father. Because Arius and his followers had great influence in the schools of Alexandria—counterparts to modern universities or seminaries—their theological views spread, especially in the eastern Mediterranean.

[ 52 ] By 325, the controversy had become significant enough that the Emperor Constantine called an assembly of bishops, the First Council of Nicaea , which condemned Arius's doctrine and formulated the original Nicene Creed of 325 .

[ 53 ] The Nicene Creed's central term, used to describe the relationship between the Father and the Son, is Homoousios ( Ancient Greek : ὁμοούσιος ), [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] or Consubstantiality , meaning "of the same substance" or "of one being". The Athanasian Creed is less often used but is a more overtly anti-Arian statement on the Trinity.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] The focus of the Council of Nicaea was the nature of the Son of God and his precise relationship to God the Father. (See Paul of Samosata and the Synods of Antioch .) Arius taught that Jesus Christ was divine or holy and was sent to Earth for the salvation of mankind, [ 41 ] but that Jesus Christ was not equal to God the Father (infinite, primordial origin) in rank, and that God the Father and the Son of God were not equal to the Holy Spirit.

[ 28 ] Under Arianism, Christ was instead not consubstantial with God the Father since both the Father and the Son under Arius were made of "like" essence or being (see homoiousia ) but not of the same essence or being (see homoousia ).

[ 60 ] In the Arian view, God the Father is a deity and is divine; the Son of God is not a deity, but is still divine.

[ 41 ] God the Father sent Jesus to earth for salvation of mankind.

[ 44 ] Ousia is essence or being, in Eastern Christianity , and is the aspect of God that is completely incomprehensible to mankind and human perception. It is all that subsists by itself and which has not its being in another, [ 61 ] God the Father and God the Son and God the Holy Spirit all being uncreated.

[ g ] According to the teaching of Arius, the preexistent Logos and thus the incarnate Jesus Christ was a begotten being; only the Son was directly begotten by God the Father, before ages, but was of a distinct, though similar, essence or substance from the Creator. His opponents argued that this would make Jesus less than God and that this was heretical.

[ 59 ] Much of the distinction between the differing factions was over the phrasing that Christ expressed in the New Testament to express submission to God the Father.

[ 59 ] The theological term for this submission is kenosis . This ecumenical council declared that Jesus Christ was true God, co-eternal and consubstantial (i.e., of the same substance) with God the Father.

[ 62 ] [ h ] Constantine is believed to have exiled those who refused to accept the Nicaean Creed—Arius himself, the deacon Euzoios, and the Libyan bishops Theonas of Marmarica and Secundus of Ptolemais , along with the bishops who signed the creed but refused to join in condemnation of Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia and Theognis of Nicaea . The emperor also ordered all copies of the Thalia , the book in which Arius had expressed his teachings, to be burned . However, there is no evidence that his son and ultimate successor, Constantius II , a Semi-Arian Christian, was exiled.

[ citation needed ] Although he was committed to maintaining what the Great Church had defined at Nicaea, Constantine was also bent on pacifying the situation and eventually became more lenient toward those condemned and exiled at the council. First, he allowed Eusebius of Nicomedia, who was a protégé of his sister, and Theognis to return once they had signed an ambiguous statement of faith. The two, and other friends of Arius, worked for Arius's rehabilitation.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] At the First Synod of Tyre in AD 335, they brought accusations against Athanasius , now bishop of Alexandria, the primary opponent of Arius. After this, Constantine had Athanasius banished since he considered him an impediment to reconciliation. In the same year, the Synod of Jerusalem under Constantine's direction readmitted Arius to communion in 336. Arius died on the way to this event in Constantinople. Some scholars suggest that Arius may have been poisoned by his opponents.

[ 64 ] Eusebius and Theognis remained in the Emperor's favor; when Constantine -who had been a catechumen much of his adult life- accepted baptism on his deathbed, it was from Eusebius of Nicomedia.

[ 67 ] Condemnation by the Council of Nicaea [ edit ] Emperor Constantine the Great summoned the First Council of Nicaea , which defined the dogmatic fundaments of Christianity; these definitions served to rebut the questions posed by Arians.

[ 68 ] Since Arius was not a bishop, he was not allowed to sit on the council, and it was Eusebius of Nicomedia who spoke for him and the position he represented.

[ 67 ] All the bishops who were there were in agreement with the major theological points of the proto-orthodoxy , [ 69 ] since at that time all other forms of Christianity "had by this time already been displaced, suppressed, reformed, or destroyed".

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Although the proto-orthodox won the previous disputes, due to the more precise defining of orthodoxy , they were vanquished with their own weapons, ultimately being declared heretics, not because they would have fought against ideas regarded as theologically correct, but because their positions lacked the precision and refinement needed by the fusion of several contradictory theses accepted at the same time by later orthodox theologians.

[ 71 ] Of the roughly 300 bishops in attendance at the Council of Nicaea , two bishops did not sign the Nicene Creed that condemned Arianism.

[ 72 ] Constantine the Great also ordered a penalty of death for those who refused to surrender the Arian writings: In addition, if any writing composed by Arius should be found, it should be handed over to the flames, so that not only will the wickedness of his teaching be obliterated, but nothing will be left even to remind anyone of him. And I hereby make a public order, that if someone should be discovered to have hidden a writing composed by Arius, and not to have immediately brought it forward and destroyed it by fire, his penalty shall be death. As soon as he is discovered in this offence, he shall be submitted for capital punishment. ...

— Edict by Emperor Constantine against the Arians [ 73 ] Ten years after the Council of Nicaea, Constantine the Great , who was himself later baptized by the Arian bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia in 337 AD, [ 74 ] [ 67 ] [ 75 ] convened another gathering of church leaders at the regional First Synod of Tyre in 335, attended by 310 bishops, to address various charges mounted against Athanasius by his detractors, such as "murder, illegal taxation, sorcery, and treason", following his refusal to readmit Arius into fellowship.

[ 13 ] Athanasius was exiled to Trier (in modern Germany ) following his conviction at Tyre of conspiracy, and Arius was, effectively, exonerated.

[ 76 ] Athanasius eventually returned to Alexandria in 346, after the deaths of both Arius and Constantine. Though Arianism had spread, Athanasius and other Nicene Christian church leaders crusaded against Arian theology, and Arius was anathemised and condemned as a heretic once more at the ecumenical First Council of Constantinople of 381, attended by 150 bishops.

[ 77 ] [ 13 ] The Roman Emperors Constantius II (337–361) and Valens (364–378) were Arians or Semi-Arians , as was the first King of Italy , Odoacer (433?–493), and the Lombards were also Arians or Semi-Arians until the 7th century. The ruling elite of Visigothic Spain was Arian until 589. Many Goths adopted Arian beliefs upon their conversion to Christianity. The Vandals actively spread Arianism in North Africa.

Aftermath of Nicaea [ edit ] Once the orthodox Trinitarians succeeded in defeating Arianism, they censored any signs that the perceived heresy left behind. This mosaic in the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo in Ravenna has had images of the Arian king, Theoderic, and his court removed. On some columns their hands remain.

The First Council of Nicaea did not end the controversy, as many bishops of the Eastern provinces disputed the homoousios , the central term of the Nicene Creed, as it had been used by Paul of Samosata , who had advocated a monarchianist Christology . Both the man and his teaching, including the term homoousios , had been condemned by the Synods of Antioch in 269.

[ 78 ] Hence, after Constantine's death in 337, open dispute resumed again. Constantine's son Constantius II , who had become emperor of the eastern part of the Roman Empire , actually encouraged the Arians and set out to reverse the Nicene Creed.

[ 79 ] His advisor in these affairs was Eusebius of Nicomedia, who had already at the Council of Nicaea been the head of the Arian party, and was made the bishop of Constantinople.

Constantius used his power to exile bishops adhering to the Nicene Creed, especially St Athanasius of Alexandria , who fled to Rome.

[ 80 ] In 355 Constantius became the sole Roman emperor and extended his pro-Arian policy toward the western provinces, frequently using force to push through his creed, even exiling Pope Liberius and installing Antipope Felix II .

[ 81 ] The Third Council of Sirmium in 357 was the high point of Arianism. The Seventh Arian Confession (Second Sirmium Confession) held that both homoousios (of one substance) and homoiousios (of similar substance) were unbiblical and that the Father is greater than the Son.

[ 82 ] This confession was later known as the Blasphemy of Sirmium.

But since many persons are disturbed by questions concerning what is called in Latin substantia , but in Greek ousia , that is, to make it understood more exactly, as to 'coessential,' or what is called, 'like-in-essence,' there ought to be no mention of any of these at all, nor exposition of them in the Church, for this reason and for this consideration, that in divine Scripture nothing is written about them, and that they are above men's knowledge and above men's understanding; [ 83 ] As debates raged in an attempt to come up with a new formula, three camps evolved among the opponents of the Nicene Creed. The first group mainly opposed the Nicene terminology and preferred the term homoiousios (alike in substance) to the Nicene homoousios , while they rejected Arius and his teaching and accepted the equality and co-eternality of the persons of the Trinity. Because of this centrist position, and despite their rejection of Arius, they were called "Semi-Arians" by their opponents.

The second group also avoided invoking the name of Arius, but in large part followed Arius's teachings and, in another attempted compromise wording, described the Son as being like ( homoios ) the Father. A third group explicitly called upon Arius and described the Son as unlike ( anhomoios ) the Father. Constantius wavered in his support between the first and the second party, while harshly persecuting the third.

Epiphanius of Salamis labeled the party of Basil of Ancyra in 358 " Semi-Arianism ". This is considered unfair by Kelly who states that some members of the group were virtually orthodox from the start but disliked the adjective homoousios while others had moved in that direction after the out-and-out Arians had come into the open.

[ 84 ] The debates among these groups resulted in numerous synods, among them the Council of Serdica in 343, the Fourth Council of Sirmium in 358 and the double Council of Rimini and Seleucia in 359, and no fewer than fourteen further creed formulas between 340 and 360. This lead the pagan observer Ammianus Marcellinus to comment sarcastically: "The highways were covered with galloping bishops." [ 85 ] None of these attempts was acceptable to the defenders of Nicene orthodoxy. Writing about the latter councils, Saint Jerome remarked that the world "awoke with a groan to find itself Arian." [ 86 ] [ 87 ] After Constantius's death in 361, his successor Julian , a devotee of Rome's pagan gods , declared that he would no longer attempt to favor one church faction over another, and allowed all exiled bishops to return. This increased dissension among Nicene Christians. The emperor Valens , however, revived Constantius's policy and supported the "Homoian" party, [ 88 ] exiling bishops and often using force. During this persecution many bishops were exiled to the other ends of the Roman Empire, e.g., Saint Hilary of Poitiers to the eastern provinces. These contacts and their common plight led to a rapprochement between the western supporters of the Nicene Creed and the homoousios and the eastern Semi-Arians.

Council of Constantinople [ edit ] Main article: Theodosius I It was not until the co-reigns of Gratian and Theodosius that Arianism was effectively wiped out among the ruling class and elite of the Eastern Empire. Valens died in the Battle of Adrianople in 378 and was succeeded by Theodosius I , who adhered to the Nicene Creed.

[ i ] This allowed for settling the dispute. Theodosius's wife St Flacilla was instrumental in his campaign to end Arianism.

[ citation needed ] Two days after Theodosius arrived in Constantinople, 24 November 380, he expelled the Arian bishop, Demophilus of Constantinople , and surrendered the churches of that city to Gregory of Nazianzus , the Homoiousian leader of the rather small Nicene community there, an act which provoked rioting. Theodosius had just been baptized, by bishop Acholius of Thessalonica, during a severe illness, as was common in the early Christian world. In February he and Gratian had published an edict that all their subjects should profess the faith of the bishops of Rome and Alexandria (i.e., the Nicene faith), [ 90 ] [ 91 ] or be handed over for punishment for not doing so.

Although much of the church hierarchy in the East had opposed the Nicene Creed in the decades leading up to Theodosius's accession, he managed to achieve unity on the basis of the Nicene Creed. In 381, at the Second Ecumenical Council in Constantinople, a group of mainly Eastern bishops assembled and accepted the Nicene Creed of 381 , [ 92 ] which was supplemented in regard to the Holy Spirit , as well as some other changes: see Comparison of Nicene Creeds of 325 and 381 . This is generally considered the end of the dispute about the Trinity and the end of Arianism among the Roman, non-Germanic peoples.

[ 93 ] Among medieval Germanic tribes [ edit ] Main articles: Christianity in the 5th century , Germanic Christianity , Gothic Christianity , Kingdom of the Lombards , and Visigothic Kingdom The ceiling mosaic of the Arian Baptistery , built in Ravenna by the Ostrogothic King Theodoric the Great During the time of Arianism's flowering in Constantinople , the Gothic convert and Arian bishop Ulfilas (later the subject of the letter of Auxentius cited above) was sent as a missionary to the Gothic tribes across the Danube , a mission favored for political reasons by the Emperor Constantius II . The Homoians in the Danubian provinces played a major role in the conversion of the Goths to Arianism .

[ 94 ] Ulfilas's translation of the Bible into Gothic language and his initial success in converting the Goths to Arianism was strengthened by later events. The conversion of Goths led to a widespread diffusion of Arianism among other Germanic tribes as well, the Vandals , Langobards , Svevi , and Burgundians .

[ 7 ] When the Germanic peoples entered the provinces of the Western Roman Empire and began founding their own kingdoms there, most of them were Arian Christians.

[ 7 ] The conflict in the 4th century had seen Arian and Nicene factions struggling for control of Western Europe. In contrast, among the Arian German kingdoms established in the collapsing Western Empire in the 5th century, there existed entirely separate Arian and Nicene Churches with parallel hierarchies, each serving different sets of believers. The Germanic elites were Arians, and the Romance-majority population was Nicene.

[ 95 ] The Arian Germanic tribes were generally tolerant towards Nicene Christians and other religious minorities, including the Jews .

[ 7 ] The apparent resurgence of Arianism after Nicaea was more an anti-Nicene reaction exploited by Arian sympathizers than a pro-Arian development.

[ 96 ] By the end of the 4th century, it had surrendered its remaining ground to Trinitarianism . In Western Europe, Arianism, which had been taught by Ulfilas , the Arian missionary to the Germanic tribes, was dominant among the Goths , Langobards and Vandals .

[ 97 ] By the 8th century, it had ceased to be the tribes' mainstream belief as the tribal rulers gradually came to adopt Nicene orthodoxy. This trend began in 496 with Clovis I of the Franks, then Reccared I of the Visigoths in 587 and Aripert I of the Lombards in 653.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] The Franks and the Anglo-Saxons were unlike the other Germanic peoples in that they entered the Western Roman Empire as Pagans and were converted to Chalcedonian Christianity , led by their kings, Clovis I of the Franks, and Æthelberht of Kent and others in Britain. See also Christianity in Gaul and Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England .

[ 100 ] The remaining tribes – the Vandals and the Ostrogoths – did not convert as a people nor did they maintain territorial cohesion. Having been militarily defeated by the armies of Emperor Justinian I , the remnants were dispersed to the fringes of the empire and became lost to history. The Vandalic War of 533–534 dispersed the defeated Vandals.

[ 101 ] Following their final defeat at the Battle of Mons Lactarius in 553, the Ostrogoths went back north and re-settled in south Austria.

[ citation needed ] A page from the Codex Argenteus , a 6th-century illuminated manuscript of the Gothic Bible From the 5th to the 7th century [ edit ] Arian and Chalcedonian kingdoms in 495 Much of south-eastern Europe and central Europe, including many of the Goths and Vandals respectively, had embraced Arianism (the Visigoths converted to Arian Christianity in 376 through their bishop Wulfila ), which led to Arianism being a religious factor in various wars in the Roman Empire.

[ j ] In the west, organized Arianism survived in North Africa, in Hispania, and parts of Italy until it was suppressed in the 6th and 7th centuries.

Visigothic Spain converted to Nicene Christianity through their king Reccared I at the Third Council of Toledo in 589.

[ 103 ] Grimoald, King of the Lombards (662–671), and his young son and successor Garibald (671), were the last Arian kings in Europe.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] From the 16th to the 19th century [ edit ] Following the Protestant Reformation from 1517, it did not take long for Arian and other nontrinitarian views to resurface. The first recorded English antitrinitarian was John Assheton , who was forced to recant before Thomas Cranmer in 1548. At the Anabaptist Council of Venice 1550, the early Italian instigators of the Radical Reformation committed to the views of Michael Servetus ,—who was burned alive by the orders of John Calvin in 1553—were promulgated by Giorgio Biandrata and others into Poland and Transylvania .

[ 106 ] The anti trinitarian wing of the Polish Reformation separated from the Calvinist ecclesia maior to form the ecclesia minor or Polish Brethren . These were commonly referred to as "Arians" due to their rejection of the Trinity, though in fact the Socinians , as they were later known, went further than Arius to the position of Photinus . The epithet "Arian" was also applied to the early Unitarians such as John Biddle ; though in denial of the pre-existence of Christ they were again largely Socinians, not Arians.

[ 107 ] In 1683, when Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury , lay dying in Amsterdam—driven into exile by his outspoken opposition to King Charles II —he spoke to the minister Robert Ferguson , and professed himself an Arian.

[ 108 ] In the 18th century the "dominant trend" in Britain , particularly in Latitudinarianism , was toward Arianism, with which Samuel Clarke , Benjamin Hoadly , William Whiston and Isaac Newton are associated.

[ 109 ] To quote the Encyclopædia Britannica 's article on Arianism: "In modern times some Unitarians are virtually Arians in that they are unwilling either to reduce Christ to a mere human being or to attribute to him a divine nature identical with that of the Father." [ 110 ] Today [ edit ] The teachings of the first two ecumenical councils that entirely reject Arianism include: the Catholic Church , the Eastern Orthodox Church , the Oriental Orthodox Churches , the Assyrian Church of the East ; almost all historic Protestant churches including Lutheran , Reformed , Presbyterian , Continental Reformed , Congregationalist , Anglican , Methodist , Baptist , and Free Evangelical ; all entirely reject the teachings associated with Arianism.

Modern groups that currently appear to embrace some of the principles of Arianism include Unitarians and Jehovah's Witnesses . Although the origins of their beliefs are not necessarily attributed to the teachings of Arius, many of the core beliefs of Unitarians and Jehovah's Witnesses are very similar to them.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] Jehovah's Witnesses [ edit ] Main articles: Jehovah's Witnesses beliefs § God , and Jehovah's Witnesses beliefs § Jesus Christ Jehovah's Witnesses are often referred to as "modern-day Arians", [ 114 ] [ 115 ] usually by their opponents , [ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] although Jehovah's Witnesses themselves have denied these claims.

[ 119 ] Significant similarities in doctrine include the identification of the Father as the only true God and of Jesus Christ as the first creation of God and the intermediate agent in the creation of all other things. They also deny the personhood of the Holy Spirit , which some Arians historically affirmed. Jehovah's Witnesses exclusively worship and pray to God the Father, or Jehovah , only through Jesus (the Son) as a mediator.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] Iglesia ni Cristo [ edit ] Main article: Iglesia ni Cristo Iglesia ni Cristo 's Christology has parallels with Arianism in that it affirms that the Father is the only true God, but it denies the preexistence of Christ. Thus, Iglesia ni Cristo is Socinian rather than Arian in its Christology.

[ 121 ] Other Socinian groups [ edit ] Other Biblical Unitarians such as the Christadelphians [ 122 ] and Church of God General Conference [ 123 ] are also typically Socinian rather than Arian in their Christology.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints [ edit ] Main article: Beliefs and practices of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) teaches a nontrinitarian theology concerning the nature of the Godhead. Similarities between LDS doctrines and Arianism were alleged as early as 1846.

[ 124 ] There are a number of key differences between Arianism and Latter-day Saint theology. Whereas Arianism is a unitarian Christian form of classical theism , Latter-day Saint theology is a non-trinitarian (but not unitarian) form of Christianity outside of classical theism. Arianism also teaches that God is eternal, was never a man, and could not incarnate as a man; in contrast, the LDS Church teaches that "God Himself is an exalted man, perfected, enthroned, and supreme." [ 125 ] Whereas Arianism denies that humans can become gods, the LDS Church affirms that humans can become gods through exaltation.

[ 126 ] Whereas Arianism teaches that the Son was created, the LDS Church also teaches that the Son was procreated as a literal spirit child of the Heavenly Father and the Heavenly Mother [ 127 ] and denies any form of creation ex nihilo ; the creation of Christ ex nihilo is, in contrast, a fundamental premise of Arianism.

[ 128 ] The LDS church, in contrast to the Arian teaching that God is incorporeal, also teaches that God has a tangible body: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us." [ 129 ] Arianism traditionally taught that God is incomprehensible even to the Son. In contrast, the LDS Church rejects the doctrine that God is incomprehensible.

[ 130 ] Though Arianism teaches that Christ is ontologically inferior and subordinate to the Father, the LDS Church teaches that Christ is equal in power and glory with the Father.

The LDS Church teaches that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are three separate beings united in purpose: "the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost) [...] are three physically separate beings, but fully one in love, purpose and will", [ 131 ] as illustrated in Jesus' Farewell Prayer , his baptism at the hands of John the Baptist , his transfiguration , and the martyrdom of Stephen .

[ 132 ] Thus, the church's first Article of Faith states: "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost." [ 133 ] Latter-day Saints believe that the three are collectively "one eternal God" [ 134 ] but reject the Nicene definition of the Trinity , that the three are consubstantial .

[ 130 ] In some respects, Latter-day Saint theology is more similar to social trinitarianism than to Arianism.

Spiritism [ edit ] According to the reincarnationist religion of Spiritism started by French educator Allan Kardec in the 19th century, Jesus is the highest-order of spirit that has ever incarnated on Earth and is distinct from God, by whom he was created. Jesus is not considered God or part of God as in Nicene Christianity, but is nonetheless the ultimate model of human love, intelligence, and forgiveness, [ 135 ] often cited as the governor of Earth.

Hebrew Roots [ edit ] Some members of the Hebrew Roots movement endorse the doctrines of Arianism.

[ 5 ] [ 136 ] Among them are personalities like Sean Griffin of the YouTube channel Kingdom in Context (KIC), who has participated in many online debates with Trinitarians over the subject.

[ 137 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Adoptionism Arian controversy Arian creeds First Council of Nicaea Germanic Christianity Gothic Bible God-man (Christianity) History of Unitarianism Jesus in Islam Monarchianism Nontrinitarianism Socinianism Subordinationism References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Arius wanted to emphasise the transcendence and sole divinity of God [...]. God alone is, for Arius, without beginning, unbegotten and eternal. In the terminology of negative theology, Arius stresses monotheism with ever-renewed attempts. God can only be understood as creator. He denies the co-eternal state of the Logos with God since otherwise God would be stripped of his absolute uniqueness. God alone is, and thus he was not always Father. [...] Following Proverbs 8:22–25, Arius is able to argue that the Son was created. For Arius the Logos belongs wholly on the side of the Divine, but he is markedly subordinate to God.

Berndt & Steinacher 2014 ^ "A heresy of the Christian Church , started by Arius, bishop of Alexandria (d. 336), who taught that the Son is not equivalent to the Father (ὁμοούσιος gr: homoousios ≅ lt: consubstantialis ) ... The very insistence upon the more subordinate relationship of the Son—that is, the Messiah—to God-the-father is much nearer to the Jewish doctrine of the Messiah than to the conception of the full divinity of the Son, as enunciated at Nicaea ." [ 7 ] ^ Arius used the two words as synonyms [ 8 ] ^ Arius believed that Jesus came into existence before time existed, [ 8 ] ^ Jesus was considered a creature but not like the other creatures.

[ 9 ] ^ Ambrose of Milan, Epistles iv ^ As quoted by John Damascene : God is unoriginate, unending, eternal, constant, uncreated, unchanging, unalterable, simple, incomplex, bodiless, invisible, intangible, indescribable, without bounds, inaccessible to the mind, uncontainable, incomprehensible, good, righteous, that Creator of all creatures, the almighty Pantocrator .

[ 59 ] :  57 ^ First, the central focus of the creed is the Trinitarian nature of God. The Nicene fathers argued that the Father was always a Father, and consequently that the Son always existed with him, co-equally and con-substantially. The Nicene fathers fought against the belief that the Son was unequal to the Father, because it effectively destroyed the unity of the Godhead. Rather, they insisted that such a view was in contravention of such Scriptures as John 10:30 "I and the Father are one" and John 1:1 "the Word was God." Saint Athanasius declared that the Son had no beginning, but had an "eternal derivation" from the Father, and therefore was co-eternal with him, and equal to God in all aspects. In a similar vein the Cappadocian Fathers argued that the Holy Spirit was also co-eternal with the Father and the Son and equal to God in all aspects. The Church Fathers held that to deny equality to any of the Persons of the Trinity was to rob God of existence and constituted the greatest heresy.

[ 63 ] ^ Early in his reign, during a serious illness, Theodosius had accepted Christian baptism. In 380 he proclaimed himself a Christian of the Nicene Creed, and he called a council at Constantinople to put an end to the Arian heresy (which, contrary to Nicene doctrine, claimed Jesus was created), which had divided the empire for over half a century. At Constantinople, 150 bishops gathered and revised the Nicene Creed of A.D. 325 into the creed we know today. Arianism has never made a serious challenge since.

[ 89 ] ^ The inhibiting and paralyzing force of superstitious beliefs penetrated to every department of life, and the most primary and elementary activities of society were influenced. War, for example, was not a simple matter of a test of strength and courage, but supernatural matters had to be taken carefully into consideration. When Clovis said of the Goths in southern Gaul, 'I take it hard that these Arians should hold a part of the Gauls; let us go with God's aid and conquer them and bring the land under our dominion', [note: see p. 45 (Book II:37)] he was not speaking in a hypocritical or arrogant manner but in real accordance with the religious sentiment of the time. What he meant was that the Goths, being heretics, were at once enemies of the true God and inferior to the orthodox Franks in their supernatural backing. Considerations of duty, strategy, and self-interest all reinforced one another in Clovis's mind. However, it was not always the orthodox side that won. We hear of a battle fought a few years before Gregory became Bishop of Tours between King Sigebert and the Huns , [note: Book IV:29] in which the Huns 'by the use of magic arts caused various false appearances to arise before their enemies and overcame them decisively.

[ 102 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c Brennecke 2018 .

^ Witherington 2007 , p. 241.

^ "Modern Day Arians" .

^ Stone, Barton W.

"An Address to the Christian Churches in Kentucky, Tennessee & Ohio on Several Important Doctrines of Religion (1821)" . Archived from the original on 1 December 2013.

^ a b "Pagan Trinity Exposed" .

^ a b c d Berndt & Steinacher 2014 .

^ a b c d e f Kohler, Kaufmann ; Krauss, Samuel.

"ARIANISM" .

Jewish Encyclopedia .

Kopelman Foundation .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2012 . Retrieved 1 December 2020 .

^ a b Davis, Leo Donald (1990).

The first seven ecumenical councils (325–787) p. 52: their history and theology . Georgetown University Law Library. Collegeville, Minn. : Liturgical Press.

ISBN 978-0-8146-5616-7 .

^ a b c d "Newman Reader – Arians of the 4th Century – Chapter 1–5" .

www.newmanreader.org . Retrieved 9 April 2023 .

^ Phan 2011 , pp. 6–7.

^ Wiles 1996 , p. 5.

^ Phan 2011 , p. 6.

^ a b c d e f "Athanasius, Five-time exile for fighting 'orthodoxy' " . 8 August 2008 . Retrieved 10 August 2018 .

^ Johnson, Samuel (1828).

A Dictionary of the English Language: In Which the Words Are Deduced from their Originals; and Illustrated in Their Different Significations by Examples from the Best Writers . Beeves and Turner.

^ a b Ferguson 2005 , p. 267.

^ "R.E. Roberts, The Theology of Tertullian (1924), Chapter 7 (pp. 140–148)" .

www.tertullian.org . Retrieved 15 December 2022 .

^ Giles, Kevin (2012).

The Eternal Generation of the Son: Maintaining Orthodoxy in Trinitarian Theology . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-0-8308-3965-0 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Arianism" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 10 April 2023 .

^ Beisner, E. Calvin (2004).

God in Three Persons . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-59244-545-5 .

^ Ramelli, Ilaria L. E.; McGuckin, J. A.; Ashwin-Siejkowski, Piotr (2021).

T&T Clark Handbook of the Early Church . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-567-68039-6 .

^ "Liberius | pope | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 April 2023 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Pope Liberius" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 16 April 2023 .

^ Wordsworth, Christopher (1847).

Letters to M. Gondon, Author of 'Mouvement Religieux en Angleterre', 'Conversion de Cent Cinquante Ministres Anglicans', Etc. Etc. Etc: On the Destructive Character of the Church of Rome, Both in Religion and Polity . F. & J. Rivington.

^ inst.), James Todd (examiner for the Protestant educ (1879).

A Protestant text book of the Romish controversy .

^ The British and Foreign Evangelical Review and Quarterly Record of Christian Literature . Johnstone & Hnuter. 1875.

^ Hanson 2005 , pp. 127–128.

^ Pullan 1905 , p. 87.

^ a b Ritchie, Mark S.

"The Story of the Church – Part 2, Topics 2 & 3" .

The Story of the Church .

^ Bauckham 1989 , p. 75.

^ "Arius | Biography, Beliefs, & Facts" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 12 April 2023 .

^ Hesiod (24 June 2022).

"Arius and Neoplatonism" .

Discourses on Minerva . Retrieved 12 April 2023 .

^ "The Early Unitarians: Arius and His Followers" .

people.wku.edu . Retrieved 12 April 2023 .

^ Spencer, Ian (5 April 2007).

"Plato: proto-trinitarian, or the Father of Arianism? – Trinities" . Retrieved 12 April 2023 .

^ Ribolov, Svet (1 January 2013).

"A New Look at Arius' Philosophical Background" .

Church Studies .

10 : 203– 212.

^ "Arianism | Definition, History, & Controversy | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 9 April 2023 .

^ McClintock & Strong 1867 , p. 45, Volume 7.

^ Proverbs 8:22–25 ^ Schüssler Fiorenza, Francis; Galvin, John P. (1991).

Systematic theology: Roman Catholic perspectives . Fortress Press. pp. 164–.

ISBN 978-0-8006-2460-6 . Retrieved 14 April 2010 .

^ Kelly 1978 , Chapter 9.

^ Davis, Leo Donald (1983).

The First Seven Ecumenical Councils (325–787) . Collegeville: Liturgical Press. pp.

52–54 .

ISBN 978-0-8146-5616-7 .

^ a b c "Newton's Arian beliefs" . Scotland: School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews.

^ Phan 2011 , p. 72.

^ a b "Auxentius on Wulfila: Translation by Jim Marchand" .

^ a b John 17:3 ^ John 1:18 ^ Proverbs 8:22–29 , Revelation 3:14 , Colossians 1:15 ^ Luke 24:49 ^ Acts 1:8 ^ Forrest 1856 , p. 6.

^ Hanson 2005 , pp. 557–558.

^ Hanson 2005 , pp. 558–559.

^ Löhr, Winrich (23 October 2012). "Arius and Arianism".

The Encyclopedia of Ancient History . pp.

716– 720.

doi : 10.1002/9781444338386.wbeah05025 .

ISBN 9781444338386 .

^ The Seven Ecumenical Councils , Christian Classics Ethereal Library ^ Bethune-Baker 2004 .

^ "Homoousios" .

Episcopal Church . 22 May 2012 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ Farley, Fr Lawrence (23 May 2015).

"The Fathers of Nicea: Why Should I Care?" .

www.oca.org . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "Athanasian Creed | Christian Reformed Church" .

www.crcna.org . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "The Athanasian Creed by R.C. Sproul" .

Ligonier Ministries . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ a b c d Pomazansky, Michael (Protopresbyter) (1984).

Pravoslavnoye Dogmaticheskoye Bogosloviye [ Orthodox Dogmatic Theology: A concise exposition ]. Translated by Rose, Seraphim (Hieromonk). Platina, California: Saint Herman of Alaska Brotherhood.

^ "The oneness of Essence, the Equality of Divinity, and the Equality of Honor of God the Son with the God the Father." [ 59 ] :  92–95 ^ Lossky 1976 , pp. 50–51.

^ "Arius and the Nicene Creed | History of Christianity: Ancient" .

blogs.uoregon.edu . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "3 things Christians should understand about the Nicene-Constantinopolitan creed" .

Transformed . 16 January 2014. Archived from the original on 18 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ a b Kirsch 2004 .

^ Gibbon 1836 , Ch. XXI.

^ Freeman 2003 .

^ a b c Gonzalez, Justo (1984).

The Story of Christianity Vol. 1 . Harper Collins. p.

176 .

ISBN 0-06-063315-8 .

^ Carroll 1987 , p. 12.

^ a b Ehrman 2003 , p. 250.

^ Ehrman 2009 , p. 259.

^ Ehrman 2003 , pp. 253–255.

^ Chadwick 1960 , pp. 171–195.

^ "Emperor Constantine's Edict against the Arians" . fourthcentury.com. 23 January 2010. Archived from the original on 19 August 2011 . Retrieved 20 August 2011 .

^ Lenski, Noel Emmanuel (2006).

"The Reign of Constantine" .

The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Constantine . Cambridge Companions to the Ancient World. Cambridge University Press. p. 82.

ISBN 978-0-521-52157-4 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Instead, only 80 kilometers into his journey the infirm emperor fell deathly ill at Nicomedia, where he received baptism at the hands of the Arianizing bishop Eusebius.

Smith, Kyle (2019) [2016].

Constantine and the Captive Christians of Persia: Martyrdom and Religious Identity in Late Antiquity . Transformation of the Classical Heritage. University of California Press. p. 58 fn. 41.

ISBN 978-0-520-30839-8 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

That the Arian bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia presided over Constantine's baptism was perhaps the most embarrassing aspect of the emperor's last  days for some commentators writing several centuries later. Theophanes, a ninth-century Byzantine chronicler, claims it is a lie and that the bishop Sylvester baptized Constantine in Rome.

Kaatz, Kevin W. (2012).

Early Controversies and the Growth of Christianity . Praeger Series on the Ancient World. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 113.

ISBN 978-0-313-38360-1 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Canella, Tessa (2018).

"Sylvester I" . In Hunter, David G.; Geest, Paul van; Lietaert Peerbolte, L. J. (eds.).

Brill encyclopedia of early Christianity online . Leiden: Brill.

ISSN 2589-7993 .

OCLC 1079362334 .

Its purpose was also to hand down another version of Constantine's conversion, one that was different to that disseminated by pagan sources, and especially to amend the historical memory of the Arian baptism that the emperor received at the end of his life, and instead to attribute an unequivocally orthodox baptism to him, imparted by Sylvester himself to a leprous and persecuting Constantine.

^ Chapman 1909 .

^ Socrates of Constantinople , Church History , book 1, chapter 33. Anthony F. Beavers, Chronology of the Arian Controversy .

^ "First Council of Constantinople, Canon 1" . ccel.org.

^ Chapman 1911 .

^ Hall, Christopher A. (July 2008).

"How Arianism Almost Won" .

Christian History | Learn the History of Christianity & the Church . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ Reardon, Patrick Henry (8 August 2008).

"Athanasius" .

Christian History | Learn the History of Christianity & the Church . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ Chapman 1910 .

^ Chapman 1912 .

^ "Second Creed of Sirmium or 'The Blasphemy of Sirmium' " .

www.fourthcentury.com . Retrieved 9 March 2017 .

^ Kelly 1978 , p. 249.

^ Schaff, Philip (18 December 2019).

The Complete History of the Christian Church (With Bible) . e-artnow.

The pagan Ammianus Marcellinus says of the councils under Constantius: "The highways were covered with galloping bishops;" and even Athanasius rebuked the restless flutter of the clergy.

^ "The history of Christianity's greatest controversy" .

Christian Science Monitor . 9 September 1999.

ISSN 0882-7729 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "On battling Arianism: then and now" .

Legatus . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ Macpherson 1912 .

^ "Theodosius I" .

Christian History . 8 August 2008 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ Bury, J.B.

"History of the Later Roman Empire" .

penelope.uchicago.edu . University of Chicago. Vol. 1 Chap. XI . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "Sozomen's Church History VII.4" . ccel.org.

^ The text of this version of the Nicene Creed is available at "The Holy Creed Which the 150 Holy Fathers Set Forth, Which is Consonant with the Holy and Great Synod of Nice" . ccel.org . Retrieved 27 November 2010 .

^ "Arianism | Definition, History, & Controversy | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 20 April 2022 .

^ Szada, Marta (February 2021). "The Missing Link: The Homoian Church in the Danubian Provinces and Its Role in the Conversion of the Goths".

Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum / Journal of Ancient Christianity .

24 (3).

Berlin and Boston : De Gruyter : 549– 584.

doi : 10.1515/zac-2020-0053 .

eISSN 1612-961X .

ISSN 0949-9571 .

S2CID 231966053 .

^ "7.5: Successor Kingdoms to the Western Roman Empire" .

Humanities LibreTexts . 16 December 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

Most of them were Christians, but, crucially, they were not Catholic Christians, who believed in the doctrine of the Trinity, that God is one God but three distinct persons of the Father, the Son (Jesus Christ), and the Holy Spirit. They were rather Arians, who believed that Jesus was lesser than God the Father (see Chapter Six). Most of their subjects, however, were Catholics.

^ Ferguson 2005 , p. 200.

^ Fanning, Steven C. (1 April 1981).

"Lombard Arianism Reconsidered" .

Speculum .

56 (2): 241– 258.

doi : 10.2307/2846933 .

ISSN 0038-7134 .

JSTOR 2846933 .

S2CID 162786616 .

^ "Clovis of the Franks | British Museum" .

www.britishmuseum.org . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "Goths and Visigoths" .

HISTORY . 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ Frassetto, Michael, Encyclopedia of barbarian Europe , (ABC-Clio, 2003), p. 128.

^ Procopius, Secret Histories, Chapter 11, 18 ^ Gregory of Tours ; Brehaut, Earnest (1916).

"Introduction" .

History of the Franks . pp.

ix– xxv.

^ Thompson, E. A. (1960). "The Conversion of the Visigoths to Catholicism".

Nottingham Medieval Studies .

4 : 4.

doi : 10.1484/J.NMS.3.5 .

^ "German Tribes org Lombard Kings" . 23 May 2011. Archived from the original on 23 May 2011 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "GARIBALDO, re dei Longobardi in "Dizionario Biografico" " .

www.treccani.it (in Italian) . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ Roland Bainton , Hunted Heretic. The Life and Death of Michael Servetus ^ George Huntston Williams .

The Radical Reformation , 3rd edition. Volume 15 of Sixteenth Century Essays and Studies. Ann Arbor, MI: Edwards Brothers, 1992 ^ Harris, Tim (23 September 2004). "Cooper, Anthony Ashley, first earl of Shaftesbury (1621–1683), politician".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/6208 .

ISBN 978-0-19-861412-8 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ William Gibson, Robert G. Ingram Religious identities in Britain, 1660–1832 p. 92 ^ "Arianism." Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica 2007 Deluxe Edition. Chicago: 2007.

^ "Trinity > Unitarianism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .

plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "The Trinity and other gods" .

Pathway . 28 June 2020 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "Arianism is taught by the Jehovah's Witness organization" .

Christian Apologetics & Research Ministry . 4 May 2010 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ Institute for Metaphysical Studies – The Arian Christian Bible – Metaphysical Institute, 2010. p. 209. Retrieved 10 June 2014.

^ Adam Bourque – Ten Things You Didn't Know about Jehovah's Witnesses.

Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine Michigan Skeptics Association. Retrieved 10 June 2014.

^ Dorsett, Tommy (29 April 2003).

"Modern Day Arians: Who Are They?" . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ "Trinity: Arius and the Nicene Creed" . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ Young, Alexey.

"Jehovah's Witnesses" . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ a b "We Worship What We Know" .

The Watchtower .

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania . 1 September 1984. pp.

25– 30 . Retrieved 28 October 2020 – via Watchtower Online Library.

^ "Should You Believe in the Trinity?" .

Awake!

.

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania . August 2013. pp.

12– 13 . Retrieved 28 October 2020 – via Watchtower Online Library.

^ "Iglesia Ni Cristo (Church Of Christ)" . 16 June 2020.

^ Pearce F.

Jesus: God the Son or Son of God?

Archived 18 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine CMPA ^ Buzzard & Hunting 1998 .

^ Mattison, Hiram.

A Scriptural Defence of the Doctrine of the Trinity: Or a Check to Modern Arianism as Taught by Campbellites, Hicksites, New Lights, Universalists and Mormons, and Especially by a Sect Calling Themselves "Christians" . L. Colby, 1846.

^ "Exaltation" .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Retrieved 1 May 2023 .

^ Doctrine and Covenants 132:20 ^ "Mother in Heaven" .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Retrieved 20 May 2023 .

^ McBride, Matthew.

" 'Man Was Also in the Beginning with God' " .

Church of Jesus Christ . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ Doctrine and Covenants 130:22 ^ a b Holland, Jeffrey R.

(November 2007), "The Only True God and Jesus Christ Whom He Hath Sent" , Ensign , p. 40 ^ "The Trinity of traditional Christianity is referred to as the Godhead" .

Newsroom of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ "Gospel Topics: Godhead" .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ Articles of Faith 1 ^ Alma 11:44 ^ Zimmermann, Zalmino (2011).

Theory of Mediumship . Allan Kardec. pp.

380– 381.

^ Himango, Judah Gabriel (2021).

"Pronomian Christianity: An Alternative To Hebrew Roots and Messianic Judaism?" . Retrieved 7 August 2025 .

^ Standing For Truth (29 January 2024).

DEBATE | Does the Bible Teach the Doctrine of the Trinity? - Anthony Rogers vs. Sean Griffin . Retrieved 7 August 2025 – via YouTube.

Sources [ edit ] Athanasius (1934).

Athanasius Werke [ The Works of Athanasius ] (in German). Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-019104-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Athanasius of Alexandria .

History of the Arians .

Part I , Part II , Part III , Part IV , Part V , Part VI , Part VII , Part VIII .

Bauckham, Richard (1989). "Review of Arius: Heresy and Tradition by Rowan Williams".

Themelios .

14 (2): 75.

Berndt, Guido M.; Steinacher, Roland (2014).

Arianism: Roman Heresy and Barbarian Creed (1st ed.).

London and New York: Routledge .

ISBN 978-14-09-44659-0 .

Bethune-Baker, J. F. (2004).

The Meaning of Homoousios in the 'Constantinopolitan' Creed . Wipf and Stock.

ISBN 978-1-59244-898-2 .

Brennecke, Hanns Christof (2018). "Arianism". In Hunter, David G.; van Geest, Paul J. J.; Lietaert Peerbolte, Bert Jan (eds.).

Brill Encyclopedia of Early Christianity Online .

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers .

doi : 10.1163/2589-7993_EECO_SIM_00000280 .

ISSN 2589-7993 .

S2CID 231892603 .

Buzzard, A.

; Hunting, C.F. (1998).

The Doctrine of the Trinity: Christianity's Self-inflicted Wound . G – Reference, Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects Series. International Scholars Publications.

ISBN 978-1-57309-310-1 .

Carroll, Warren (1987).

The building of Christendom . Front Royal, VA: Christendom College Press.

ISBN 0-931888-24-7 .

OCLC 16875022 .

Chadwick, Henry (July 1960). "Faith and Order at the Council of Nicaea: a Note on the Background of the Sixth Canon".

The Harvard Theological Review .

53 (3): 171– 195.

doi : 10.1017/S0017816000027000 .

JSTOR 1508399 .

S2CID 170956611 .

Chapman, Henry Palmer (1909).

"Eusebius of Nicomedia" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Chapman, Henry Palmer (1910).

"Pope Liberius" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Chapman, Henry Palmer (1911).

"Paul of Samosata" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Chapman, Henry Palmer (1912).

"Semiarians and Semiarianism" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 13. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Clarke, Peter B. (2006). "Iglesia ni Cristo".

Encyclopedia of new religious movements . London: Routledge. pp.

292– 293.

ISBN 0-203-48433-9 .

OCLC 63792403 .

Ehrman, Bart D.

(2003).

Lost Christianities: The Battles for Scripture and the Faiths We Never Knew . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-972712-4 .

Ehrman, Bart D.

(2009).

Jesus, Interrupted: Revealing the Hidden Contradictions in the Bible (And Why We Don't Know About Them) . HarperOne.

ISBN 978-0-06-186328-8 .

Ferguson, Everett (2005).

Church History . Vol. 1 : From Christ to pre-Reformation. Harper Collins.

ISBN 978-0-310-20580-7 .

Forrest, J. (1856).

Some Account of the Origin and Progress of Trinitarian Theology: In the Second, Third, and Succeeding Centuries, and of the Manner in which Its Doctrines Gradually Supplanted the Unitarianism of the Primitive Church . Crosby, Nichols, and Company.

Freeman, Charles (2003).

The Closing of the Western Mind: The Rise of Faith and the Fall of Reason . Knopf.

Gibbon, Edward (1836) [1782].

The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire . New York: Harper & Brothers – via Project Gutenberg .

Gross, Terry (7 April 2014).

"If Jesus Never Called Himself God, How Did He Become One?" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 30 October 2020 .

Hanson, R. P. C. (2005).

The Search for the Christian Doctrine of God: The Arian Controversy 318–381 AD . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-0-567-03092-4 .

Heather, Peter J.; Matthews, John (1991).

The Goths in the Fourth Century . Liverpool University Press.

ISBN 978-0-85323-426-5 .

Kelly, J.N.D.

(1978).

Early Christian Doctrines . San Francisco: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-064334-8 .

Kirsch, Jonathan (2004).

God Against the Gods: The History of the War Between Monotheism and Polytheism . Viking Compass.

ISBN 9780670032860 .

Lossky, Vladimir (1976).

The Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church . St Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 978-0-913836-31-6 .

Macpherson, Ewan (1912).

"Flavius Valens" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 15. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

McClintock, John ; Strong, James (1867).

Cyclopaedia of Biblical, Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature . Vol. 7. Harper.

Phan, Peter C. (2011).

The Cambridge Companion to the Trinity . Cambridge Companions to Religion. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-87739-8 .

Pullan, Leighton (1905).

Early Christian Doctrine . Oxford Church Text Books (3rd ed.). New York: Edwin S. Gorham.

Schaff, Philip .

Theological Controversies and the Development of Orthodoxy: The history of the Christian church . volumes III and IX.

Wiles, Maurice (1996).

Archetypal heresy: Arianism through the centuries . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 9780191520594 .

OCLC 344023364 .

Williams, Rowan (2001).

Arius: Heresy and Tradition (revised ed.). Wm. B. Eerdmans.

ISBN 0-8028-4969-5 .

Witherington, B. (2007).

The Living Word of God: Rethinking the Theology of the Bible . Baylor University Press.

ISBN 978-1-60258-017-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ayres, Lewis (2004).

Nicaea and its Legacy: An approach to fourth-century trinitarian theology . New York: Oxford University Press.

Belletini, Mark.

"Arius in the Mirror: The Alexandrian dissent and how it is reflected in modern Unitarian Universalist practice and discourse" . Sermons. Columbus, OH: First Unitarian Universalist Church. Archived from the original on 16 February 2007 . Retrieved 18 September 2006 .

Brennecke, Hanns Christof (1999). "Arianism". In Fahlbusch, Erwin (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Christianity . Vol. 1. Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans. pp.

121–122 .

ISBN 0-8028-2413-7 .

Davidson, Ivor J. (2005). "A Public Faith".

Baker History of the Church . Vol. 2.

ISBN 0-8010-1275-9 .

Newman, John Henry (1833).

"Arians of the Fourth Century" .

newmanreader.org .

Parvis, Sarah (2006).

Marcellus of Ancyra and the Lost Years of the Arian Controversy 325–345 . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199280131 .

Rodriguez, Eliseo (29 July 2014).

The Doctrine of the Trinity is Dead: The original gospel . Lost Fundamental Doctrines. Vol. 1.

ISBN 978-1490922164 .

Rusch, William C. (1980).

The Trinitarian Controversy . Sources of Early Christian Thought.

ISBN 0-8006-1410-0 .

External links [ edit ] Documents of the Early Arian Controversy Chronological survey of the sources English translations of all extant letters relating to early Arianism A map of early sympathizers with Arius Barry, William (1913).

"Arianism" .

Catholic Encyclopedia .

Jewish Encyclopedia: Arianism Concordia Cyclopedia: Arianism (page 1) (page 2) (page 3) "Arianism" .

The American Cyclopædia . 1879.

The Arians of the fourth century by John Henry "Cardinal" Newman in "btm" format [ usurped ] Concise Summary of the Arian Controversy Arianism Today Archived 1 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e Beliefs condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church ( list ) Antiquity Adoptionism Apollinarism Arianism Anomoeanism Semi-Arianism Antidicomarianites Audianism Docetism Donatism Circumcellions Collyridianism Dualism Ebionites Euchites Gnosticism Manichaeism Paulicianism Priscillianism Naassenes Ophites Sethianism Valentinianism Iconoclasm Luciferianism Macedonianism Marcionism Melchisedechians Modalism Monarchianism Athinganoi Modalistic Monophysitism Monothelitism Montanism Nestorianism Novatianism Patripassianism Pelagianism Semipelagianism Pneumatomachians Psilanthropism Sabellianism Subordinationism Valentinianism Middle Ages Arnoldism Bogomilism Bosnian Church Catharism Conciliarism Dulcinians Fraticelli Free Spirits Henricians Humiliati Hussites Impanation Josephines Lollardy Migetians Pasagians Spanish Adoptionism Taborites Waldensians Early modernity Antinomianism Consubstantiation Febronianism Gallicanism Jansenism Josephinism Pantheism Protestantism Anabaptism Arminianism Calvinism Lutheranism Quietism Modernity Americanism Community of the Lady of All Nations Feeneyism Indifferentism Jehovah's Witnesses Modernism Mormonism Narco-saints Maximón Santa Muerte Positive Christianity Reincarnationism Catholic Church portal v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐5g5v4
Cached time: 20250814215035
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.030 seconds
Real time usage: 2.377 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13786/1000000
Revision size: 88477/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 419605/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19722/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 493247/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.267/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19577029/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1926.242      1 -total
 35.92%  691.996      2 Template:Reflist
 17.34%  333.960     54 Template:Cite_web
 16.13%  310.694     51 Template:Cite_book
 10.70%  206.187      1 Template:Arianism
  8.63%  166.169     42 Template:Sfn
  6.07%  116.969      2 Template:Lang
  4.38%   84.420      1 Template:Short_description
  3.53%   68.034      4 Template:Fix
  3.04%   58.540      3 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1252:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215035 and revision id 1304607933. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arianism&oldid=1304607933 " Categories : Arianism Christian denominations established in the 3rd century Christian terminology Christian theological movements Nature of Jesus Christ Nontrinitarian denominations Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Koine Greek-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 02:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arianism 83 languages Add topic

