Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and usage 2 In other languages 3 Related terms Toggle Related terms subsection 3.1 Central Asia 3.2 Central Eurasia 4 Origin of Inner Asian studies 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Chinese dynastic history 5.2 Regional history 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Inner Asia 25 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Magyar Монгол नेपाली 日本語 Português Русский کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical region over time Map of Inner Asia, showing the extent of the area studied by the Sinor Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies, located at Indiana University in the United States Map of Inner Asia, showing the extent of the area studied by the CIAS at the University of Toronto .

Inner Asia refers to the northern and landlocked regions spanning North , Central , and East Asia . It includes parts of western and northeast China , as well as southern Siberia . The area overlaps with some definitions of "Central Asia", mostly the historical ones, but certain regions that are often included in Inner Asia, such as Iran , are not a part of Central Asia by any of its definitions. Inner Asia may be regarded as the western and northern "frontier" of China proper and as being bounded by East Asia proper, which consists of China proper, Japan and Korea.

[ 1 ] The extent of Inner Asia has been understood differently in different periods. "Inner Asia" is sometimes contrasted to "China proper", that is, the territories originally unified under the Qin dynasty with majority identifying their ethnicity as Han populations. By the year 1800, Chinese Inner Asia consisted of the Tibetan Plateau , Xinjiang and Mongolian Plateau . They were governed through administrative structures different from those of the older Chinese provinces.

[ 2 ] The frontier regions of China proper are also sometimes included as part of Inner Asia.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Definition and usage [ edit ] Alternative conception of Inner Asia showing the Mongolian (or Mongolian-related) areas of Inner Asia that are represented in the Mongolian Digital Ethnography Archive "Inner Asia" today has a range of definitions and usages.

[ 5 ] Denis Sinor , for example, used "Inner Asia" in contrast to agricultural civilizations, noting its changing borders, such as when a Roman province was taken by the Huns , areas of North China were occupied by barbarians, or Anatolia came under Turkish influence , eradicating Hellenistic culture.

[ 6 ] Some scholars or historians use the term "Inner Asia" to describe territories outside of Chinese speaking proper, [ 7 ] although previous empires like the Han dynasty , Tang dynasty and Ming dynasty also expanded their realms and influences into Inner Asia.

According to Morris Rossabi , Inner Asia is composed not only of the five Central Asian countries, which includes Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , Tajikistan , Kyrgyzstan , and Kazakhstan , but also includes western and northern China, Iran , Mongolia , Afghanistan .

[ 8 ] The Committee on Inner Asian and Altaic Studies of Harvard University defines Inner Asia as a region consisting of West Turkestan , East Turkestan (i.e., Xinjiang), Eastern Iran , Northern Pakistan , Afghanistan, Tibet , Qinghai , Sichuan , Gansu and northwestern Yunnan .

[ 3 ] The Mongolia and Inner Asia Studies Unit at the University of Cambridge defines Inner Asia as "an area centred on Mongolia and extending across the region of the great steppes to the Himalayas ", including Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, East Turkestan, Tibet, Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan, Yunnan, Nepal , Sikkim , Bhutan , Inner Mongolia , Liaoning , Jilin , Heilongjiang , Altai , Tuva , Buryatia and Chita .

[ 4 ] In other languages [ edit ] In French , Asie centrale can mean either "Central Asia" or "Inner Asia", while Mongolia and Tibet are grouped as Haute Asie ( lit.

' Upper Asia ' ).

[ 9 ] The terms meaning "Inner Asia" in the languages of Inner Asia itself are all modern translations of terms in European languages, mostly Russian.

[ 9 ] Related terms [ edit ] Central Asia [ edit ] Main article: Central Asia See also: Soviet Central Asia and Greater Central Asia " Central Asia " normally denotes the western part of Inner Asia; that is, Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan , and Uzbekistan , with Afghanistan sometimes also included as part of Central Asia. However, The Library of Congress subject classification system treats "Central Asia" and Inner Asia as synonymous.

[ 9 ] Central Eurasia [ edit ] According to Morris Rossabi , the term "Inner Asia" is the well-established term for the area in the literature. However, because of its deficiencies, including the implication of an "Outer Asia" that does not exist, Denis Sinor has proposed the neologism "Central Eurasia", which emphasizes the role of the area in intercontinental exchange.

[ 10 ] According to Sinor: [ 11 ] The definition that can be given of Central Eurasia in space is negative. It is that part of the continent of Eurasia that lies beyond the borders of the great sedentary civilizations.... Although the area of Central Eurasia is subject to fluctuations, the general trend is that of diminution. With the territorial growth of the sedentary civilizations, their borderline extends and offers a larger surface on which new layers of barbarians will be deposited.

Origin of Inner Asian studies [ edit ] Gustav Kreitner , Béla Széchenyi and Lajos Lóczy led an expedition to Inner Asia in 1877–1880.

Central Europe is the birthplace of Inner Asian studies in the West. Hungarian explorers and scholars of the early 19th century travelled to Inner Asia with an attempt to find their own national origins.

Sándor Kőrösi Csoma was the first among these explorers, who became the founder of Tibetology . The Hungarian count Béla Széchenyi led a scientific expedition to Inner Asia in 1877–1880 and subsequently founded the journal Turán in 1913. The term "Inner Asian studies" (Hungarian: belső-ázsiai kutatások ; German: innerasiatische Studien ) first appeared in the masthead of Turán .

[ 9 ] Aurel Stein 's discoveries of Inner Asian antiquities contributed significantly to the knowledge of the civilizations of this region. In 1928, he published his 4-volume work entitled Innermost Asia: Detailed Report of Explorations in Central Asia, Kan-su and Eastern Iran, Carried Out and Described under the Orders of H.M. Indian Government . In 1940, the first academic chair for Inner Asian studies was established by Lajos Ligeti at the University of Budapest .

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] China proper Chinese Tartary Western Regions Nomadic empire Eurasianism Indo-Pacific Asia , the rest of Asia Pan-Mongolism Silk Road Turco-Mongols Turkification Turan Turanism Tartary Division of the Mongol Empire Chinese dynastic history [ edit ] Han dynasty in Inner Asia Tang dynasty in Inner Asia Yuan dynasty in Inner Asia Ming dynasty in Inner Asia Qing dynasty in Inner Asia Regional history [ edit ] History of Manchuria History of Mongolia History of Tibet History of Xinjiang References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Bulag, Uradyn E. (October 2005).

"Where is East Asia?: Central Asian and Inner Asian Perspectives on Regionalism" . Japan Focus. Archived from the original on 2015-04-02 . Retrieved 2012-12-09 .

^ The Cambridge History of China: Volume 10, Part 1, by John K. Fairbank, p37 ^ a b "The Committee on Inner Asian and Altaic Studies" .

harvard.edu . Retrieved 8 November 2024 .

^ a b "Mongolia and Inner Asia Studies Unit: About us" .

miasu.socanth.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 8 November 2024 .

^ Book Abstract: "Inner Asia: Making a Long-Term U.S. Commitment." Archived 2011-06-04 at the Wayback Machine Authors: Carol D. Clair; Army War Coll Carlisle Barracks Pa. Retrieved: 22 August 2009.

^ The Cambridge History of Early Inner Asia, Volume 1 By Denis Sinor.

Retrieved: 22 August 2009.

^ New Qing Imperial History: The Making of Inner Asian Empire at Qing Chengde , ed. Ruth W. Dunnell, Mark C. Elliott , Philippe Foret and James A. Millward ^ Rossabi, Morris. "Central Asia: A Historical Overview".

Asia Society .

^ a b c d e "Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies (RIFIAS)" .

indiana.edu . Archived from the original on 12 March 2009 . Retrieved 22 August 2009 .

^ Rossabi, Morris (1975).

China and Inner Asia: from 1368 to the present day . Pica Press. p. 10.

^ Sinor, Denis (1997).

Inner Asia: History, civilization, languages: a syllabus . p. 4.

Sources [ edit ] Di Cosmo, Nicola. 1999. "State Formation and Periodization in Inner Asian History".

Journal of World History 10 (1). University of Hawai'i Press: 1–40.

State Formation and Periodization in Inner Asian History .

Rogers, J. Daniel. 2012. "Inner Asian States and Empires: Theories and Synthesis".

Journal of Archaeological Research 20 (3). Springer: 205–56.

Inner Asian States and Empires: Theories and Synthesis .

External links [ edit ] The Association for Asian Studies (AAS): The China and Inner Asia Council (CIAC).

Archived 2021-11-02 at the Wayback Machine Indiana University at Bloomington: Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies (RIFIAS).

University of Cambridge: Mongolia and Inner Asia Studies Unit (MIASU).

v t e Inner Asia history series Nomadic empires Xiongnu Xianbei Rouran Göktürks First Turkic Khaganate Eastern Turkic Khaganate Western Turkic Khaganate Second Turkic Khaganate Tibetan Zubu Uyghur Kyrgyz Mongol Tatar Khamag Mongol Mongol Empire Chagatai Timurid Dzungar Chinese empires Han against Xiongnu Protectorate of the Western Regions Chief Official Tang against Western Turks / Eastern Turks against Tibet Mongolian Plateau Beiting Tarim Basin Liao Western Liao Northern Liao Eastern Liao Later Liao Yuan against Northwest khanates Manchuria Mongolia Tibet Northern Yuan Ming against Mongols against Turpan Manchuria Tibet Qing against Dzungar genocide Lifan Yuan Amban Manchuria Mongolia Tibet Xinjiang Related topics The Cambridge History of Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Central Asia Eurasian nomads Tartary Chinese Tartary Western Regions ( Chinese Turkestan ) China proper Sinosphere Greater China v t e Asia articles History Chronology Indian Ocean trade Silk Road Imperialism Decolonisation Cold War By topic Military conflicts Sovereignty Geography Cities metropolitan areas tallest buildings urban agglomerations Countries and territories by population Extreme points Islands Lakes Mountains Rivers Geopolitical Transcontinental regions Asia–Pacific Caucasus EMEA Mediterranean world MENASA Greater Middle East / Middle East and North Africa Middle East / Near East Indo-Mediterranean Indo-Pacific Indian Ocean world Pacific Rim Pacific Asia Intracontinental regions Anatolia/Asia Minor Arabia South Arabia Cyprus Far East / Pacific Asia Greater China China proper Taiwan Tibet Xinjiang Indochina Malay world Manchuria Northeast China Outer Manchuria Greater Mongolia Inner Mongolia Mongolia Japan Korea Russian Far East Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Greater Iran Greater Khorasan Global Southeast Greater India Levant / Syria Southern Levant Mesopotamia Siberia South Caucasus Turkestan Afghan Turkestan Chinese Turkestan Russian Turkestan Continental subregions Central Asia Soviet Central Asia East Asia Northeast Asia North Asia South Asia Subregions Southeast Asia Mainland Southeast Asia Maritime Southeast Asia West Asia Cultural Austronesia Indosphere Sinosphere Nanyang Northern and southern China Physical Supercontinents Afro-Eurasia Afro-Asia Eurasia Subcontinents Arabian subcontinent Indian subcontinent Plateaus Anatolian plateau Deccan Plateau Iranian plateau Mongolian Plateau Tibetan Plateau Peninsulas Anatolian Peninsula Arabian Peninsula Indian Peninsula Indochinese Peninsula Malay Peninsula Korean Peninsula Leizhou Peninsula Liaodong Peninsula Shandong Peninsula Archipelagos Japanese Archipelago Ryukyu Islands Malay Archipelago Indonesian Archipelago Maluku Islands Sunda Islands Greater Sunda Islands Lesser Sunda Islands Philippine Archipelago Visayan Islands Mergui Archipelago Biogeographic Eastern Asia Indo-Pacific Malesia Tropical Asia Politics Heads of government Heads of state Elections political parties Democracy Human rights Law Military Pan-Asianism Intergovernmental Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Bay of Bengal Initiative (BIMSTEC) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (CCASG / GCC) Mekong–Ganga Cooperation (MGC) Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) Economy Countries by average wage Countries by GDP (PPP) Countries by HDI Currencies Stock exchanges Technology renewable energy Transport airports high-speed rail Markets Property markets Society Demographics Education Etiquette Health Languages Life expectancy People ethnic groups Culture Art Cinema Cuisine Literature Music Philosophy Religion Sport Future Asian Century Chinese Century Indian Century Pacific Century Outline Index Category Portal Maps v t e Regions of Asia Central ( The 'stans ) Roof of the World Greater  Middle  East Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea Dead Sea Sea of Galilee Tartary Transoxiana Turan Greater Khorasan Ariana Arachosia Khwarazm Sistan Kazakhstania Kazakh Steppe Betpak-Dala Eurasian Steppe Kazakh Steppe Mongolian–Manchurian grassland Iranian plateau Altai Mountains Pamir Mountains Tian Shan Badakhshan Wakhan Corridor Wakhjir Pass Mount Imeon Mongolian Plateau Western Regions Taklamakan Desert Karakoram Trans-Karakoram Tract Siachen Glacier Tibetan Plateau East ( Northeast ) Orient Japanese Archipelago Northeastern Japan Arc Sakhalin Island Arc Korea Gobi Desert Taklamakan Desert Greater Khingan Mongolian Plateau Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Inner Mongolia Outer Mongolia China proper Manchuria Northeast China Northeast China Plain Outer Manchuria Mongolian–Manchurian grassland North China Plain Yan Mountains Liaodong Peninsula High-mountain Asia Himalayas Tibetan Plateau Karakoram Kunlun Mountains Qilian Mountains Hengduan Mountains Tarim Basin Qinling Mountains Sichuan Basin Northern Silk Road Hexi Corridor Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau Lingnan Liangguang Jiangnan Jianghuai Guanzhong Huizhou Wu Jiaozhou Zhongyuan Shaannan Ordos Loop Loess Plateau Shaanbei Hamgyong Mountains Central Mountain Range Japanese Alps Suzuka Mountains Leizhou Peninsula Gulf of Tonkin Yangtze Yangtze Delta Yellow River Pearl River Delta Yenisei Basin Altai Mountains Wakhan Corridor Wakhjir Pass Far East / Pacific Asia Ring of Fire Asia–Pacific Tropical Asia North ( Siberia ) Arctic Arctic Circle Inner Asia Northeast Ural Ural Mountains Far East / Pacific Asia Russian Far East Okhotsk–Manchurian taiga Beringia Chukchi Peninsula Kamchatka Peninsula Extreme North Tartary Siberia Baikalia ( Lake Baikal ) Baraba steppe Khatanga Gulf Transbaikal West Amur Basin Yenisei Gulf Yenisei Basin Sikhote-Alin Kolyma Bering Strait Ring of Fire Outer Manchuria Asia–Pacific Southeast ( East Indies ) Orient Sundaland Mainland/Indochina Northern Triangle temperate forests Maritime / Malay Archipelago Peninsular Malaysia Sunda Islands Greater Sunda Islands Lesser Sunda Islands Indonesian Archipelago / Nusantara Wallacea Timor Philippine Archipelago Luzon Mindanao Visayas Leyte Gulf Gulf of Thailand East Indies Nanyang Alpide belt Far East / Pacific Asia Ring of Fire Asia–Pacific Tropical Asia South ( Indian Subcontinent ) Subregions Eastern Northern Northwestern Southern Orient Greater India Indian subcontinent Himalayas Kangchenjunga Nanda Devi Hindu Kush Bactria Carnatic region Tamilakam Western Ghats Eastern Ghats Ganges Basin Ganges Delta Guzgan Pashtunistan Punjab Balochistan Gedrosia Makran Marathwada Kashmir Kashmir Valley Pir Panjal Range Thar Desert Indus Valley Indus River Delta Indus Valley Desert Indo-Gangetic Plain Eastern Coastal Plains Kalinga Western Coastal Plains Meghalaya subtropical forests Lower Gangetic Plains moist deciduous forests Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows Doab Bagar tract Great Rann of Kutch Little Rann of Kutch Deccan Plateau Coromandel Coast Konkan False Divi Point Hindi Belt Ladakh Aksai Chin Gilgit-Baltistan Baltistan Shigar Valley High-mountain Asia Karakoram Saltoro Mountains Siachen Glacier Bengal Bay of Bengal Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Halar Gulf of Mannar Palk Strait Trans-Karakoram Tract Wakhan Corridor Wakhjir Pass Lakshadweep Laccadive Islands Aminidivi Paropamisadae Andaman and Nicobar Islands Andaman Islands Nicobar Islands Maldives Alpide belt Asia–Pacific Tropical Asia Tibetan Plateau West ( Middle East and South Caucasus ) Red Sea Hanish Islands Caspian Sea Mediterranean Sea Zagros Mountains Elam Persian Gulf Pirate Coast Strait of Hormuz Greater and Lesser Tunbs Al-Faw Peninsula Gulf of Oman Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Aden Balochistan Arabian Peninsula Najd Al-Yamama Hejaz Tihamah Eastern Arabia South Arabia Hadhramaut Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert Al-Sharat Tigris–Euphrates Mesopotamia Upper Mesopotamia Lower Mesopotamia Sawad Nineveh Plains Akkad (region) Babylonia Suhum Eastern Mediterranean Mashriq Eber-Nari Kurdistan Levant Levantine corridor Syria region Palestine region Transjordan Jordan Rift Valley Philistia Golan Heights Hula Valley Galilee Canaan Gilead Syrian Desert Judea Samaria Arabah Aram Aram-Naharaim Negev Phoenicia Retjenu Anti-Lebanon Mountains Bekaa valley Levantine Sea Sinai Peninsula Arabian Desert Fertile Crescent Iranian Azerbaijan Hauran Iranian plateau Dasht-e Kavir Armenian highlands Caucasus Caucasus Mountains Greater Caucasus Lesser Caucasus South Caucasus Shirvan Kur-Araz Lowland Lankaran Lowland Alborz Absheron Peninsula Kartli Anatolia Taurus Mountains Aeolis Paphlagonia Phasiane Isauria Ionia Bithynia Cilicia Cappadocia Caria Corduene Chaldia Doris Lycaonia Lycia Lydia Galatia Pisidia Pontus Mysia Arzawa Speri Sophene Biga Peninsula Troad Tuwana Alpide belt NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jxnfh
Cached time: 20250817192511
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.499 seconds
Real time usage: 0.662 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2355/1000000
Revision size: 11441/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 175620/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25266/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55772/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.277/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16474338/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  503.924      1 -total
 22.02%  110.973      1 Template:Reflist
 18.56%   93.541      9 Template:Navbox
 17.82%   89.815      1 Template:Asia_topics
 17.45%   87.914      1 Template:Region_topics
 15.52%   78.207      4 Template:Cite_web
 15.26%   76.888      2 Template:Lang
 14.07%   70.925      1 Template:Inner_Asia
 13.44%   67.725      1 Template:Short_description
  7.06%   35.557      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:426875:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817192511 and revision id 1294582986. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inner_Asia&oldid=1294582986 " Categories : Inner Asia Regions of Asia Natural history of Asia Historical regions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 15:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inner Asia 25 languages Add topic

