Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Space law Toggle Space law subsection 1.1 International treaties 1.1.1 Partial Test Ban Treaty 1.1.2 Outer Space Treaty 1.1.3 Rescue Agreement 1.1.4 Liability Convention 1.1.5 Registration Convention 1.1.6 Moon Agreement 2 Policy by country Toggle Policy by country subsection 2.1 United States 2.1.1 History 2.2 Europe 2.3 China 2.4 Russia and Ukraine 2.5 India 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Space policy 5 languages العربية Català Deutsch فارسی Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public policy concerning the exploration of outer space Space policy is the political decision-making process for, and application of, public policy of a state (or association of states) regarding spaceflight and uses of outer space , both for civilian ( scientific and commercial ) and military purposes.

International treaties , such as the 1967 Outer Space Treaty , attempt to maximize the peaceful uses of space and restrict the militarization of space .

Space policy intersects with science policy , since national space programs often perform or fund research in space science , and also with defense policy , for applications such as spy satellites and anti-satellite weapons .  It also encompasses government regulation of third-party activities such as commercial communications satellites and private spaceflight .

[ 1 ] Space policy also encompasses the creation and application of space law , and space advocacy organizations exist to support the cause of space exploration .

Space law [ edit ] Main article: Space law Space law is an area of the law that encompasses national and international law governing activities in outer space . There are currently six treaties that make up the body of international space law.

The inception of the field of space law began with the launch of the world's first artificial satellite by the Soviet Union in October 1957. Named Sputnik 1 , the satellite was launched as part of the International Geophysical Year . Since that time, space law has evolved and assumed more importance as mankind has increasingly come to use and rely on space-based resources.

International space law consists of six international treaties, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] five declarations and principles, and other United Nations (UN) General Assembly resolutions. The UN Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) is primarily responsible for the implementation of international space law, and helps advise governments and non-governmental organizations on space law.

[ 4 ] International treaties [ edit ] All treaties below except the Partial Test Ban Treaty were adopted by the UN General Assembly.

[ 2 ] The Partial Test Ban Treaty, being the first, was signed by the governments of the Soviet Union , the United Kingdom , and the United States in Moscow on August 5, 1963, before it was opened for signature by other countries.

[ 3 ] Partial Test Ban Treaty [ edit ] The Partial Test Ban Treaty was entered into force on October 10, 1963.

[ 3 ] The treaty prohibits nuclear weapons tests or nuclear explosions in the atmosphere, in outer space , and under water. It also prohibits nuclear explosions underground if they cause "radioactive debris to be present outside the territorial limits of the State under whose jurisdiction or control" the explosions were conducted.

[ 5 ] With increased knowledge of the effects of nuclear fallout , the issue of nuclear tests and the resultant radioactive debris drew intensified public attention. As the treaty does not outright ban nuclear tests underground, hundreds of such tests were conducted in the following decades.

[ 6 ] The Partial Test Ban Treaty is seen [ by whom?

] as the first step towards global nuclear disarmament . Continued efforts in this direction include increasing public awareness through events such as the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons .

Outer Space Treaty [ edit ] The Outer Space Treaty was ratified on October 10, 1967. Key provisions of the treaty include prohibiting nuclear weapons in space; limiting the use of the Moon and all other celestial bodies to peaceful purposes; establishing that space shall be freely explored and used by all nations; and precluding any country from claiming sovereignty over outer space or any celestial body .

[ 7 ] International challenges to the Outer Space Treaty have been attempted. Most prominently is the Bogota Declaration which asserts sovereignty over those portions of the geostationary orbit that continuously lie over the signatory nations' territory. The declaration has been signed by seven equatorial countries: Ecuador , Colombia , Congo , Zaire (in 1997 renamed to the Democratic Republic of the Congo), Uganda , Kenya , and Indonesia . These claims did not receive wider international support or recognition, and were subsequently largely abandoned.

[ 8 ] With the increase of private satellites and counter-space technologies since 2016, there have been calls for an update to the Outer Space Treaty. This topic, amongst others, was discussed in 2021 at the annual Outer Space Security Conference in Geneva, Switzerland.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Rescue Agreement [ edit ] The Rescue Agreement was ratified on December 3, 1968. The agreement's provisions elaborate on the rescue provisions set forth by the Outer Space Treaty . The agreement essentially requires that any state party to the agreement, upon becoming aware that the personnel of a spacecraft are in distress, must notify the launching authority and the Secretary General of the United Nations , and must provide all possible assistance to rescue the personnel of a spacecraft who have landed within that state's territory. Moreover, if the distress occurs in an area that is beyond the territory of any nation, then any state party that is in a position to do so shall, if necessary, extend assistance in the search and rescue operation.

[ 11 ] At the time the agreement was drafted, rescuing travelers in space was unlikely, due to the limited launch capabilities of even the most advanced space programs.

[ citation needed ] More recently, it has become more plausible. The Rescue Agreement has been criticized for being vague, especially regarding the definition of who is entitled to be rescued and the definition of what constitutes a spacecraft and its component parts. With the recent increase of commercial spaceflight providers, this distinction has become more relevant, raising questions as to whether space tourists are covered by the term "personnel of a spacecraft" used in the agreement. There have been calls to revisit these issues in international space law.

[ 12 ] Liability Convention [ edit ] The Liability Convention was ratified on September 1, 1972. The treaty expands on the liability rules created in the Outer Space Treaty .

[ 13 ] Its provisions state that a state bears international responsibility for all space objects that are launched within their territory. This means that regardless of who launches the space object, if it was launched from State A's territory, or from State A's facility, or if State A caused the launch to happen, then State A is fully liable for damages that result from that space object. In 1978, the crash of the nuclear-powered Soviet satellite Kosmos 954 in Canadian territory led to the only claim filed under the convention. More recently, in July and October 2021, China's Tiangong space station , with three astronauts aboard, performed "evasive maneuver(s)" to avoid collision with SpaceX 's Starlink satellites .

[ 14 ] The Liability Convention does not introduce legal penalties for leaving space debris in Earth's orbit.

[ 15 ] Registration Convention [ edit ] The Registration Convention was ratified on September 15, 1976. The convention's provisions require states to provide details such as date and location of launch, as well as basic orbital parameters to the United Nations for each space object.

[ 16 ] Moon Agreement [ edit ] The Moon Agreement was ratified on July 11, 1984.

[ 17 ] The agreement is a multilateral treaty that turns jurisdiction of all celestial bodies (including the orbits around such bodies) over to the participant countries. Thus, all activities would conform to international law , including the United Nations Charter . It has not been ratified by any state that engages in self-launched human spaceflight (e.g. the United States , Russia , People's Republic of China ), and thus it has little to no relevancy in international law .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Policy by country [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Space policy of the United States See also: Space policy of the George W. Bush administration , Space policy of the Barack Obama administration , and Space policy of the Donald Trump administration United States space policy is drafted by the Executive branch at the direction of the President of the United States , and submitted for approval and establishment of funding to the legislative process of the United States Congress .

[ 20 ] The President may also negotiate with other nations and sign space treaties on behalf of the US, according to his or her constitutional authority.

Congress ' final space policy product is, in the case of domestic policy a bill explicitly stating the policy objectives and the budget appropriation for their implementation to be submitted to the President for signature into law, or else a ratified treaty with other nations.

Space advocacy organizations (such as the Space Science Institute , National Space Society , and the Space Generation Advisory Council , learned societies such as the American Astronomical Society and the American Astronautical Society ; and policy organizations such as the National Academies ) may provide advice to the government and lobby for space goals.

Civilian and scientific space policy is carried out by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA, subsequent to 29 July 1958), and military space activities (communications, reconnaissance, intelligence, mapping, and missile defense) are carried out by various agencies of the Department of Defense . The President is legally responsible for deciding which space activities fall under the civilian and military areas.

[ 21 ] In addition, the Department of Commerce 's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operates various services with space components, such as the Landsat program .

[ 22 ] The President consults with NASA and Department of Defense on their space activity plans, as potential input for the policy draft submitted to Congress . He or she also consults with the National Security Council , the Office of Science and Technology Policy , and the Office of Management and Budget to take into account Congress 's expected willingness to provide necessary funding levels for proposed programs.

[ 23 ] Once the President's policy draft or treaty is submitted to the Congress , civilian policies are reviewed by the House Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics and the Senate Subcommittee on Science and Space . These committees also exercise oversight over NASA 's operations and investigation of accidents such as the 1967 Apollo 1 fire. Military policies are reviewed and overseen by the House Subcommittee on Strategic Forces and the Senate Subcommittee on Strategic Forces , as well as the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence . The Senate Foreign Relations Committee conducts hearings on proposed space treaties, and the various appropriations committees have power over the budgets for space-related agencies.  Space policy efforts are supported by Congressional agencies such as the Congressional Research Service , the Congressional Budget Office , and Government Accountability Office .

[ 24 ] History [ edit ] President Kennedy committed the United States to landing a man on the Moon by the end of the 1960s decade, in response to contemporary Soviet space successes.  This speech at Rice University on 12 September 1962 is famous for the quote "We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard." The early history of United States space policy is linked to the US–Soviet Space Race of the 1960s.  The National Aeronautics and Space Act creating NASA was passed in 1958, after the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 satellite. Thereafter, in response to the flight of Yuri Gagarin as the first man in space, Kennedy in 1961 committed the United States to landing a man on the Moon by the end of the decade.  Although the costs of the Vietnam War and the programs of the Great Society forced cuts to NASA 's budget as early as 1965, the first Moon landing occurred in 1969, early in Richard Nixon's presidency .  Under the Nixon administration NASA 's budget continued to decline and three of the planned Apollo Moon landings were cancelled .  The Nixon administration approved the beginning of the Space Shuttle program in 1972, but did not support funding of other projects such as a Mars landing , colonization of the Moon , or a permanent space station .

[ 25 ] The Space Shuttle first launched in 1981, during Ronald Reagan's administration .  Reagan in 1982 announced a renewed active space effort, which included initiatives such the construction of Space Station Freedom , and the military Strategic Defense Initiative , and, later in his term, a 30 percent increase in NASA 's budget.  The Space Shuttle Challenger disaster in January 1986 led to a reevaluation of the future of the national space program in the National Commission on Space report and the Ride Report .

[ 25 ] The United States has participated in the International Space Station beginning in the 1990s, the Space Shuttle program has continued, although the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster has led to the planned retirement of the Space Shuttle in mid-2011.  There is a current debate on the post-Space Shuttle future of the civilian space program: the Constellation program of the George W. Bush administration directed NASA to create a set of new spacecraft with the goal of sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars, [ 26 ] but the Obama administration cancelled the Constellation program , opting instead to emphasize development of commercial rocket systems.

The Vision for Space Exploration established under the George W. Bush administration in 2004 was replaced with a new policy released by Barack Obama on 28 June 2010.

[ 27 ] In recent years, U.S. space operators and decisionmakers have become increasingly concerned about threats to U.S. space leadership. In the civil sector, this has been driven largely by U.S. dependence on Russia for crew access to the International Space Station (ISS) since the termination of the Space Shuttle program in 2011. In national security, foreign development of counterspace systems has become a regular feature of public statements by U.S. defense and intelligence officials.

[ 28 ] This is reminiscent of similar concerns about the Soviet Union's space program between the launch of Sputnik 1 in 1957 and the success of the Apollo lunar missions. The threat of Soviet dominance in space turned out to be less formidable than expected, but it continued to drive policy and programmatic decisions for decades, until the Soviet Union ceased to exist.

[ 29 ] Europe [ edit ] The ESA is an international organization whose membership overlaps with, but is not the same as, that of the EU.

ESA and EU member countries ESA-only members EU-only members Main article: Space policy of the European Union The European Space Agency (ESA) is the common space agency for many European nations.  It is independent of the European Union , though the 2007 European Space Policy provides a framework for coordination between the two organizations and member states, including issues such as security and defence, access to space, space science, and space exploration.

[ 30 ] The ESA was founded to serve as a counterweight to the dominant United States and Soviet space programs, and further the economic and military independence of Europe.  This has included the development of the Ariane rockets , which by 1985 had captured over 40 percent of commercial launch market in the free world.  The ESA budget is split between mandatory and voluntary programs, the latter of which allow individual member nations to pursue their own national space goals within the organization.

[ 31 ] The ESA Director General's Proposal for the European Space Policy states, "Space systems are strategic assets demonstrating independence and the readiness to assume global responsibilities. Initially developed as defence or scientific projects, they now also provide commercial infrastructures on which important sectors of the economy depend and which are relevant in the daily life of citizens....  Europe needs an effective space policy to enable it to exert global leadership in selected policy areas in accordance with European interests and values." [ 32 ] In the final part of 2010s the ESA has made strong efforts in order to make Europe stronger in the competition for the development of new strategies regarding space policy. Those included a huge increase in ESA's budget promoted by countries such as Italy , France and Germany .

[ 33 ] China [ edit ] See also: Chinese space program Although Chairman Mao Zedong planned after Russia's Sputnik 1 launch to place a Chinese satellite in orbit by 1959 to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China (PRC), [ 34 ] China did not successfully launch its first satellite until 24 April 1970. Mao and Zhou Enlai decided on 14 July 1967 that the PRC should not be left behind, and started China's own human spaceflight program.

[ 35 ] The first success came on 15 October 2003 when China sent its first astronaut into space for 21 hours aboard Shenzhou 5 .

The Ministry of Aerospace Industry was responsible for the Chinese space program prior to July 1999, when it was split into the China National Space Administration responsible for setting policy, and the state-owned China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation , responsible for implementation.

The China National Space Administration states its aims as maintaining the country's overall development strategy, making innovations in an independent and self-reliant manner, promoting the country's science and technology sector and encouraging economic and social development, and actively engaging in international cooperation.

[ 36 ] Russia and Ukraine [ edit ] Russia inherited its space programs in 1991 from its predecessor state, the Soviet Union. Russia's civilian space agency is the Russian Federal Space Agency and its military counterpart is the Russian Aerospace Defence Forces .

Ukraine 's agency is the State Space Agency of Ukraine , which handles both civilian and military programs.

The Soviet Union became the world's first spacefaring state by launching its first satellite, Sputnik 1 , on 4 October 1957. The Soviet space program was active from 1955 until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.

In the 1980s the Soviet Union was considered to be technologically behind the United States, but it outspent the United States in its space budget, and its cosmonauts had spent three times as many days in space as American astronauts. The Soviet Union had also been more willing than the United States to embark on long-term programs, such as the Salyut and Mir space station programs, and increased their investment in space programs throughout the 1970s and 1980s.

[ 37 ] After the dissolution of the Soviet Union , the 1990s saw serious financial problems because of the decreased cash flow, which encouraged Roskosmos to improvise and seek other ways to keep space programs running. This resulted in Roskosmos ' leading role in commercial satellite launches and space tourism . While scientific missions, such as interplanetary probes or astronomy missions during these years played a very small role, although Roskosmos has connections with Russian aerospace forces, its budget is not part of the defense budget of the country, Roskosmos managed to operate the space station Mir well past its planned lifespan, contribute to the International Space Station , and continue to fly additional Soyuz and Progress missions.

[ 38 ] The Russian economy boomed throughout 2005 from high prices for exports, such as oil and gas, and the outlook for subsequent funding became more favorable. The federal space budget for the year 2009 was left unchanged despite the global economic crisis, standing at around 82 billion rubles ($2.4 billion). Current priorities of the Russian space program include the new Angara rocket family and development of new communications, navigation and remote Earth sensing spacecraft. The GLONASS global navigation satellite system has for many years been one of the top priorities and has been given its own budget line in the federal space budget.

[ citation needed ] India [ edit ] See also: Indian Space Research Organisation The purpose of India's space program was outlined [ when?

] by Vikram Sarabhai (regarded as the father of the Indian space program): [ 39 ] There are some who question the relevance of space activities in a developing nation. To us, there is no ambiguity of purpose....we are convinced that if we are to play a meaningful role nationally, and in the community of nations, we must be second to none in the application of advanced technologies to the real problems of man and society.

The Department of Space (DoS) is the Indian government department responsible for administration of the Indian space program. It manages several agencies and institutes related to space exploration and space technologies. The Indian space program under the DoS aims to promote the development and application of space science and technology for the socio-economic benefit of the country. It includes two major satellite systems, INSAT for communication, television broadcasting and meteorological services, and Indian Remote Sensing Satellites (IRS) system for resources monitoring and management. It has also developed two satellite launch vehicles, Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV), to place IRS and INSAT class satellites in orbit.

See also [ edit ] Spaceflight portal Chinese exclusion policy of NASA Citizens' Advisory Council on National Space Policy Politics of outer space Space advocacy Space Generation Advisory Council Space law Space Race References [ edit ] ^ Goldman, Nathan C. (1992).

Space Policy:An Introduction . Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press. p. vii.

ISBN 0-8138-1024-8 .

^ a b "Space Law Treaties and Principles" .

www.unoosa.org . Retrieved 5 October 2021 .

^ a b c "UNODA Treaty Database: Partial Test Ban Treaty" .

United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs . Retrieved 15 July 2021 .

^ "Space Treaty Implementation" .

www.unoosa.org . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ "Limited Test Ban Treaty (LTBT)" .

U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 20 October 2021 .

^ "The Partial Test Ban Treaty: 50 Years Later" .

All Things Nuclear . 10 October 2013 . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ "The Outer Space Treaty" .

www.unoosa.org . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ "Who Owns the Geostationary Orbit?" . 27 September 2011. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 26 October 2021 .

^ "Space policy is finally moving into the 21st century" .

MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ Ayala, Christine (8 October 2021).

"Is conflict in space inevitable?" .

TheHill . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ "Rescue Agreement" .

www.unoosa.org . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ David, Leonard (15 September 2021).

"Humanity needs a space-rescue capability, report stresses" .

Space.com . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ "Liability Convention" .

www.unoosa.org . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ Tan, Huileng.

"SpaceX satellites nearly collided with China's space station twice this year, sparking online criticism of Elon Musk's 'space junk' " .

Business Insider . Retrieved 9 February 2022 .

^ "Perspective | If a satellite falls on your house, space law protects you — but there are no legal penalties for leaving junk in orbit" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ "Registration Convention" .

www.unoosa.org . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ "Moon Agreement" .

www.unoosa.org . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ "Institutional Framework for the Province of all Mankind: Lessons from the International Seabed Authority for the Governance of Commercial Space Mining.] Jonathan Sydney Koch. "Institutional Framework for the Province of all Mankind: Lessons from the International Seabed Authority for the Governance of Commercial Space Mining." Astropolitics , 16:1, 1-27, 2008.

doi : 10.1080/14777622.2017.1381824 ^ "The Space Review: Beyond UNISPACE: It's time for the Moon Treaty (page 1)" .

www.thespacereview.com . Retrieved 26 October 2021 .

^ Goldman, pp.79–83.

^ National Aeronautics and Space Act (1958), Sec. 102(b).

^ Goldman, pp. 91–97.

^ Goldman, Nathan C. (1992).

Space Policy:An Introduction . Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press. pp.

79– 83.

ISBN 0-8138-1024-8 .

^ Goldman, pp. 107–112.

^ a b Goldman, pp. 84–90.

^ Connolly, John F. (October 2006).

"Constellation Program Overview" (PDF) . Constellation Program Office . Retrieved 6 July 2009 .

^ "Fact Sheet: The National Space Policy" .

whitehouse.gov . 28 June 2010.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2017 . Retrieved 20 December 2015 – via National Archives .

^ Cecil D. Haney, “Statement before the Senate Committee on Armed Services,” February 27, 2014 ^ Vedda, James.

Space Leadership in Transition , November 2019 ^ "European Space Policy" . European Space Agency . Retrieved 1 February 2011 .

^ Goldman, pp. 34–36.

^ "Resolution on the European Space Policy: ESA Director General's Proposal for the European Space Policy" (PDF) . European Space Agency. p. 21 . Retrieved 1 February 2011 .

^ Andrea Muratore, Icaro nel XXI secolo , Osservatorio Globalizzazione, 29 February 2020 ^ "赵九章与中国卫星" .

中国科学院 . 16 October 2007. Archived from the original on 14 March 2008 . Retrieved 3 July 2008 .

^ "首批航天员19人胜出 为后来积累了宝贵的经验" . 雷霆万钧. 16 September 2005. Archived from the original on 22 December 2005 . Retrieved 24 July 2008 .

^ "China's Space Activities in 2006" . Information Office of China's State Council. Archived from the original on 2 April 2011 . Retrieved 1 February 2011 .

^ Goldman, pp. 38–42.

^ Harvey, Brian (2007). "The design bureaus".

The Rebirth of the Russian Space Program (1st ed.). Germany: Springer.

ISBN 978-0-387-71354-0 .

^ "Dr. Vikram Ambalal Sarabhai (1963–1971) – ISRO" .

www.isro.gov.in . Retrieved 29 January 2019 .

External links [ edit ] European Space Policy Institute Space Policy – Academic Journal Space Policy Resource Websites Center for Space Policy and Strategy at The Aerospace Corporation US Space Policy Archive – collected by the Center for Space Policy and Strategy Space Security Portal at the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research Space Policy - Outer Space Policy, Politics and Law – Blog by Dr Jill Stuart v t e Politics of outer space Spacefaring nations Space policy Space traffic management Space debris management Space Debris Working Group Space Debris Committee Planetary protection principle Post-detection policy Asteroid impact Prediction Avoidance Spaceguard The Spaceguard Foundation Space races Cold War Space Race Sputnik crisis Timeline Billionaire space race Mars race Records Space propaganda Space competition Chinese space program Two Bombs, One Satellite doctrine (1966–1976) Shuguang program (1966–1972) Chinese ASAT program (1964–) 2007 test Project 921 (1992–) Shenzhou program Tiangong program Space station Chinese Lunar Exploration Program (2003–) Mars and beyond Planetary Exploration of China (2016–) MARS-500 study ESA Science Programme European Launcher Development Organisation (1960–1975) Europa launcher programme (1962–1973) European Space Research Organisation (1964–1975) European Space Agency (1975–) EU/ESA Space Council European Cooperation for Space Standardization European Space Research and Technology Centre Concurrent Design Facility European Astronaut Centre ESA Centre for Earth Observation Living Planet Programme European Centre for Space Applications and Telecommunications European Data Relay System Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility (1983–2010) European Space Astronomy Centre (2005–) European Space Security and Education Centre European Space Operations Centre ESTRACK network Guiana Space Centre Ariane launcher programme (1973–) Vega launcher programme (1998–) European Space Policy Institute Space Situational Awareness Programme Future Launchers Preparatory Programme Intermediate eXperimental Vehicle PRIDE Space Rider ESA Television Mars and beyond Mars Exploration Joint Initiative MARS-500 study Aurora programme ExoMars Horizon 2000 (1985–1995) SOHO Cassini–Huygens Huygens Cluster Cluster II XMM- Newton Rosetta INTEGRAL Herschel Planck Horizon 2000 Plus (1995–2015) ISS programme Politics Gaia LISA Pathfinder BepiColombo Cosmic Vision (2015–2025) Solar Orbiter Euclid ARIEL EnVision CHEOPS JUICE ATHENA LISA Comet Interceptor SMILE EU Space Programme Western European Union Satellite Centre (1992–2002) EU Satellite Centre (2002–) EU/ESA Space Council EU Commission DG Defence Industry and Space European GNSS Supervisory Authority (2004–2010) European GNSS Agency (2010–2021) EU Agency for the Space Programme (2021–) Galileo programme Copernicus programme EGNOS programme EUSST programme Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications European Union Aviation Safety Agency European Network of Civil Aviation Safety Investigation Authorities European Defence Agency Europe by Satellite Other European initiatives and bodies AeroSpace and Defence Industries Association of Europe Eurospace Eurocontrol Council of Europe Council of European Aerospace Societies European Broadcasting Union European Civil Aviation Conference European Committee for Standardization / European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations European Telecommunications Standards Institute European Organisation for Civil Aviation Equipment European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites European Patent Organisation European Patent Office European Telecommunications Satellite Organization European Southern Observatory Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Indian space policy Department of Space Indian Human Spaceflight Programme Space Activities Bill Indian ASAT programme Mission Shakti British space programme Creation of the British National Committee for Space Research (1958) Start of the Ariel programme (1962) Black Arrow launcher (1964–1971) Creation of the British National Space Centre (1985) Outer Space Act 1986 Project Juno (1991) Space Innovation and Growth Team (2009–2010) Creation of the UK Space Agency (2010) Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 Space Industry Act 2018 UK Global Navigation Satellite System (2018–2020) 2021 Integrated Review Defence in a Competitive Age US space policy Truman space policy Operation Paperclip list of scientists Aerobee rocket program RAND Establishment of Cape Canaveral Eisenhower space policy WS-117L Project Vanguard Sputnik crisis Introduction to Outer Space 1958 NASA Act Space Act Agreement Cancellation of Man in Space Soonest Launch of Project Mercury Missile gap Launch of X-15 program Kennedy space policy Launch of the Mariner program Launch of the Gemini project Launch of the Apollo program " We choose to go to the Moon " Johnson space policy 1967 Outer Space Treaty Nixon space policy Moon landing Extra-Terrestrial Exposure Law Launch of the Space Shuttle Program Skylab Ford space policy Apollo–Soyuz Launch of the Viking program Carter space policy Reagan space policy Citizens' Advisory Council Strategy of Technology doctrine Strategic Defense Initiative Space Station Freedom proposal 1984 Space Act 1985 anti-satellite missile test Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Rogers Report Ride Report George H. W. Bush space policy Space Exploration Initiative 1990 Augustine Committee Hubble Space Telescope National Space Council Clinton space policy Faster, better, cheaper Gore–Chernomyrdin Commission ISS Shuttle–Mir program ISS programme Politics Launch of the Mars Exploration Program 1998 Space Act Decadal Planning Team Launch of the X-37 program George W. Bush space policy Aerospace Industry Commission 2002 National missile defense directive Space Shuttle Columbia disaster Vision for Space Exploration Aldridge Commission ESAS 2005 NASA Act Launch of the Constellation program Operation Burnt Frost Obama space policy 2009 Augustine Committee Kennedy Space Center speech Cancellation of the Constellation program Launch of the Space Launch System program Redesign of the Orion program Flexible path Mars Exploration Joint Initiative 2010 NASA Act Title 51 Space Shuttle retirement Development of the Commercial Crew Program 2014 NASA Act 2015 Space Act Trump space policy Re-establishment of the National Space Council Creation of the Space Force Launch of the Artemis program Launch of the Lunar Gateway project Executive Order 13959 China exclusion policy of NASA International Traffic in Arms Regulations Full-spectrum dominance doctrine Budget of NASA House Committee on Space NESDIS Office of Space Commerce FCC FAA/AST NRO IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Society Antennas & Propagation Society Broadcast Technology Society Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society Vehicular Technology Society USSR and Russia Soviet space program Stalin Operation Osoaviakhim (1946) list of scientists Khrushchev Sputnik program Sputnik crisis (1957) Vostok program (1960–1963) Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (1960–1982) Soviet crewed lunar programs (1961–1976) Voskhod program (1964–1966) Brezhnev Soyuz program (1967–) Interkosmos (1967–1991) Salyut program (1971–1986) Almaz (1973–1977) Buran program (1974–1993) Apollo–Soyuz (1975) Gorbachev Mir (1986–2001) Roscosmos Yeltsin Gore–Chernomyrdin Commission ISS (1993–) Shuttle–Mir program ISS programme Politics Medvedev Medvedev modernisation programme 2010 Military doctrine Putin United Rocket and Space Corporation (2013–2015) 2014 Military doctrine 2015 Creation of Roscosmos Mars MARS-500 study ExoMars Other policies Australian space program Brazilian space program Emirati space program Japanese space program Kazakh space program Kenyan space program Lebanese space program North Korean space program Pakistani space program Space programme 2040 Philippine space program South Korean space program Ugandan space initiatives International Space Station programme Politics of the International Space Station United Nations International Civil Aviation Organization ITU-R Office for Outer Space Affairs UN-SPIDER Space Generation Advisory Council Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space General Assembly Fourth Committee Other intergovernmental or inter-agency bodies African Space Agency Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Committee on Space Research International Planetary Data Alliance International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Group on Earth Observations Global Standards Collaboration Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee International Charter 'Space and Major Disasters' International Mobile Satellite Organization International Space Exploration Coordination Group International Space Station Multilateral Coordination Board International Telecommunications Satellite Organization Intersputnik Orbital Debris Co-ordination Working Group Regional African Satellite Communication Organization Arab Satellite Communications Organization Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization Space law Partial Test Ban Treaty (1963) Outer Space Treaty (1967) Rescue Agreement (1968) Space Liability Convention (1972) US-USSR Cooperation Agreement (1972) Satellite Convention (1974) Registration Convention (1975) Bogota Declaration (1976) Moon Treaty (1979) Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space (1981) International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Agreement (1988) International Space Station Intergovernmental Agreement (1998) International Docking System Standard International Charter 'Space and Major Disasters' (1999) Cape Town Treaty, Space Assets protocol (2012) Artemis Accords (2020) Space jurisdiction Common heritage of mankind Extraterrestrial real estate Astronomical naming conventions ITU Radio Regulations CCSDS standards ODCWG standards CEOS standards COSPAR standards International Designator IPDA standards GSC standards GEO standards ISECG standards Various conventions, treaties, agreements, memorandums, charters or declarations establishing and governing intergovernmental organisations or inter-agency bodies dealing with space affairs Commercial use Space industry India Russia United Kingdom United States Private spaceflight Launch market competition Space tourism Space advertising Space technology Space-based economy Space trade Space manufacturing Lunar resources Project Harvest Moon Asteroid mining Militarisation Space forces, units and formations Space forces Australia Brazil Canada China Colombia France Germany Iran AJA IRGC Israel Japan Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Pakistan Russia South Korea Spain Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States History Structure Vietnam Ranks and insignia Space commands France India Italy NATO NORAD United Kingdom United States Space warfare Space domain awareness Space weapon Anti-satellite weapon China India Russia United States Kinetic bombardment Kill vehicle Missile defense Military satellite Reconnaissance satellite Spaceplane Satellite jamming Space advocacy Air & Space Forces Association Alliance for Space Development National Space Society Space Frontier Foundation Mars Society Moon Society Students for the Exploration and Development of Space Arthur C. Clarke Institute for Modern Technologies British Interplanetary Society Coalition for Deep Space Exploration International Academy of Astronautics International Astronautical Federation International Astronomical Union Lunar Explorers Society Space Exploration Alliance Space Fellowship Space Force Association Space Foundation The Planetary Society v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation v t e Spaceflight General Astrodynamics History Timeline Space Race Records Accidents and incidents Space launch Space policy Australia China European Space Agency European Union India Japan North Korea South Korea Russia Soviet Union United States Space law Outer Space Treaty Rescue Agreement Space Liability Convention Registration Convention Moon Treaty Space warfare Space command Space force Militarisation of space Private spaceflight Billionaire space race Applications Astronomy Earth observation Archaeology Imagery and mapping Reconnaissance Weather and environment monitoring Communications satellite Internet Radio Telephone Television Satellite navigation Commercial use of space Space launch market competition Space architecture Space exploration Space research Space technology Space weather Human spaceflight General Astronaut commercial Life-support system Animals in space Bioastronautics Space suit Extravehicular activity Overview effect Weightlessness Space toilet Space tourism Space colonization Space diving Programs Vostok Mercury Voskhod Gemini Soyuz Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz Space Shuttle Mir Shuttle–Mir International Space Station Shenzhou Tiangong New Shepard Artemis Health issues Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space adaptation syndrome Health threat from cosmic rays Space psychology Psychological and sociological effects Space and survival Space medicine Space nursing Space sexology Spacecraft Launch vehicle Rocket Space capsule Orbital module Reentry capsule Service module Spaceplane Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Lander Rover Self-replicating spacecraft Space telescope Spacecraft propulsion Rocket engine Electric propulsion Solar sail Gravity assist Destinations Sub-orbital Orbital Geocentric Geosynchronous Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic Space launch Direct ascent Escape velocity Expendable and reusable launch systems Launch pad Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceport Ground segment Flight controller Ground station Pass Mission control center Category Portal v t e Public policy Fields Agricultural Climate change Cultural Domestic Drug reform Economic Fiscal Incomes Industrial Investment Monetary Tax Trade Education Energy Nuclear energy Renewable energy Environmental Food Foreign Health Pharmaceutical Vaccination Housing Immigration Knowledge Language Military Science Stem cell Space Technology Social Other topics Evidence-based policy Public administration Public budgeting Public policy doctrine Public policy school Policy analysis Policy studies Regulation Youth services Public policy by country Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4fjrf
Cached time: 20250817172756
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.059 seconds
Real time usage: 1.386 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15072/1000000
Revision size: 34095/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 442197/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18314/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 62/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 145613/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.464/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23239873/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1010.082      1 -total
 75.30%  760.560     15 Template:Navbox
 48.63%  491.245      1 Template:Politics_of_outer_space
 23.05%  232.834      1 Template:Reflist
 19.20%  193.982      1 Template:Public-sector_space_agencies
 15.56%  157.197    105 Template:Flag_decoration
 11.09%  111.990     24 Template:Cite_web
 10.36%  104.614     32 Template:Flag_icon
  9.65%   97.496      2 Template:Lang
  8.23%   83.114      3 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14431561:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817172756 and revision id 1263025647. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_policy&oldid=1263025647 " Categories : Astropolitics Space policy Politics of science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2019 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from January 2019 Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 14 December 2024, at 07:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space policy 5 languages Add topic

