Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Early life and education 2 Pastoral career Toggle Pastoral career subsection 2.1 Philadelphia during the Civil War 2.2 Trinity Church, Boston 2.3 Preaching 2.4 Bishop of Massachusetts 3 Death 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Publications 4.2 Influence 4.3 Awards and Monuments 5 Notes 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Phillips Brooks 10 languages العربية Deutsch Français 한국어 مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American clergyman and author For other people named Phillip Brooks, see Phil Brooks .

The Right Reverend Phillips Brooks D.D.

Bishop of Massachusetts Church Episcopal Church Diocese Massachusetts Elected April 30, 1891 Installed October 14, 1891 Term ended January 23, 1893 Predecessor Benjamin Henry Paddock Successor William Lawrence Previous post(s) Rector, Trinity Church, Boston (1869–1891) Rector, Church of the Holy Trinity, Philadelphia (1862–1869) Rector, Church of the Advent, Philadelphia (1860–1862) Orders Ordination May 27, 1860 by Alonzo Potter Consecration October 14, 1891 by John Williams Personal details Born ( 1835-12-13 ) December 13, 1835 Boston , Massachusetts , United States Died January 23, 1893 (1893-01-23) (aged 57) Boston , Massachusetts , United States Buried Mount Auburn Cemetery Nationality American Denomination Anglican Parents William Gray Brooks & Mary Ann Phillips Signature Sainthood Feast day 23 January Venerated in Episcopal Church Phillips Brooks (December 13, 1835 – January 23, 1893) was an American Episcopal clergyman and author, long the Rector of Boston's Trinity Church and briefly Bishop of Massachusetts . One of the most popular preachers of the Gilded Age , he worked to make the Christian Church more relevant to contemporaries.

[ 1 ] Among his other accomplishments, he wrote the lyrics of the Christmas hymn, " O Little Town of Bethlehem ".

He is honored on the Episcopal Church liturgical calendar on January 23 .

[ 2 ] In addition to his moral stature, he was a man of great physical height, standing six feet four inches (1.93 m) tall.

Background [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Brooks was born on December 13, 1835, in Boston to William Gray Brooks and Mary Ann Phillips Brooks. His father, a Unitarian from a solid, middle-class background, started his career as a hardware and dry goods merchant. His mother was from an orthodox Congregational family. Her father was John Phillips (1776-1820), one of the founders of Andover Theological Seminary .

[ 1 ] Rejecting the arid Unitarianism of New England, Mary Ann Brooks determined that the family would join St. Paul's Episcopal Church on Tremont St. in Boston.

[ 1 ] Three of Phillips Brooks' five brothers – Frederic, Arthur, and John Cotton – were eventually ordained in the Episcopal Church .

Phillips Brooks attended Boston Latin School , where he excelled in classical languages, followed by Harvard University . Here, he encountered literary Romanticism , the sermons of Henry Ward Beecher , and the poetry of Samuel Taylor Coleridge . He was elected to the A.D. Club and graduated in 1855 at the age of twenty.

After graduation, he took a post at Boston Latin where he lasted only six months before being fired. He felt that he had failed miserably. He wrote, "I do not know what will become of me and I do not care much.... I wish I were fifteen years old again. I believe I might become a stunning man: but somehow or other I do not seem in the way to come to much now." [ 3 ] Brooks chose to enter the ministry. In 1856, he began to study for ordination in the Episcopal Church in the Virginia Theological Seminary at Alexandria , Virginia . He struggled with what he perceived as anti-intellectualism of his fellow students but managed to complete his training.

[ 1 ] While a seminarian there, he preached at Sharon Chapel (now All Saints Episcopal Church, Sharon Chapel) in nearby Fairfax County .

Pastoral career [ edit ] Philadelphia during the Civil War [ edit ] Statue by Augustus Saint-Gaudens , Trinity Church, Boston, dedicated 1910 Memorial to Phillips Brooks in Trinity Church, Boston In 1859, Brooks graduated from Virginia Theological Seminary , was ordained deacon by Bishop William Meade of Virginia, and became rector of the Church of the Advent in Philadelphia . In 1860, he was ordained priest, and in 1862, became rector of the Church of the Holy Trinity, Philadelphia , where he remained seven years, gaining an increasing name as a Broad churchman , [ 4 ] preacher, and patriot.

During the American Civil War he upheld the cause of the North and opposed slavery, and his sermon on the death of Abraham Lincoln was an eloquent expression of the character of both men. His sermon at Harvard's commemoration of the Civil War dead in 1865 likewise attracted attention nationwide.

[ 4 ] Trinity Church, Boston [ edit ] In 1869, Brooks accepted the call to serve as rector of Trinity Church, Boston ; today, his statue is located on the left exterior of the church.

Brooks' ambition was to help build a new kind of Protestantism that incorporated insights drawn from the Romantic and liberal theology of the nineteenth century, particularly its celebration of subjective individual experience. To this end, he worked to create a physical manifestation of that message in stone and mortar.

[ 1 ] In the 1870s, Brooks became intimately involved in the design and construction of the new Trinity Church on Copley Square in the Back Bay . Architect Henry Hobson Richardson drew on Romanesque architectural language to create an architectural masterpiece. The interior was richly decorated with murals by John LaFarge and stained glass windows by William Morris and Edward Burne-Jones . A repudiation of the cool, classical aesthetic of New England Protestantism, the church was designed to evoke religious sensibilities in the congregation. Van Wyck Brooks wrote that the new church represented "the break of the Boston mind with its Puritan past." [ 5 ] The interior marked a deliberate return to early Christian liturgical principles and symbolism. Among the building's notable features was a freestanding liturgical altar. This allowed the celebrant to face the congregation during the Eucharist, emphasizing the communal nature of the sacrament rather than the priest acting as intermediary between God and people. The church also had a synthronon , a semicircular seating arrangement for priests around the apse that directly mirrors early Christian basilicas. Theologically, it represents the collegiality of the priesthood, the idea that ministry is shared among clergy rather than concentrated in a single hierarchical figure. With no choir stalls blocking sight lines, the entire assembly could participate more fully in the liturgy.

[ 6 ] These interior features were inspired by St. George's Episcopal Church (Manhattan) .

[ 7 ] Until 1888, Trinity Church had no pulpit. Brooks preferred to preach his legendary sermons from a modest lectern near the rector's stall on the south side of the chancel. By preaching from within the chancel rather than from a towering pulpit, Brooke embodied the Anglican via media between Catholic sacramentalism and the Protestant emphasis on preaching.

[ 6 ] Such was the magnificence of Trinity Church that historian Douglass Shand-Tucci called it "an American Hagia Sophia ." [ 8 ] Preaching [ edit ] P. Brooks, ca. 1875–1920. Cabinet Card Collection, Boston Public Library Brooks was a gifted preacher with broad appeal. His sermons drew crowds of people, some of whom had never been in an Episcopal Church before. He had no sensational manner, according to listeners, but simply presented the Gospel in his natural style. "There is nothing in his voice, bearing, or look," wrote one frustrated observer, "which can explain his almost unexampled popularity. For popular he is almost beyond precedent." [ 1 ] One source of his power as a speaker, according to historian Gillis J. Harp, was his ability to offer congregants an encounter with Christ through a mixture of scriptural truth and personality. Skilled at the use of metaphor to quicken religious sentiment, he was both preacher and poet.

[ 1 ] Brooks was neither a reformer nor a social conservative, but both groups drew inspiration from his words. Harp noted, "He understood his own ministerial role as primarily exhortative, an inspirational preacher to stir ups he soul, not agitate for social change." [ 1 ] Bishop of Massachusetts [ edit ] On April 30, 1891, Brooks was elected sixth Bishop of Massachusetts , despite opposition from conservative High Church Anglo-Catholics opposed to his theological liberalism.

[ 1 ] He was consecrated to that office in Trinity Church on October 14, 1891.

Brooks was for many years an overseer and preacher of Harvard University . In 1881, he declined an invitation to be the sole preacher to the university and professor of Christian ethics.

Death [ edit ] Brooks died suddenly in early 1893, at the age of fifty-seven, probably as a result of diphtheria complicated by a cold or flu . His episcopate lasted only 15 months.

[ 1 ] His death was a major event in the history of Boston. One observer reported: "They buried him like a king. Harvard students carried his body on their shoulders. All barriers of denomination were down. Roman Catholics and Unitarians felt that a great man had fallen in Israel." [ 9 ] Somewhat more critically, Harvard professor Charles Eliot Norton noted that Brooks seldom appeared to be troubled by religious doubt or concern about the declining influence of the clergy. "He was quite sincere, for religion was a matter of sentiment not of intelligence with him. His strong sense of right & wrong prevented his optimism from sapping his moral integrity, and from doing much harm to the easygoing public whom he served and pleased. The eulogies of him are sadly extravagant." [ 1 ] Legacy [ edit ] Publications [ edit ] Brooks left behind published lectures and sermons in an effort to bring Protestant Christianity to a wide audience of readers. In 1877, Brooks published a course of lectures upon preaching that he had delivered at the theological school of Yale University as an expression of his own experience. In 1879, the Bohlen Lectures on The Influence of Jesus came out. In 1878, he published his first volume of sermons, and from time to time issued other volumes, including Sermons Preached in English Churches (1883) and "The Candle of the Lord" and Other Sermons (1895).

Brooks was also famous and beloved for his collections of sermons, The Purpose and Use of Comfort , first published in 1878, which includes the title sermon as well as: "The Withheld Completions of Life," "The Conqueror from Edom," "Keeping the Faith," "The Soul's Refuge in God," "The Man with One Talent," "The Food of Man, "The Symbol and the Reality," "Is It I?", and others.

He wrote several hymns and carols, among them the Christmas carol " O Little Town of Bethlehem ".

[ 10 ] Influence [ edit ] Brooks did not marry or have children of his own, but he had great love for children. He met an eleven-year-old Helen Keller when she was at the Perkins Institute for the Blind. It is said that "she sat on Phillips Brooks' knee and learned that God is love." [ 11 ] Awards and Monuments [ edit ] Within his lifetime, Brooks received honorary degrees from Harvard (1877) and Columbia (1887), and the Doctor of Divinity degree by the University of Oxford , England (1885).

Phillips Brooks Statue on North Andover Common His close ties with Harvard University led to the creation of Phillips Brooks House in Harvard Yard , built seven years after his death. On January 23, 1900, it was dedicated to serve "the ideal of piety, charity, and hospitality". The Phillips Brooks House originally housed a Social Service Committee, which became the Phillips Brooks House Association in 1904. It ceased formal religious affiliation in the 1920s, but remains in operation as a student-run group of volunteer organizations. Brooks' theological alma mater, Virginia Theological Seminary, honors him with a statue outside its library.

[ 12 ] Plaque on rear base of Phillips Brooks Statue, North Andover Common A statue of Phillips Brooks stands on the North Andover, Massachusetts , Town Common, facing North Parish Church.

View of Phillips Brooks statue and North Parish on North Andover Common A private elementary school in Menlo Park, California – Phillips Brooks School – is named for him, as is Brooks School in his hometown of North Andover, Massachusetts, the latter founded by Endicott Peabody, who also founded the Groton School . The Brooks family founded a Brooks Memorial School in Cleveland, Ohio , in 1874 in memory of Phillips' brother, the Rev. Frederic Brooks, who died in an accident in Cambridge. That school was sponsored in part by John D. Rockefeller and operated under the Brooks name until 1891; it currently operates under the name of the Hathaway Brown School . John S. White, first headmaster of the school in Cleveland, also founded a Phillips Brooks School in Philadelphia in 1904 that operated there until 1919.

The Episcopal Church remembers Phillips Brooks annually on January 23, the anniversary of his death.

[ 2 ] He is buried in Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Harp, Gillis J. (2003).

Brahmin Prophet: Phillips Brooks and the Path of Liberal Protestantism . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 0-8476-9960-9 .

^ a b "Phillips Brooks, Bishop, 1893" .

The Episcopal Church . Retrieved July 19, 2022 .

^ Clyde E. Fant and William M. Pinson, Jr., Twenty Centuries of Great Preaching, Volume 6 (Waco, TX: Word, 1971), p. 114 ^ a b "Brooks, Phillips", in Concise Dictionary of American Biography (1964), New York:  Scribner's.

^ Tucci, Douglas Shand (1978).

Built in Boston: City and Suburb . Boston: New York Graphic Society. p. 47.

^ a b Shand-Tucci, Douglass.

"American Aristocracy: Gods of Copley Square-Centerpiece 6" .

Open Letters Monthly . Retrieved July 1, 2025 .

^ Curran, Kathleen (1999). "The Romanesque Revival, Mural Painting, and Protestant Patronage in America".

The Art Bulletin .

81 : 693– 722.

^ Shand-Tucci, Douglass (2005).

Ralph Adams Cram: An Architect's Four Quests . Boston: University of Massachusetts Press.

^ Mrs. Edward S. Drown, in The Witness , March 21, 1940 ^ Brooks, Phillip (1903).

Christmas Songs and Easter Carols . Boston: E.P. Dutton.

^ Henny, Nella Braddy (June 26, 1955).

"Helen Keller at 75: 'Tranquil and Unafraid' " .

New York Times . Retrieved July 1, 2025 .

^ "Friday, December 20, 2013" . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

^ "Phillips Brooks 1835–1893" . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved January 23, 2014 .

^ "Burial of Bishops Brooks and Dwenger" .

St. Louis Globe-Democrat . January 27, 1893. p. 4 . Retrieved November 18, 2022 – via Newspapers.com .

Bibliography [ edit ] Albright, Raymond W.

Focus on Infinity: A Life of Phillips Brooks.

New York: Macmillan, 1961.

Allen, Alexander V.G.

Phillips Brooks, Life and Letters.

2 vols. New York: Dutton, 1900.

Allen, Alexander V.G.

Phillips Brooks, 1835-1893.

New York: Dutton, 1907.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Brooks, Phillips ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Harp, Gillis J.

Brahmin Prophet: Phillips Brooks and the Path of Liberal Protestantism.

Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003.

External links [ edit ] Christianity portal Wikiquote has quotations related to Phillips Brooks .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Phillips Brooks Wikimedia Commons has media related to Phillips Brooks .

Texts and bibliography of works by and about Brooks Works by Phillips Brooks at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Phillips Brooks at the Internet Archive "The Light of the World and Other Sermons." (E. P. Dutton, 1904).

Works by Phillips Brooks at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Episcopal Church (USA) titles Preceded by Benjamin Henry Paddock 6th Bishop of Massachusetts 1891 – 1893 Succeeded by William Lawrence v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy 2 Australia Spain Netherlands Norway Korea Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz 2 Discography of American Historical Recordings People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phillips_Brooks&oldid=1300102557 " Categories : 1835 births 1893 deaths Abolitionists from Boston Anglican saints History of Christianity in the United States Clergy from Boston Harvard University alumni 19th-century Christian saints 19th-century American male writers Episcopal bishops of Massachusetts American people of English descent Phillips family (New England) Burials at Mount Auburn Cemetery Boston Latin School alumni Songwriters from Massachusetts Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees 19th-century American male musicians 19th-century Anglican theologians Deaths from diphtheria Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 08:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phillips Brooks 10 languages Add topic

