Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 1.1 Basal ganglia 1.2 Pseudoganglion 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ganglion 56 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ganglia ) Clusters of neurons in the peripheral nervous system This article is about neuron clusters. For other uses, see Ganglion (disambiguation) .

"Ganglia" redirects here. For other uses, see Ganglia (disambiguation) .

Ganglion Micrograph of a ganglion.

H&E stain .

Details System Nervous system Identifiers Latin ganglion MeSH D005724 TA98 A14.2.00.002 FMA 5884 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] A dorsal root ganglion (DRG) from a chicken embryo (around stage of day 7) after incubation overnight in NGF growth medium stained with anti-neurofilament antibody. Note the axons growing out of the ganglion.

A ganglion ( pl.

: ganglia ) is a group of neuron cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system . In the somatic nervous system , this includes dorsal root ganglia and trigeminal ganglia among a few others. In the autonomic nervous system , there are both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia which contain the cell bodies of postganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons respectively.

A pseudoganglion looks like a ganglion, but only has nerve fibers and has no nerve cell bodies.

Structure [ edit ] Ganglia are primarily made up of somata and dendritic structures , which are bundled or connected. Ganglia often interconnect with other ganglia to form a complex system of ganglia known as a plexus . Ganglia provide relay points and intermediary connections between different neurological structures in the body, such as the peripheral and central nervous systems.

Among vertebrates there are three major groups of ganglia: Dorsal root ganglia (also known as the spinal ganglia) contain the cell bodies of sensory (afferent) neurons .

Cranial nerve ganglia contain the cell bodies of cranial nerve neurons.

Autonomic ganglia contain the cell bodies of autonomic nerves.

In the autonomic nervous system, fibers from the central nervous system to the ganglia are known as preganglionic fibers , while those from the ganglia to the effector organ are called postganglionic fibers .

Basal ganglia [ edit ] The term "ganglion" refers to the peripheral nervous system .

[ 1 ] However, in the brain (part of the central nervous system ), the basal ganglia are a group of nuclei interconnected with the cerebral cortex , thalamus , and brainstem , associated with a variety of functions: motor control, cognition, emotions, and learning.

[ citation needed ] Partly due to this ambiguity, the Terminologia Anatomica recommends using the term 'basal nuclei' instead of 'basal ganglia'; however, this usage has not been generally adopted.

[ citation needed ] Pseudoganglion [ edit ] A pseudoganglion is a localized thickening of the main part or trunk of a nerve that has the appearance of a ganglion [ 2 ] but has only nerve fibers and no nerve cell bodies.

Pseudoganglia are found in the teres minor muscle [ 3 ] and radial nerve .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Sympathetic ganglion Ganglion cyst Nervous system Neuron Chiasm References [ edit ] ^ "Glossary G" .

UNSW Embryology . Archived from the original on 14 December 2007 . Retrieved 2008-01-13 .

^ "pseudoganglion" .

The Free Dictionary . Retrieved 19 December 2016 .

^ Gitlin, G. (Oct 1957).

"Concerning the gangliform enlargement (pseudoganglion) on the nerve to the teres minor muscle" .

Journal of Anatomy .

91 (4): 466– 70.

PMC 1244902 .

PMID 13475146 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Ganglia at Wikimedia Commons v t e Nervous tissue CNS Tissue Types Grey matter White matter Projection fibers Association fiber Commissural fiber Lemniscus Nerve tract Decussation Neuropil Meninges Cell Types Neuronal Pyramidal Purkinje Granule Von Economo Medium spiny Interneuron Glial Astrocyte Ependymal cells Tanycyte Oligodendrocyte progenitor cell Oligodendrocyte Microglia PNS General Dorsal Root Ganglion Ramus Ventral Root Ramus Ramus communicans Gray White Autonomic ganglion ( Preganglionic nerve fibers Postganglionic nerve fibers ) Nerve fascicle Funiculus Connective tissues Epineurium Perineurium Endoneurium Neuroglia Myelination : Schwann cell Neurilemma Myelin incisure Node of Ranvier Internodal segment Satellite glial cell Neurons / nerve fibers Parts Soma Axon hillock Axon Telodendron Axon terminals Axoplasm Axolemma Neurofibril/neurofilament Dendrite Nissl body Dendritic spine Apical dendrite / Basal dendrite Types Bipolar Unipolar Pseudounipolar Multipolar Interneuron Renshaw Afferent nerve fiber / Sensory neuron GSA GVA SSA SVA fibers Ia or Aα Ib or Golgi or Aα II or Aβ and Aγ III or Aδ or fast pain IV or C or slow pain Efferent nerve fiber / Motor neuron GSE GVE SVE Upper motor neuron Lower motor neuron α motorneuron β motorneuron γ motorneuron Termination Synapse Electrical synapse / Gap junction Chemical synapse Synaptic vesicle Active zone Postsynaptic density Autapse Ribbon synapse Neuromuscular junction Sensory receptors Meissner's corpuscle Merkel nerve ending Pacinian corpuscle Ruffini ending Muscle spindle Free nerve ending Nociceptor Olfactory receptor neuron Photoreceptor cell Hair cell Taste receptor Authority control databases National Czech Republic Other Terminologia Anatomica Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ganglion&oldid=1261745658 " Category : Neurohistology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 December 2024, at 19:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ganglion 56 languages Add topic

