Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Uses of the term 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Critical security studies 2 languages Français Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic discipline This article is about those theories that reject "traditional" security theories. For the critical school of security studies associated with Aberystwyth, see Welsh School (security studies) .

International relations theory Constructivism Feminist constructivism Liberalism Idealism Democratic peace theory Capitalist peace Republican liberalism Liberal institutionalism Marxism Dependency theory Theories of imperialism Uneven and combined development World-systems theory Realism Classical realism Neoclassical realism Neorealism Offensive realism Defensive realism Territorial peace theory Democratic peace theory Realpolitik Other theories Neo-Gramscianism Critical security studies Critical theory English School Intergovernmentalism ( liberal intergovernmentalism ) International political economy Feminism Green theory Hegemonic stability theory Copenhagen School Functionalism ( neofunctionalism ) Postmodernism Postcolonialism Intercommunalism Chinese school of international relations Classifications Postpositivism Rationalism Reflectivism " Great Debates " Inter-paradigm debate Other approaches International ethics Historical sociology Regime theory State cartel theory Geopolitics Scholars Michael Barnett Zbigniew Brzezinski Hedley Bull E. H. Carr Daniel Deudney Michael W. Doyle Cynthia Enloe James Fearon Martha Finnemore Robert Gilpin Samuel P. Huntington John Ikenberry Robert Jervis Peter J. Katzenstein Robert Keohane Henry Kissinger Stephen D. Krasner John Mearsheimer Hans Morgenthau Joseph Nye Kathryn Sikkink Susan Strange J. Ann Tickner Immanuel Wallerstein Stephen Walt Kenneth Waltz Alexander Wendt Yan Xuetong Qin Yaqing Categories International relations Politics portal v t e Critical security studies (CSS) is an academic discipline within security studies which draws on critical theory to revise and, at times, reject the narrow focus of mainstream approaches to security. Similarly to the case of critical international relations theory , critical security studies encompasses a wide range of theories including but not limited to: feminist , neo-Gramscian , Marxist , post-structuralist , postcolonial , and queer theory .

[ 1 ] Additionally, critical security studies, draws from a number of related disciplines such as sociology , anthropology , and criminology to find alternative routes to approach questions of security.

Definition [ edit ] Defining critical security studies can be difficult due to the wide range of theories involved, meaning that any single definition is likely to exclude works and scholars who would list themselves, or be listed by most scholars as part of the subfield.

[ 2 ] Due to this, most definitions of critical security studies focus on listing shared components rather than create a single definition. Browning and McDonald argue that critical security studies entails three main components: the first is a rejection of conventional (particularly realist ) approaches to security, rejecting or critiquing the theories, epistemology, and implications of realism, such as the total focus on the role of the state when approaching questions of security.

[ 3 ] The second is that of critically examining the meaning of security and the politics surrounding it, in particular the "function of representations or discourses of security in defining group identity, enabling particular policy or legitimating particular actors as security providers." [ 4 ] One such example of this is that of the Copenhagen School and their theory of securitization . The third component, is that of critically examining the ethics and approaches inherent to the study of security.

[ 5 ] More recent topics of concern include environmental and planetary , health , ontological , border or everyday security.

[ 6 ] Uses of the term [ edit ] The term "critical security studies" is most often used to refer to some variation of the above definition of critical security studies, as a subfield of security studies or a set of alternative paradigms within that field. However, it has also been used to refer to a specific strand of approaches within this subfield, which has as its most characteristic element a commitment to emancipatory theory that is not shared by other critical approaches to security.

[ 7 ] The authors representing this latter view, such as Ken Booth and Richard Wyn Jones , are usually referred to as the Aberystwyth or Welsh School to avoid ambiguity.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Politics portal Critical theory Critical international relations theory Copenhagen School (international relations) Welsh School (security studies) International political sociology Postmodernism (international relations) References [ edit ] ^ Browning, C. S., & McDonald, M. (2011). The future of critical security studies: Ethics and the politics of security.

European Journal of International Relations , 19 (2), 238 ^ The future of critical security studies, 236 ^ The future of critical security studies, 236 ^ The future of critical security studies, 236 ^ The future of critical security studies, 235 ^ Peoples, Vaughan-Williams (2021).

Critical security studies: An introduction (3rd ed.). New York: Routledge.

^ Williams, Paul (2005) 'Critical Security Studies' in International Society and Its Critics , A. Bellamy (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 135 ^ C.A.S.E. collective (2006). "Critical Approaches to Security in Europe. A Networked Manifesto".

Security Dialogue .

37 (4): 448.

^ Peoples, Vaughan-Williams (2021).

Critical security studies: An introduction (3rd ed.). New York: Routledge. p. 32.

Further reading [ edit ] Krause, K., & Williams, M. C. (1997).

Critical security studies: Concepts and strategies . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781857287332 Peoples, C., & Vaughan-Williams, N. (2021).

Critical security studies: An introduction (3rd edition). New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780367224257 Salter, M., & Mutlu, C. E. (eds.). (2013).

Research methods in critical security studies . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415535397 v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory v t e Security studies Approaches Realism Liberalism Constructivism (Copenhagen School) Peace and conflict studies Human security Critical security studies Welsh School Paris School ( International Political Sociology) Feminist security studies Third World Security School Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critical_security_studies&oldid=1265492420 " Categories : International relations theory Security studies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 December 2024, at 05:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critical security studies 2 languages Add topic

