Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organizations Toggle Organizations subsection 2.1 Harvard Votes Challenge 2.2 Harvard Public Opinion Project 2.3 Policy Program 2.4 Harvard Political Review 2.5 Senior Advisory Committee 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Institute of Politics 2 languages 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′17″N 71°07′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37145°N 71.12210°W ﻿ / 42.37145; -71.12210 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Harvard political science department Harvard Institute of Politics Established 1966 ; 59 years ago ( 1966 ) Mission To inspire students to consider careers in politics and public service.

Director Setti Warren Owner Harvard Kennedy School Address 79 John F. Kennedy St, Cambridge, Massachusetts , U.S.

Coordinates 42°22′17″N 71°07′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37145°N 71.12210°W ﻿ / 42.37145; -71.12210 Website Official website The Institute of Politics ( IOP ) is an institute of Harvard Kennedy School at Harvard University that was created to serve as a living memorial to President John F. Kennedy and to inspire Harvard undergraduates to consider careers in politics and public service.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] Harvard Institute of Politics at Harvard Kennedy School at Harvard University Following the assassination of President John F. Kennedy on November 22, 1963, the Kennedy Library Corporation raised more than $20 million for both the construction of the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston , and the creation and endowment of an institute at Harvard University dedicated to the study of politics and public affairs. More than 30 million people from around the world, including school children, contributed to the fund. In 1966, the Kennedy Library Corporation presented Harvard University with an endowment for the creation of the Institute of Politics.

[ 3 ] The IOP does not offer formal courses or degree-granting programs. IOP hosts the John F. Kennedy Jr. Forum, located at Harvard Kennedy School. The forum regularly hosts speeches, debates, and panel discussions.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Since its founding in 1978, the Forum has hosted more than 1,000 events, seen by live audiences totaling more than 650,000 people and millions more via cable television, teleconferencing, and the Internet. Originally known as the KSG Forum, it was renamed in 2002 in tribute to the president's son , who had served on the Institute of Politics' board of directors until his death in 1999. The forum was renovated in 2003.

[ 6 ] Organizations [ edit ] Harvard Votes Challenge [ edit ] In 2018, students at the IOP started the Harvard Votes Challenge (HVC) in collaboration with the Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation . The university-wide initiative "strives to build a civic culture at Harvard University by increasing voter registration and participation among students, staff, and faculty." [ 7 ] During the 2018 midterm election, HVC launched the first-ever Harvard-Yale Votes Challenge.

[ 8 ] HVC integrated voter engagement and registration into First-Year Orientation in 2019.

[ 9 ] For the 2020 election , 390 volunteers from all 12 degree-granting Harvard schools worked to mobilize voters during the COVID-19 pandemic . Organizers sent 94,297 text messages, distributed over 1700 stamps to students, and recruited 121 campus organizations to a pledge committing to 100% voter participation.

[ 10 ] Harvard Public Opinion Project [ edit ] Founded in 2000, the Harvard Public Opinion Project (HPOP) aims to track young Americans' (18- to 29-year-olds) attitudes toward politics and public service. Undergraduate members, in conjunction with the IOP's director of polling, John Della Volpe , conduct the largest national survey of the millennial generation. These form a tracking poll in the fall and a more comprehensive poll in the spring. After analyzing the data, the committee shares its findings in a nationally covered media release.

[ 11 ] Policy Program [ edit ] The Policy Program is an undergraduate-run think tank dedicated to developing policy recommendations. Participants collaborate on research projects that have contributed to the development of new legislation, the establishment of community programs, and the analysis of pressing issues affecting communities and states nationwide. Commissioners include individual senators, federal agencies such as the U.S. Department of Commerce , and international organizations such The Peace Corps .

[ 12 ] Harvard Political Review [ edit ] Main article: Harvard Political Review The IOP is also home to and publishes the Harvard Political Review (HPR), a quarterly, non-partisan journal of political affairs written, edited, and managed by Harvard College undergraduates.

[ 13 ] Senior Advisory Committee [ edit ] The following individuals make up the Senior Advisory Committee of the Institute of Politics: [ 14 ] Michael Nutter , Chair David Axelrod Charles Frank Bolden Jr.

LaTosha Brown Alex Burns Heather Campion Torie Clarke William D. Delahunt Joseph Kennedy III Susan Molinari Abby Phillip Olympia Snowe Michelle Wu See also [ edit ] Harvard University people Center for American Political Studies References [ edit ] ^ "Founding" .

Harvard Institute of Politics . Harvard University. n.d . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ "About Us" .

Harvard Institute of Politics . Harvard University. n.d . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ "History Overview." JFK Library , February 22, 2025.

^ Aguero, Edward. "Edwards Kicks Off 'Hardball' Series at IOP." The Harvard Crimson, October 14, 2003.

^ Kumar, Prateek. "IOP Panelists Simulate Oil Shock." The Harvard Crimson , April 29, 2008.

^ "KSG Forum to be renamed in honor of JFK Jr" .

Harvard Gazette . December 5, 2002 . Retrieved April 22, 2020 .

^ "Harvard Votes Challenge" .

voteschallenge.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2020-12-07 .

^ "Harvard Wins Harvard-Yale Votes Challenge | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2020-12-07 .

^ "Harvard Votes Challenge Targets Freshmen With Move-In Registration Program | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2020-12-07 .

^ Twitter https://twitter.com/harvardiop/status/1331630610662662149 . Retrieved 2020-12-07 .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ "Youth Poll" .

^ "The Policy Program | The Institute of Politics at Harvard University" .

iop.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-12-16 .

^ ISSN 0090-1032 ; OCLC 1784689 ^ "Senior Advisory Committee" .

Harvard Institute of Politics . Harvard University. n.d . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Harvard Institute of Politics website Google Cultural Institute: Harvard Institute of Politics v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Institute_of_Politics&oldid=1277472798 " Categories : Harvard Institute of Politics 1966 establishments in Massachusetts Educational institutions established in 1966 Harvard Kennedy School Harvard University research institutes Monuments and memorials to John F. Kennedy in the United States Public policy research Student political organizations in the United States Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 24 February 2025, at 21:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Institute of Politics 2 languages Add topic

