Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and connection to modern theories 2 Connection to logic 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Elimination theory 6 languages Ελληνικά Français 한국어 हिन्दी Română 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of algebraic geometry devoted to the elimination of variables between polynomials In commutative algebra and algebraic geometry , elimination theory is the classical name for algorithmic approaches to eliminating some variables between polynomials of several variables, in order to solve systems of polynomial equations .

Classical elimination theory culminated with the work of Francis Macaulay on multivariate resultants , as described in the chapter on Elimination theory in the first editions (1930) of Bartel van der Waerden 's Moderne Algebra . After that, elimination theory was ignored by most algebraic geometers for almost thirty years, until the introduction of new methods for solving polynomial equations, such as Gröbner bases , which were needed for computer algebra .

History and connection to modern theories [ edit ] The field of elimination theory was motivated by the need of methods for solving systems of polynomial equations .

One of the first results was Bézout's theorem , which bounds the number of solutions (in the case of two polynomials in two variables at Bézout time).

Except for Bézout's theorem, the general approach was to eliminate variables for reducing the problem to a single equation in one variable.

The case of linear equations was completely solved by Gaussian elimination , where the older method of Cramer's rule does not proceed by elimination, and works only when the number of equations equals the number of variables. In the 19th century, this was extended to linear Diophantine equations and abelian group with Hermite normal form and Smith normal form .

Before the 20th century, different types of eliminants were introduced, including resultants , and various kinds of discriminants . In general, these eliminants are also invariant under various changes of variables, and are also fundamental in invariant theory .

All these concepts are effective, in the sense that their definitions include a method of computation. Around 1890, David Hilbert introduced non-effective methods, and this was seen as a revolution, which led most algebraic geometers of the first half of the 20th century to try to "eliminate elimination". Nevertheless Hilbert's Nullstellensatz , may be considered to belong to elimination theory, as it asserts that a system of polynomial equations does not have any solution if and only if one may eliminate all unknowns to obtain the constant equation 1 = 0.

Elimination theory culminated with the work of Leopold Kronecker , and finally Macaulay , who introduced multivariate resultants and U-resultants , providing complete elimination methods for systems of polynomial equations, which are described in the chapter on Elimination theory in the first editions (1930) of van der Waerden's Moderne Algebra .

Later, elimination theory was considered old-fashioned and removed from subsequent editions of Moderne Algebra . It was generally ignored until the introduction of computers , and more specifically of computer algebra , which again made relevant the design of efficient elimination algorithms, rather than merely existence and structural results. The main methods for this renewal of elimination theory are Gröbner bases and cylindrical algebraic decomposition , introduced around 1970.

Connection to logic [ edit ] There is also a logical facet to elimination theory, as seen in the Boolean satisfiability problem . In the worst case, it is presumably hard to eliminate variables computationally.

Quantifier elimination is a term used in mathematical logic to explain that, in some theories, every formula is equivalent to a formula without quantifier. This is the case of the theory of polynomials over an algebraically closed field , where elimination theory may be viewed as the theory of the methods to make quantifier elimination algorithmically effective.

Quantifier elimination over the reals is another example, which is fundamental in computational algebraic geometry .

See also [ edit ] Buchberger's algorithm Faugère's F4 and F5 algorithms Resultant Triangular decomposition Main theorem of elimination theory References [ edit ] Israel Gelfand , Mikhail Kapranov, Andrey Zelevinsky , Discriminants, resultants, and multidimensional determinants . Mathematics: Theory & Applications. Birkhäuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 1994. x+523 pp.

ISBN 0-8176-3660-9 Lang, Serge (2002), Algebra , Graduate Texts in Mathematics , vol. 211 (Revised third ed.), New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-0-387-95385-4 , MR 1878556 David Cox, John  Little, Donal O'Shea, Using Algebraic Geometry . Revised second edition.

Graduate Texts in Mathematics , vol. 185.

Springer-Verlag , 2005, xii+558 pp., ISBN 978-0-387-20733-9 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elimination_theory&oldid=1198842809 " Categories : Algebraic geometry Computer algebra Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 January 2024, at 05:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elimination theory 6 languages Add topic

