Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Undue influence of intellectuals 2 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 2.1 Working with ideas 2.2 Lack of real accountability 2.3 Narrow and specialized knowledge 2.4 Intellectual climate of distortion and misinformation 2.5 Verbal virtuosity (rhetoric) versus evidence or logic 2.6 Ego-involvement and personalization 3 Reception 4 See also 5 References 6 Related reading Toggle the table of contents Intellectuals and Society Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2010 book by Thomas Sowell Intellectuals and Society Cover of the hardcover edition Author Thomas Sowell Language English Subjects Sociology, social philosophy Publisher Basic Books Publication date January 5, 2010 Publication place United States Media type Print eBook audiobook Pages 416 ISBN 0-465-01948-X Preceded by The Housing Boom and Bust Intellectuals and Society is a non-fiction book by Thomas Sowell .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The book was initially published on January 5, 2010, by Basic Books .

Intellectuals are defined as "idea workers" who exercise profound influence on policy makers and public opinion, but are often not directly accountable for the results.

Intellectuals and Society examines the record of these idea workers and the conditions, methods and incentives driving their points of view that, according to Sowell, have often resulted in disaster for societies where intellectuals have been allowed "undue influence".

Undue influence of intellectuals [ edit ] Sowell explained undue influence of intellectuals as follows: "Those whose careers are built on the creation and dissemination of ideas — the intellectuals — have played a role in many societies out of all proportion to their numbers. Whether that role has, on balance, made those around them better off or worse off is one of the key questions of our times.

The quick answer is that intellectuals have done both. But certainly, during the 20th century, it is hard to escape the conclusion that intellectuals have on balance made the world a worse and more dangerous place. Scarcely a mass-murdering dictator of the 20th century was without his supporters, admirers, or apologists among the leading intellectuals — not only within his own country, but in foreign democracies, where intellectuals were free to say whatever they wanted.

...intellectuals are people whose end products are intangible ideas, and they are usually judged by whether those ideas sound good to other intellectuals or resonate with the public. Whether their ideas turn out to work — whether they make life better or worse for others — is another question entirely." [ 3 ] Summary [ edit ] Sowell argues that intellectuals, whom he defines as people whose occupations deal primarily with ideas (writers, historians, academics, etc.), usually consider themselves as "anointed", or as endowed with superior intellect or insight with which to guide the masses and those who have authority over them. Sowell contends that several characteristics mark such intellectuals.

[ 4 ] Working with ideas [ edit ] An intellectual's work begins and ends with ideas, not the practical application of ideas to real world problems. These purveyors of ideas may be at all points of the political and ideological spectrum, although Sowell generally reserves his sharpest criticisms for those on the left. Certain common patterns in intellectuals, he argues, cut across specific political ideologies. He argues that intellectuals like to work outside the established power structures and apply what is presumed to be superior insight in order to control the resources and decision-making processes of the masses and their official leaders. For example, both National Socialism and Stalinism attempted to micro-manage the lives of their citizens; both implemented sweeping propaganda campaigns to reframe reality, and both resulted in leadership by an elite outside group.

[ 5 ] Lack of real accountability [ edit ] The work of intellectuals is ultimately not subject to external (real world) verifiability, as compared to those engaged in more practical pursuits with readily observable results. An intellectual, for example, can condemn a military operation for "excessive force" but has no accountability in regards to the actual outcome of that operation. By contrast, a military commander who fails to deploy sufficient force at the appropriate time can pay with his own life and that of his men. The acclaim given to intellectuals, despite their predictions having failed, is a prime example of the lack of ultimate accountability, Sowell maintains.

[ 6 ] Narrow and specialized knowledge [ edit ] Intellectuals usually have thorough knowledge in their areas of expertise. Outside these fields, however, they may be as uninformed as the average person. Too often, Sowell argues, this does not stop them from attempting to influence public opinion in areas where they are not fully qualified. Sowell lists several examples that he argues support his thesis.

[ 7 ] Intellectual climate of distortion and misinformation [ edit ] Sowell states that intellectuals often assume that their specialized knowledge qualifies them to guide others, as do experts in any field of endeavor, practical or otherwise. Sowell argues that what is crucial is their influence on the people who wield decision-making power. The presumption of insight often creates a climate that influences the way events are reported by the media, and may make politicians hesitant to take certain approaches to problem-solving. Before World War II, for example, British intellectuals played a large role in the process of creating the opposition to re-armament, which proved to be a deadly mistake.

[ 8 ] Verbal virtuosity (rhetoric) versus evidence or logic [ edit ] Sowell suggests that intellectuals rely heavily on what he calls "verbal virtuosity" (clever phrasing, vague euphemisms , witty quotes, deceptive labeling, name-calling and sneering asides) to substitute for evidence, logic and analysis. Other tactics of "verbal virtuosity" include dismissing opposing ideas as simplistic, portraying those making opposing arguments as morally unworthy, invoking "rights" which have no legal basis, vague calls for "change", reliance on the abstract versus the concrete, and a constant "filtering of reality".

[ 9 ] Ego-involvement and personalization [ edit ] The presumption of wisdom and/or virtue causes intellectuals to personalize situations where contending ideas are involved. This often results in: (a) the demonization of opponents, and (b) personal fulfillment serving as a substitute for debate and evidence. Sowell does not make it clear if intellectuals acquired these traits from politicians, or the other way around.

[ 10 ] Reception [ edit ] In 2010, American libertarian philosopher David Gordon wrote a positive review of the book for the Independent Institute . He states that Sowell has written an excellent book as a whole.

[ 11 ] In 2012, Aidan Byrne, from the School of Humanities at the University of Wolverhampton wrote a negative review of the book for LSE Review of Books . Unaware of Sowell's race, Byrne wrote within the review: "To him, slavery's cultural legacy means that it shouldn't be considered a moral problem, nor should amelioration be attempted: easy for a rich white man to say." [ 12 ] In 2020, Byrne's review was removed from the LSE Review of Books website with a message declaring that the review "did not meet the minimum standard for publication and has consequently been removed." [ 13 ] See also [ edit ] The Vision of the Anointed References [ edit ] ^ Sowell, Thomas (July 17, 2012).

"Why Aren't Race Riots News?" .

The National Review .

^ The Independent Institute ^ Sowell, T. "Intellectuals and Society" (January 5, 2010), National Review Online. Retrieved June 14, 2009 The National Review Archived 2010-07-01 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sowell, Intellectuals... pp. 4–116; 281–319 ^ Sowell, Intellectuals... pp. 75–157 ^ Sowell, Intellectuals... p. 4–31 ^ Sowell, Intellectuals... p. 13-50 ^ Sowell, Intellectuals... pp. 203–281 ^ Sowell, Intellectuals... pp. 10–241 ^ Sowell, Intellectuals... pp. 75–157 ^ Gordon, David (2010).

"Book Review | Intellectuals and Society, by Thomas Sowell" .

The Independent Institute . Retrieved 2022-06-09 .

^ "Book Review: Intellectuals and Society by Thomas Sowell" .

LSE . 26 May 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2017 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ "This book review of Thomas Sowell's Intellectuals and Society, originally published in 2012, has been removed" .

LSE Review of Books . 26 May 2012 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

Related reading [ edit ] Raymond Aron , The Opium of the Intellectuals , Transaction (2001) ISBN 0-7658-0700-9 Julien Benda , The Treason of the Intellectuals , Transaction (2006) ISBN 1-4128-0623-2 Edward W. Said , Representations of the Intellectual , Vintage (1996) ISBN 0-679-76127-6 Florian Znaniecki , The Social Role of the Man of Knowledge , Harper Torchbooks (1968) ISBN 0-06-131372-6 v t e Works by Thomas Sowell Race and Economics (1975) Knowledge and Decisions (1980) A Conflict of Visions (1987) Inside American Education (1993) The Vision of the Anointed (1995) Basic Economics (2000–2014) Applied Economics (2003; 2008) Affirmative Action Around the World (2004) Black Rednecks and White Liberals (2005) The Housing Boom and Bust (2009) Intellectuals and Society (2010) Wealth, Poverty and Politics (2015; 2016) Charter Schools and Their Enemies (2020) v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intellectuals_and_Society&oldid=1267037771 " Categories : 2010 non-fiction books Basic Books books Books by Thomas Sowell Contemporary philosophical literature English-language non-fiction books Social philosophy literature Works about intelligentsia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 3 January 2025, at 09:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intellectuals and Society Add languages Add topic

