Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Abstracting and indexing 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Monist 4 languages Deutsch Français Nederlands Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal The Monist Discipline Philosophy Language English Edited by Fraser MacBride, University of Manchester Publication details History 1890–1936; 1962–present Publisher Oxford University Press on behalf of the Hegeler Institute Frequency Quarterly Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Monist Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 0026-9662 (print) 2153-3601 (web) LCCN 08-22458 OCLC no.

1758549 Links Journal homepage Online archive The Monist: An International Quarterly Journal of General Philosophical Inquiry is a quarterly peer-reviewed academic journal in the field of philosophy . It was established in October 1890 by American publisher Edward C. Hegeler .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Initially the journal published papers not only by philosophers but also by prominent scientists and mathematicians such as Ernst Mach , David Hilbert , Henri Poincaré , Alfred Binet , Pierre Janet , Cesare Lombroso and Ernst Haeckel . The journal helped to professionalize philosophy as an academic discipline in the United States by publishing philosophers such as Charles Sanders Peirce , Ernst Cassirer , John Dewey , Gottlob Frege , Hans-Georg Gadamer , Sidney Hook , C. I. Lewis , Hilary Putnam , Willard Van Orman Quine , and Bertrand Russell . Russell's Philosophy of Logical Atomism was originally published in full as a series of articles in the journal in 1918–19.

After ceasing publication in 1936, the journal resumed publication in 1962 and has been continually published since then. Each issue contains papers on a single, pre-announced topic. A list of topics thus far is provided here .

The journal's editors-in-chief have included Paul Carus (1890–1919), Mary Hegeler Carus (1919–1936), Eugene Freeman (1962–1983), John Hospers (1983–1991), Barry Smith ( University at Buffalo , 1992-2016 ), Fraser MacBride ( University of Manchester , 2017–present). Since January 2015 the journal has been published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Hegeler Institute.

Abstracting and indexing [ edit ] The journal is abstracted and indexed: Academic Search Arts & Humanities Citation Index ATLA Religion Database Expanded Academic ASAP Factiva FRANCIS International Bibliography of Periodical Literature International Philosophical Bibliography Philosopher's Index Philosophy Research Index PhilPapers ProQuest 5000 VINITI Database RAS Scopus See also [ edit ] List of philosophy journals Mind References [ edit ] ^ Homans, James E., ed. (1918).

"Hegeler, Edward C." .

The Cyclopædia of American Biography . New York: The Press Association Compilers, Inc.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Philosophy journals General American Philosophical Quarterly Analysis Australasian Journal of Philosophy Canadian Journal of Philosophy Erkenntnis European Journal of Philosophy Journal of the American Philosophical Association The Journal of Philosophy Mind The Monist Noûs Pacific Philosophical Quarterly The Philosophical Quarterly The Philosophical Review Philosophical Studies Philosophy and Phenomenological Research Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Synthese Thought Moral , social , and political philosophy Ethics Journal of Moral Philosophy Journal of Social Ontology Journal of Social Philosophy International Journal of Applied Philosophy Philosophy & Public Affairs Res Publica The Journal of Ethics Philosophy of mind Journal of Consciousness Studies Mind & Language Logic Journal of Philosophical Logic Journal of Symbolic Logic Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy Philosophy of science British Journal for the Philosophy of Science Aesthetics British Journal of Aesthetics Rhetoric Philosophy & Rhetoric History of philosophy Ancient Philosophy Apeiron Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie British Journal for the History of Philosophy Dionysius Epoché History of Philosophy Quarterly Isis Journal of the History of Ideas Journal of the History of Philosophy Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy Phronesis Revista Española de Filosofía Medieval Feminist philosophy Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Public philosophy Philosophy Now The Philosophers' Magazine Think Philosophers Augustinian Studies Berkeley Studies Deleuze Studies Derrida Today Hegel-Studien Hegel Bulletin Heidegger Studies Hume Studies International Journal of Baudrillard Studies The Journal of Nietzsche Studies Kantian Review Kierkegaard Studies Yearbook The Leibniz Review New Nietzsche Studies New Vico Studies Sartre Studies International Categories and lists Category:Philosophy journals List of ethics journals List of philosophy journals Related The Philosopher's Index Philosophy Documentation Center PhilPapers Philosophy Research Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Monist&oldid=1297936499 " Categories : English-language journals Philosophy journals Quarterly journals Academic journals established in 1890 Contemporary philosophical literature Publications disestablished in 1936 Academic journals established in 1962 Philosophy Documentation Center academic journals Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Cyclopaedia of American Biography Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Quarterly journals (infobox) Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 13:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Monist 4 languages Add topic

