Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Atmospheric chemistry 2 Atmospheric dynamics 3 Atmospheric physics 4 Climatology 5 Aeronomy 6 Atmospheres on other celestial bodies 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Atmospheric science 38 languages العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu 日本語 پښتو Polski Português සිංහල Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Atmospheric sciences ) Study of the atmosphere, its processes, and its interactions with other systems Part of a series of Geophysics Computational Exploration History Outline Electricity Ionosphere Polar wind Thunderstorms Lightning Fluid dynamics Atmospheric science Magnetohydrodynamics Oceanography Turbulence Geodynamics Climate Earth's mantle Exoplanetology Geochemistry Glaciology Planetary science Plate tectonics Tectonics Volcanism Gravity Geodesy Geoid Physical geodesy Magnetism Earth's magnetic field Geomagnetic reversal Magnetosphere Paleomagnetism Solar wind Waves Seismology Spectroscopy Vibration Geophysicists Aki Alfven Anderson Benioff Bowie Dziewonski Forbes Eotvos Gilbert Gutenberg Heiskanen Hotine von Humboldt Jeffreys Kanamori Love Matthews McKenzie Mercalli Molodenskii Munk Press Richter Turcotte Van Allen Vanicek Vening Meinesz Wegener Wilson v t e Atmospheric sciences Atmospheric physics Atmospheric dynamics category Atmospheric chemistry category Meteorology Weather category portal Tropical cyclone category Climatology Climate category Climate variability and change Climate change category portal Aeronomy Aeronomy Glossaries Glossary of meteorology Glossary of tropical cyclone terms Glossary of tornado terms Glossary of climate change v t e Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e Atmospheric science is the study of the Earth's atmosphere and its various inner-working physical processes.

Meteorology includes atmospheric chemistry and atmospheric physics with a major focus on weather forecasting .

Climatology is the study of atmospheric conditions over timescales longer than those of weather , focusing on average climate conditions and their variability over time .

Aeronomy is the study of the upper layers of the atmosphere, where dissociation and ionization are important. Atmospheric science has been extended to the field of planetary science and the study of the atmospheres of the planets and natural satellites of the Solar System .

Experimental instruments used in atmospheric science include satellites , rocketsondes , radiosondes , weather balloons , radars , and lasers .

The term aerology (from Greek ἀήρ, aēr , " air "; and -λογία, -logia ) is sometimes used as an alternative term for the study of Earth's atmosphere; [ 1 ] in other definitions, aerology is restricted to the free atmosphere , the region above the planetary boundary layer .

[ 2 ] Early pioneers in the field include Léon Teisserenc de Bort and Richard Assmann .

[ 3 ] Atmospheric chemistry [ edit ] Main article: Atmospheric chemistry Composition diagram showing the evolution/cycles of various elements in Earth's atmosphere Atmospheric chemistry is a branch of atmospheric science in which the chemistry of the Earth's atmosphere and that of other planets is studied. It is a multidisciplinary field of research and draws on environmental chemistry, physics, meteorology, computer modeling, oceanography, geology and volcanology and other disciplines. Research is increasingly connected with other areas of study such as climatology.

The composition and chemistry of the atmosphere is of importance for several reasons, but primarily because of the interactions between the atmosphere and living organisms. The composition of the Earth's atmosphere has been changed by human activity and some of these changes are harmful to human health, crops and ecosystems. Examples of problems which have been addressed by atmospheric chemistry include acid rain, photochemical smog and global warming. Atmospheric chemistry seeks to understand the causes of these problems, and by obtaining a theoretical understanding of them, allow possible solutions to be tested and the effects of changes in government policy evaluated.

Atmospheric chemistry plays a major role in understanding the concentration of gases in our atmosphere that contribute to climate change . More specifically, when combined with atmospheric physics and biogeochemistry, it is useful in terms of studying the influence of greenhouse gases like CO 2 , N 2 O , and CH 4 , on Earth's radiative balance.

[ 4 ] According to UNEP, CO 2 emissions increased to a new record of 57.1 GtCO2e, up 1.3% from the previous year. Previous GHG emissions growth from 2010-2019 averaged only +0.8% yearly, illustrating the dramatic increase in global emissions. The Global Nitrous Oxide Budget cited that atmospheric N 2 O has increased by roughly 25% between 1750 and 2022, having the fasted annual growth rate in 2020 and 2021.

[ 5 ] Atmospheric chemistry is critical in understanding what contributes to our changing climate. The warming of our climate is caused when CO 2 emissions, constrained by biogeochemistry, are above a 0% increase. In order to stop temperatures from rising, there must be no CO 2 emissions. By understanding the chemical composition and emission rates in our atmosphere alongside economic factors, researchers are able to trace back emissions back to their sources. About 26% of the 2023 GtCO2e was used for power, 15% for transportation, 11% in industry, 11% in agriculture, etc.

[ 6 ] In order to successfully reverse the human-driven damage contributing to global climate change, cuts of nearly 42% are needed by 2030 and are to be implementing using government intervention. This is one example of how atmospheric chemistry goes hand-in-hand with social and political policy, biogeochemistry, and economic factors.

Atmospheric dynamics [ edit ] See also: Synoptic scale meteorology Atmospheric dynamics is the study of motion systems of meteorological importance, integrating observations at multiple locations and times and theories. Common topics studied include diverse phenomena such as thunderstorms , tornadoes , gravity waves , tropical cyclones , extratropical cyclones , jet streams , and global-scale circulations. The goal of dynamical studies is to explain the observed circulations on the basis of fundamental principles from physics . The objectives of such studies incorporate improving weather forecasting , developing methods for predicting seasonal and interannual climate fluctuations, and understanding the implications of human-induced perturbations (e.g., increased carbon dioxide concentrations or depletion of the ozone layer) on the global climate.

[ 7 ] Atmospheric physics [ edit ] Main article: Atmospheric physics Atmospheric physics is the application of physics to the study of the atmosphere. Atmospheric physicists attempt to model Earth's atmosphere and the atmospheres of the other planets using fluid flow equations, chemical models, radiation balancing, and energy transfer processes in the atmosphere and underlying oceans and land. In order to model weather systems, atmospheric physicists employ elements of scattering theory, wave propagation models, cloud physics , statistical mechanics and spatial statistics , each of which incorporate high levels of mathematics and physics. Atmospheric physics has close links to meteorology and climatology and also covers the design and construction of instruments for studying the atmosphere and the interpretation of the data they provide, including remote sensing instruments.

In the United Kingdom, atmospheric studies are underpinned by the Meteorological Office. Divisions of the U.S.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) oversee research projects and weather modeling involving atmospheric physics. The U.S. National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center also carries out studies of the high atmosphere.

The Earth's magnetic field and the solar wind interact with the atmosphere, creating the ionosphere , Van Allen radiation belts , telluric currents , and radiant energy .

Recent studies in atmospheric physics often rely on satellite-based observation. One example includes CALIPSO , or the Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observation. The CALIPSO mission, engineered by NASA and the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales/CNES, studies how clouds and airborne particles play a role in regulating the weather, climate, and quality of Earth's atmosphere. According to NASA, this mission uses methods like retrieval algorithm development, climatology development, spectroscopy, weather and climate model evaluation, and cloudy radiative transfer models in addition to atmospheric physics concepts to understand the physics involved in Earth atmospheric regulation.

[ 8 ] Climatology [ edit ] Main article: Climatology Climatology is a science that derives knowledge and practices from the more specialized disciplines of meteorology, oceanography, geology, biology, and astronomy to study climate. In contrast to meteorology , which studies short-term weather systems lasting up to a few weeks, climatology studies the frequency and trends of those systems. It studies the periodicity of weather events over timescales ranging from years to millennia, as well as changes in long-term average weather patterns.

Climatologists , those who practice climatology, study both the nature of climates – local, regional or global – and the natural or human-induced factors that cause climate variability and current ongoing global warming . Additionally, the occurrence of past climates on Earth, such as those arising from glacial periods and interglacials, can be used to predict future changes in climate.

Oftentimes, climatology is studied in conjunction with another specialized discipline. One recent scientific study that utilizes topics in climatology, oceanology, and even economics is entitled "Concerns about El Nino-Southern Oscillation and the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation with an Increasingly Warm Ocean." [ 9 ] Scientists under New Insights in Climate Science found that Earth is at risk of El Nino events of greater extremes and overall climate instability given new information regarding the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC). ENSO describes a recurring climate pattern in which the temperature of waters in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean changes periodically.

[ 10 ] AMOC is best described by NOAA as "a system of ocean currents that circulates water within the Atlantic Ocean, bringing warm water north and cold water south".

[ 11 ] This research has revealed that the collapse of the AMOC appears to be occurring sooner than when earlier models had predicted. It also expands on the fact that our economic and social systems are more vulnerable to El Nino impacts than previously thought. The study of climatology is vital in understanding current climate risks. Research is necessary to mitigate and monitor the efforts put forth towards are ever-evolving climate. Strengthening our knowledge within the realm of climatology allows us to better prepare for the impacts of extreme El Nino events, such as amplified droughts, floods, and heat extremes.

[ 9 ] Phenomena of climatological interest include the atmospheric boundary layer , circulation patterns , heat transfer ( radiative , convective and latent ), interactions between the atmosphere, the oceans and land surface (particularly vegetation , land use and topography ), as well as the chemical and physical composition of the atmosphere. Related disciplines include astrophysics , atmospheric physics , chemistry , ecology , physical geography , geology , geophysics , glaciology , hydrology , oceanography , and volcanology .

Aeronomy [ edit ] Main article: Aeronomy Aeronomy is the scientific study of the upper atmosphere of the Earth — the atmospheric layers above the stratopause — and corresponding regions of the atmospheres of other planets, where the entire atmosphere may correspond to the Earth's upper atmosphere or a portion of it. A branch of both atmospheric chemistry and atmospheric physics, aeronomy contrasts with meteorology, which focuses on the layers of the atmosphere below the stratopause.

[ 12 ] In atmospheric regions studied by aeronomers, chemical dissociation and ionization are important phenomena.

Atmospheres on other celestial bodies [ edit ] False-color image of the atmosphere of Venus in ultraviolet light, taken by the Akatsuki orbiter in October 2021 All of the Solar System's planets have atmospheres.  This is because their gravity is strong enough to keep gaseous particles close to the surface.  Larger gas giants are massive enough to keep large amounts of the light gases hydrogen and helium close by, while the smaller planets lose these gases into space .

[ 13 ] The composition of the Earth's atmosphere is different from the other planets because the various life processes that have transpired on the planet have introduced free molecular oxygen .

[ 14 ] Much of Mercury's atmosphere has been blasted away by the solar wind .

[ 15 ] The only moon that has retained a dense atmosphere is Titan . There is a thin atmosphere on Triton , and a trace of an atmosphere on the Moon .

Planetary atmospheres are affected by the varying degrees of energy received from either the Sun or their interiors, leading to the formation of dynamic weather systems such as hurricanes (on Earth), planet-wide dust storms ( on Mars ), an Earth-sized anticyclone on Jupiter (called the Great Red Spot ), and holes in the atmosphere (on Neptune).

[ 16 ] At least one extrasolar planet, HD 189733 b , has been claimed to possess such a weather system, similar to the Great Red Spot but twice as large.

[ 17 ] Hot Jupiters have been shown to be losing their atmospheres into space due to stellar radiation, much like the tails of comets.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] These planets may have vast differences in temperature between their day and night sides which produce supersonic winds, [ 20 ] although the day and night sides of HD 189733b appear to have very similar temperatures, indicating that planet's atmosphere effectively redistributes the star's energy around the planet.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Air pollution References [ edit ] ^ "Aerology" .

OED Online . Oxford University Press . Retrieved December 4, 2019 .

^ "Aerology - AMS Glossary" .

glossary.ametsoc.org . Retrieved 2019-09-08 .

^ Ultraviolet radiation in the solar system By Manuel Vázquez, Arnold Hanslmeier ^ "Chapter 2: Changing State of the Climate System" .

www.ipcc.ch . Retrieved 2025-05-28 .

^ "Supplemental data to Global Nitrous Oxide Budget 1980-2020 | ICOS" .

www.icos-cp.eu . Retrieved 2025-06-03 .

^ Environment, U. N. (2024-10-17).

"Emissions Gap Report 2024 | UNEP - UN Environment Programme" .

www.unep.org . Retrieved 2025-05-28 .

^ University of Washington .

Atmospheric Dynamics.

Retrieved on 1 June 2007.

^ "Atmospheric Physics and Weather" .

Jet Propulsion Laboratory California Institute of Technology . May 27, 2025 . Retrieved May 27, 2025 .

^ a b "5. Human security requires climate security" .

10insightsclimate . Retrieved 2025-05-28 .

^ US Department of Commerce, NOAA.

"What is ENSO?" .

www.weather.gov . Retrieved 2025-06-03 .

^ US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

"What is the AMOC?" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2025-06-03 .

^ Brasseur, Guy (1984).

Aeronomy of the Middle Atmosphere : Chemistry and Physics of the Stratosphere and Mesosphere . Springer. pp. xi.

ISBN 978-94-009-6403-7 .

^ Sheppard, S. S.; Jewitt, D.; Kleyna, J. (2005). "An Ultradeep Survey for Irregular Satellites of Uranus: Limits to Completeness".

The Astronomical Journal .

129 (1): 518– 525.

arXiv : astro-ph/0410059 .

Bibcode : 2005AJ....129..518S .

doi : 10.1086/426329 .

S2CID 18688556 .

^ Zeilik, Michael A.; Gregory, Stephan A. (1998).

Introductory Astronomy & Astrophysics (4th ed.). Saunders College Publishing. p. 67.

ISBN 0-03-006228-4 .

^ Hunten D. M., Shemansky D. E., Morgan T. H. (1988), The Mercury atmosphere , In: Mercury (A89-43751 19–91). University of Arizona Press, pp. 562–612 ^ Harvey, Samantha (1 May 2006).

"Weather, Weather, Everywhere?" . NASA. Archived from the original on 8 August 2007 . Retrieved 9 September 2007 .

^ a b Knutson, Heather A.; Charbonneau, David; Allen, Lori E.

; Fortney, Jonathan J. (2007). "A map of the day-night contrast of the extrasolar planet HD 189733b".

Nature .

447 (7141): 183– 6.

arXiv : 0705.0993 .

Bibcode : 2007Natur.447..183K .

doi : 10.1038/nature05782 .

PMID 17495920 .

S2CID 4402268 .

(Related press release ) ^ Weaver, D.; Villard, R. (31 January 2007).

"Hubble Probes Layer-cake Structure of Alien World's Atmosphere" .

University of Arizona, Lunar and Planetary Laboratory (Press Release) .

Archived from the original on 8 August 2007 . Retrieved 15 August 2007 .

^ Ballester, Gilda E.; Sing, David K.; Herbert, Floyd (2007). "The signature of hot hydrogen in the atmosphere of the extrasolar planet HD 209458b".

Nature .

445 (7127): 511– 4.

Bibcode : 2007Natur.445..511B .

doi : 10.1038/nature05525 .

hdl : 10871/16060 .

PMID 17268463 .

S2CID 4391861 .

^ Harrington, Jason; Hansen, Brad M.; Luszcz, Statia H.; Seager, Sara (2006). "The phase-dependent infrared brightness of the extrasolar planet Andromeda b".

Science .

314 (5799): 623– 6.

arXiv : astro-ph/0610491 .

Bibcode : 2006Sci...314..623H .

doi : 10.1126/science.1133904 .

PMID 17038587 .

S2CID 20549014 .

(Related press release ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Atmospheric sciences .

Atmospheric fluid dynamics applied to weather maps – Principles such as Advection, Deformation and Vorticity National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Archives, documents the history of the atmospheric sciences v t e Earth science Outline Index Atmospheric science Environmental science Geodesy Geology Geophysics Glaciology Hydrology Meteorology Oceanography Paleogeoscience Physical geography Soil science Volcanology Category Portal Commons v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric science Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental humanities Environmental statistics Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Radioecology Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Public transport encouragement Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary Environment by year See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Technogaianism Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Atmospheric electricity General Geophysics Atmospheric science Atmospheric physics Atmospheric dynamics Atmospheric dynamo Atmospheric chemistry Earth's magnetic field Electromagnetism ELF/VLF emissions Radio atmospherics Whistlers Chorus Hiss Optical emissions Upper-atmospheric lightning Sprites St. Elmo's fire Ball lightning Sources Solar irradiance Lightning Equatorial electrojet Applications Electrodynamic tethers Magnetotellurics People Georg Wilhelm Richmann Egon Schweidler Nikola Tesla George Simpson Charles Thomson Rees Wilson Category Commons Authority control databases International FAST National United States Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atmospheric_science&oldid=1304882526 " Categories : Atmospheric sciences Fluid dynamics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 19:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Atmospheric science 38 languages Add topic

