Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Reception 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents The Emperor's New Mind 7 languages العربية Español فارسی Italiano Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1989 book by Roger Penrose The Emperor's New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds and The Laws of Physics Cover of the first edition Author Roger Penrose Language English Subject Artificial intelligence Publisher Oxford University Press Publication date November 9, 1989 Publication place United Kingdom Media type Print ( hardcover and paperback ) Pages 480 ISBN 0-19-851973-7 (first edition, hardcover) OCLC 19724273 Dewey Decimal 006.3 20 LC Class Q335 .P415 1989 Followed by Shadows of the Mind The Emperor's New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds and The Laws of Physics is a 1989 book by the mathematical physicist Roger Penrose .

Penrose argues that human consciousness is non- algorithmic , and thus is not capable of being modeled by a conventional Turing machine , which includes a digital computer . Penrose hypothesizes that quantum mechanics plays an essential role in the understanding of human consciousness . The collapse of the quantum wavefunction is seen as playing an important role in brain function.

Most of the book is spent reviewing, for the scientifically-minded lay-reader, a plethora of interrelated subjects such as Newtonian physics , special and general relativity , the philosophy and limitations of mathematics, quantum physics , cosmology , and the nature of time . Penrose intermittently describes how each of these bears on his developing theme: that consciousness is not "algorithmic". Only the later portions of the book address the thesis directly.

Overview [ edit ] Penrose states that his ideas on the nature of consciousness are speculative, and his thesis is considered erroneous by some experts in the fields of philosophy, computer science, and robotics.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The Emperor's New Mind attacks the claims of artificial intelligence using the physics of computing: Penrose notes that the present home of computing lies more in the tangible world of classical mechanics than in the imponderable realm of quantum mechanics. The modern computer is a deterministic system that for the most part simply executes algorithms. Penrose shows that, by reconfiguring the boundaries of a billiard table, one might make a computer in which the billiard balls act as message carriers and their interactions act as logical decisions. The billiard-ball computer was first designed some years ago by Edward Fredkin and Tommaso Toffoli of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

Reception [ edit ] Following the publication of the book, Penrose began to collaborate with Stuart Hameroff on a biological analog to quantum computation involving microtubules , which became the foundation for his subsequent book, Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness .

Penrose won the Science Book Prize in 1990 for The Emperor's New Mind .

[ 4 ] According to an article in the American Journal of Physics , Penrose incorrectly claims a barrier far away from a localized particle can affect the particle.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Alan Turing Anathem Church–Turing thesis Mind–body dualism Orchestrated objective reduction Quantum mind Raymond Smullyan Shadows of the Mind " The Emperor's New Clothes " Turing test References [ edit ] ^ Landau, L. J. (1997).

Penrose's Philosophical Error . Springer.

ISBN 3-540-76163-2 . Archived from the original on 25 January 2016.

^ Various critical reactions to be found in Behavioral and Brain Sciences vol. 13 #4 (1990), 643–705, and vol. 16 #3 (1993), 611–622, e.g.

M. Davis "How subtle is Godel’s theorem? More on Roger Penrose" ^ M. Davis (1995), "Is mathematical insight algorithmic", Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 13 (4), 659–60.

^ Royal Society Winton Prize for Science Books: Previous winners .

The Royal Society . Retrieved 12 March 2013.

^ Styer, Daniel F. (1 January 1996). "Common misconceptions regarding quantum mechanics".

American Journal of Physics .

64 (1): 31– 34.

Bibcode : 1996AmJPh..64...31S .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.207.2493 .

doi : 10.1119/1.18288 .

v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons v t e Roger Penrose Books The Emperor's New Mind (1989) Shadows of the Mind (1994) The Road to Reality (2004) Cycles of Time (2010) Fashion, Faith, and Fantasy in the New Physics of the Universe (2016) Coauthored books The Nature of Space and Time (with Stephen Hawking ) (1996) The Large, the Small and the Human Mind (with Abner Shimony , Nancy Cartwright and Stephen Hawking) (1997) White Mars or, The Mind Set Free (with Brian W. Aldiss ) (1999) Concepts Twistor theory Spin network Abstract index notation Black hole bomb Geometry of spacetime Cosmic censorship Weyl curvature hypothesis Penrose inequalities Penrose interpretation of quantum mechanics Moore–Penrose inverse Newman–Penrose formalism Penrose diagram Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems Riemannian Penrose inequality Penrose process Penrose tiling Penrose triangle Penrose stairs Penrose graphical notation Penrose transform Penrose–Terrell effect Orchestrated objective reduction / Penrose–Lucas argument FELIX experiment Trapped surface Andromeda paradox Conformal cyclic cosmology Related Lionel Penrose (father) Oliver Penrose (brother) Jonathan Penrose (brother) Shirley Hodgson (sister) John Beresford Leathes (grandfather) Illumination problem Quantum mind Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Emperor%27s_New_Mind&oldid=1304622223 " Categories : 1989 non-fiction books Works about consciousness English-language non-fiction books English non-fiction books Mathematics books Oxford University Press books Philosophy of artificial intelligence Philosophy of mind literature Popular physics books Quantum mind Science books Turing machine Works by Roger Penrose Non-fiction books about artificial intelligence Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 04:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Emperor's New Mind 7 languages Add topic

