Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Physics Toggle Physics subsection 1.1 Adaption to low-water activity areas 2 Examples of xerophilic species Toggle Examples of xerophilic species subsection 2.1 Bacteria 2.2 Archaea 2.3 Eukarya 3 Impact on humans Toggle Impact on humans subsection 3.1 Bioremediation 3.2 Agriculture 3.3 Food storage 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Xerophile 22 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organism that can grow and reproduce with low available water A xerophile (from Greek ξηρός : xērós ' dry ' and φίλος : phílos ' loving ' ) [ 1 ] is an extremophilic organism that can grow and reproduce in conditions with a low availability of water, also known as water activity .

Physics [ edit ] Water activity, a thermodynamical value denoted a w , is defined as the partial water vapor pressure p in equilibrium with the substance relative to (divided by) the (partial) vapor pressure of pure water p* at the same temperature: a w ≡ ≡ p p ∗ ∗ {\displaystyle a_{w}\equiv {\frac {p}{p^{*}}}} The thermodynamical water activity is thus equal to the relative humidity (RH), and the chemical activity of pure water is equal to one: a w = 1.0.

When the atmosphere above a substance, or a solution , is undersaturated in water vapor (p < p * ) , its water activity is lower than one.

Xerophiles are "xerotolerant", meaning tolerant of dry conditions. They can often survive in environments with water activity below 0.8; above which is typical for most life on Earth. Typically xerotolerance is used with respect to matrix drying, where a substance has a low water concentration. These environments include arid desert soils. The term osmophile , or osmotolerant, is typically applied to microorganisms that can grow in solutions with high solute concentrations ( salts , sugars ), such as halophiles .

Adaption to low-water activity areas [ edit ] Eukaryotic and most prokaryotic life will collect or create compatible solutes, also called osmolytes , which establish a counter balance to the osmotic pressures. An example would be some bacteria accumulate KCl to counter-balance NaCl osmotic pressures. Fungi appear to use glycerol as an osmolyte since when cultures are grown in glycerol high concentrations that become better adapted to surviving low water activities.

[ 2 ] Examples of xerophilic species [ edit ] Bacteria [ edit ] All taxonomic kingdoms have examples of xerophiles. Microbial xerophiles will usually inhabit environments that are sugar-rich or salt-rich, and xerophilic bacteria will most commonly be found in salt rich areas.

[ 2 ] Because xerophiles often live in salt-rich environments many halophilic species such as H. halophila , Bacillus halophilus , and H. salina are often also xerophilic.

Image of Zygosachromyces a xerophilic yeast.

Archaea [ edit ] A xerophilic archaea would be Natronococcus .

Eukarya [ edit ] Xerophilic fungi will usually be found in environments that are sugar rich, and some xerophilic fungi have shown extremely low water activity, as low as .61. Xerophilic fungi include Trichosporonoides nigrescens , [ 3 ] Zygosaccharomyces , and Aspergillus penicillioides .

Among multi plant life an example of a xerophilic plant group is cacti .

Impact on humans [ edit ] Bioremediation [ edit ] Xerophilic micro organisms can be utilized in efforts of bioremediation. This is especially the case when the environment needing bioremediation has low water activity. Xerotolerant bacteria isolated from areas in Chile have expressed traits allowing it to be used as to begin bioremediation.

[ 4 ] Agriculture [ edit ] For plants to properly grow in dry areas they will need a usable xerotolerant microbiome. In desert plants xerophiles are set in a plant's microbiome helping with its water management.

[ 5 ] Food storage [ edit ] Xerophiles are a concern to food storage industry due to their ability to bypass common food preservation methods. Many foods are preserved by creating high osmotic pressures that dry out and kill any microbes that attempt to culture in the food. Foods such as honey or jam have such high levels of sugar and low levels of water normal micro organisms can not grow on them. However, xerophilic organisms can grow in these mediums posing a threat to food safety.

[ 2 ] The common food preservation methods of reducing water activity ( food drying ) may not always be sufficient to prevent the growth of xerophilic organisms, often resulting in food spoilage . Some mold and yeast species are xerophilic. Mold growth on bread is an example of food spoilage by xerophilic organisms.

[ citation needed ] Complete dehydration based on the freeze-drying technique with effective protection inside a tight packaging system, strictly impervious to water and atmospheric gases ( O 2 and CO 2 ), may be required for long-term preservation of food and pharmacochemical substances ( antibiotics , vaccines …). Freeze drying can limit the microbial activity on the long term, as long as the product remains perfectly dry in a hermetically sealed and intact package, but it is not a sterilisation technique per se , because after rehydration, even if many dehydrated cells suffer irreversible and lethal damages, some resistant spores and bacterial endospores can still be revived again, and multiplied, by means of microbiological cultures if the product was not initially sterilized by applying a proven technique.

See also [ edit ] Look up xerophile in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Extremophile – Organisms capable of living in extreme environments Ombrophobe Osmophile – Organism tolerant osmotic effects from a low water activity Xerocole – Any animal adapted to live in the desert Xerophyte – Plants able to survive in an environment with little liquid water References [ edit ] ^ "xero-".

The New Oxford American Dictionary (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press, Inc. 2005.

^ a b c Kanekar, Pradnya Pralhad; Kanekar, Sagar Pralhad (2022), Kanekar, Pradnya Pralhad; Kanekar, Sagar Pralhad (eds.), "Xerophilic and Xerotolerant Microorganisms" , Diversity and Biotechnology of Extremophilic Microorganisms from India , Singapore: Springer Nature, pp.

281– 288, doi : 10.1007/978-981-19-1573-4_10 , ISBN 978-981-19-1573-4 , retrieved 2025-04-23 ^ Hocking AD; Pitt JI (December 1981). " Trichosporonoides nigrescens sp.

nov., a new xerophilic yeast-like fungus".

Antonie van Leeuwenhoek .

47 (5): 411– 21.

doi : 10.1007/BF00426003 .

PMID 7198892 .

S2CID 10634262 .

^ Dheeran, Pratibha; Kumar, Sachin; EBSCOhost, eds. (2022).

Extremophiles: general and plant biomass based biorefinery . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.

ISBN 978-0-367-85652-6 .

^ Parihar, Jagdish; Bagaria, Ashima (2019-12-23).

"The Extremes of Life and Extremozymes: Diversity and Perspectives" (PDF) .

Acta Scientific Microbiology .

3 (1): 107– 119.

doi : 10.31080/ASMI.2020.03.0466 .

v t e Extremophiles Types Acidophile Alkaliphile Capnophile Endolith Halophile Hypolith Lipophile Lithoautotroph Lithophile Methanogen Metallotolerant Oligotroph Osmophile Piezophile Polyextremophile Psammophile Psychrophile Radioresistant Thermophile / Hyperthermophile Thermoacidophile Xerophile Notable extremophiles Bacteria Chloroflexus aurantiacus Deinococcus radiodurans Deinococcota Snottite Thermus aquaticus Thermus thermophilus Spirochaeta americana GFAJ-1 Archaea Pyrococcus furiosus Strain 121 Pyrolobus fumarii Thermococcus gammatolerans Eukaryota Cyanidioschyzon merolae Galdieria sulphuraria Paralvinella sulfincola Halicephalobus mephisto Pompeii worm Related articles Abiogenic petroleum origin Acidithiobacillales Acidobacteriota Acidophiles in acid mine drainage Archaeoglobaceae Berkeley Pit Blood Falls Thermoproteota Grylloblattidae Halobacteria Halobacterium Helaeomyia petrolei Hydrothermal vent Methanopyrus Movile Cave Radiotrophic fungus Rio Tinto Tardigrade Taq polymerase Thermostability Thermotogota Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xerophile&oldid=1298243091 " Categories : Xerophiles Biology terminology Ecology terminology Extremophiles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 08:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xerophile 22 languages Add topic

