Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 1.1 Wind-driven circulation 1.2 Thermohaline circulation 2 Effects on climate and ecology 3 Ocean currents and climate change 4 Economic importance 5 Distribution 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ocean current 77 languages Afrikaans Anarâškielâ العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Directional mass flow of oceanic water This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ocean current" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ocean surface currents Distinctive white lines trace the flow of surface currents around the world.

Visualization showing global ocean currents from January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2012, at sea level, then at 2,000 m (6,600 ft) below sea level Animation of circulation around ice shelves of Antarctica An ocean current is a continuous, directed movement of seawater generated by a number of forces acting upon the water, including wind, the Coriolis effect , breaking waves , cabbeling , and temperature and salinity differences.

[ 1 ] Depth contours , shoreline configurations, and interactions with other currents influence a current's direction and strength. Ocean currents move both horizontally, on scales that can span entire oceans, as well as vertically, with vertical currents ( upwelling and downwelling ) playing an important role in the movement of nutrients and gases, such as carbon dioxide, between the surface and the deep ocean.

Ocean currents flow for great distances and together they create the global conveyor belt , which plays a dominant role in determining the climate of many of Earth's regions. More specifically, ocean currents influence the temperature of the regions through which they travel. For example, warm currents traveling along more temperate coasts increase the temperature of the area by warming the sea breezes that blow over them. Perhaps the most striking example is the Gulf Stream , which, together with its extension the North Atlantic Drift , makes northwest Europe much more temperate for its high latitude than other areas at the same latitude. Another example is Lima, Peru , whose cooler subtropical climate contrasts with that of its surrounding tropical latitudes because of the Humboldt Current .

The largest ocean current is the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), a wind-driven current which flows clockwise uninterrupted around Antarctica. The ACC connects all the oceanic basins together, and also provides a link between the atmosphere and the deep ocean due to the way water upwells and downwells on either side of it.

Ocean currents are patterns of water movement that influence climate zones and weather patterns around the world. They are primarily driven by winds and by seawater density, although many other factors influence them – including the shape and configuration of the oceanic basin they flow through. The two basic types of currents – surface and deep-water currents [ 2 ] – help define the character and flow of ocean waters across the planet. By temperature, there are two types of ocean currents: warm ocean currents and cold ocean currents.

Causes [ edit ] The bathymetry of the Kerguelen Plateau in the Southern Ocean governs the course of the Kerguelen deep western boundary current , part of the global network of ocean currents.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Ocean currents are driven by the wind, by the gravitational pull of the moon in the form of tides , and by the effects of variations in water density.

[ 5 ] Ocean dynamics define and describe the motion of water within the oceans.

Ocean temperature and motion fields can be separated into three distinct layers: mixed (surface) layer, upper ocean (above the thermocline), and deep ocean. Ocean currents are measured in units of sverdrup (Sv) , where 1 Sv is equivalent to a volume flow rate of 1,000,000 m 3 (35,000,000 cu ft) per second.

There are two main types of currents, surface currents and deep water currents. Generally surface currents are driven by wind systems and deep water currents are driven by differences in water density due to variations in water temperature and salinity .

[ 6 ] Wind-driven circulation [ edit ] Surface oceanic currents are driven by wind currents, the large scale prevailing winds drive major persistent ocean currents, and seasonal or occasional winds drive currents of similar persistence to the winds that drive them, [ 7 ] and the Coriolis effect plays a major role in their development.

[ 8 ] The Ekman spiral velocity distribution results in the currents flowing at an angle to the driving winds, and they develop typical clockwise spirals in the northern hemisphere and counter-clockwise rotation in the southern hemisphere .

[ 9 ] In addition, the areas of surface ocean currents move somewhat with the seasons ; this is most notable in equatorial currents.

Deep ocean basins generally have a non-symmetric surface current, in that the eastern equator-ward flowing branch is broad and diffuse whereas the pole-ward flowing western boundary current is relatively narrow.

Thermohaline circulation [ edit ] Main article: Thermohaline circulation Further information: Deep ocean water Coupling data collected by NASA/JPL by several different satellite-borne sensors, researchers have been able to "break through" the ocean's surface to detect "Meddies" – super-salty warm-water eddies that originate in the Mediterranean Sea and then sink more than a half-mile underwater in the Atlantic Ocean. The Meddies are shown in red in this scientific figure.

Large scale currents are driven by gradients in water density , which in turn depend on variations in temperature and salinity. This thermohaline circulation is also known as the ocean's conveyor belt. Where significant vertical movement of ocean currents is observed, this is known as upwelling and downwelling . The adjective thermohaline derives from thermo- referring to temperature and -haline referring to salt content , factors which together determine the density of seawater.

The thermohaline circulation is a part of the large-scale ocean circulation that is driven by global density gradients created by surface heat and freshwater fluxes .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Wind -driven surface currents (such as the Gulf Stream ) travel polewards from the equatorial Atlantic Ocean , cooling en route, and eventually sinking at high latitudes (forming North Atlantic Deep Water ). This dense water then flows into the ocean basins . While the bulk of it upwells in the Southern Ocean , the oldest waters (with a transit time of around 1000 years) [ 12 ] upwell in the North Pacific.

[ 13 ] Extensive mixing therefore takes place between the ocean basins, reducing differences between them and making the Earth's oceans a global system. On their journey, the water masses transport both energy (in the form of heat) and matter (solids, dissolved substances and gases) around the globe. As such, the state of the circulation has a large impact on the climate of the Earth. The thermohaline circulation is sometimes called the ocean conveyor belt, the great ocean conveyor, or the global conveyor belt. On occasion, it is imprecisely used to refer to the meridional overturning circulation , (MOC).

Since the 2000s an international program called Argo has been mapping the temperature and salinity structure of the ocean with a fleet of automated platforms that float with the ocean currents. The information gathered will help explain the role the oceans play in the earth's climate.

[ 14 ] Effects on climate and ecology [ edit ] Ocean currents affect temperatures throughout the world. For example, the ocean current that brings warm water up the north Atlantic to northwest Europe also cumulatively and slowly blocks ice from forming along the seashores, which would also block ships from entering and exiting inland waterways and seaports, hence ocean currents play a decisive role in influencing the climates of regions through which they flow.

[ 15 ] Ocean currents are important in the study of marine debris .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Plankton are dispersed by ocean currents.

Upwellings and cold ocean water currents flowing from polar and sub-polar regions bring in nutrients that support plankton growth, which are crucial prey items for several key species in marine ecosystems .

[ 18 ] Ocean currents are also important in the dispersal and distribution of many organisms, including those with pelagic egg or larval stages.

[ 19 ] An example is the life-cycle of the European Eel . Terrestrial species, for example tortoises and lizards, can be carried on floating debris by currents to colonise new terrestrial areas and islands .

[ 19 ] Ocean currents and climate change [ edit ] The continued rise of atmospheric temperatures is anticipated to have various effects on the strength of surface ocean currents, wind-driven circulation and dispersal patterns.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Ocean currents play a significant role in influencing climate, and shifts in climate in turn impact ocean currents.

[ 21 ] Human-induced climate change is leading to long-term alterations in ocean and atmospheric circulation. The accumulation of greenhouse gases traps extra heat within the Earth's system, causing both the atmosphere and oceans to warm. Notably, over 90% of this trapped heat is absorbed by the oceans. There are signs that crucial circulation patterns are shifting, with growing evidence suggesting that the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation may be slowing down.

Over the last century, reconstructed sea surface temperature data reveal that western boundary currents are heating at double the rate of the global average.

[ 23 ] These observations indicate that the western boundary currents are likely intensifying due to this change in temperature, and may continue to grow stronger in the near future.

[ 21 ] There is evidence that surface warming due to anthropogenic climate change has accelerated upper ocean currents in 77% of the global ocean.

[ 22 ] Specifically, increased vertical stratification due to surface warming intensifies upper ocean currents, while changes in horizontal density gradients caused by differential warming across different ocean regions results in the acceleration of surface zonal currents .

[ 22 ] There are suggestions that the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) is in danger of collapsing due to climate change, which would have extreme impacts on the climate of northern Europe and more widely, [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] although this topic is controversial and remains an active area of research.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] The "State of the cryosphere" report, dedicates significant space to AMOC, saying it may be en route to collapse because of ice melt and water warming. In the same time, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) is also slowing down and is expected to lose 20% of its power by the year 2050, "with widespread impacts on ocean circulation and climate".

[ 30 ] UNESCO mentions that the report in the first time "notes a growing scientific consensus that melting Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, among other factors, may be slowing important ocean currents at both poles, with potentially dire consequences for a much colder northern Europe and greater sea-level rise along the U.S. East Coast." [ 31 ] In addition to water surface temperatures, the wind systems are a crucial determinant of ocean currents.

[ 32 ] Wind wave systems influence oceanic heat exchange, the condition of the sea surface, and can alter ocean currents.

[ 33 ] In the North Atlantic, equatorial Pacific, and Southern Ocean, increased wind speeds as well as significant wave heights have been attributed to climate change and natural processes combined.

[ 33 ] In the East Australian Current , global warming has also been accredited to increased wind stress curl , which intensifies these currents, and may even indirectly increase sea levels, due to the additional warming created by stronger currents.

[ 34 ] As ocean circulation changes due to climate, typical distribution patterns are also changing. The dispersal patterns of marine organisms depend on oceanographic conditions, which as a result, influence the biological composition of oceans.

[ 20 ] Due to the patchiness of the natural ecological world, dispersal is a species survival mechanism for various organisms.

[ 35 ] With strengthened boundary currents moving toward the poles, it is expected that some marine species will be redirected to the poles and greater depths.

[ 20 ] [ 36 ] The strengthening or weakening of typical dispersal pathways by increased temperatures are expected to not only impact the survival of native marine species due to inability to replenish their meta populations but also may increase the prevalence of invasive species .

[ 20 ] In Japanese corals and macroalgae, the unusual dispersal pattern of organisms toward the poles may destabilize native species.

[ 37 ] Economic importance [ edit ] Knowledge of  surface ocean currents is essential in reducing costs of shipping, since traveling with them reduces fuel costs. In the wind powered sailing-ship era, knowledge of wind patterns and ocean currents was even more essential. Using ocean currents to help their ships into harbor and using currents such as the gulf stream to get back home.

[ 38 ] The lack of understanding of ocean currents during that time period is hypothesized to be one of the contributing factors to exploration failure. The Gulf Stream and the Canary current keep western European countries warmer and less variable, while at the same latitude North America's weather was colder.

[ 39 ] A good example of this is the Agulhas Current (down along eastern Africa), which long prevented sailors from reaching India.

In recent times, around-the-world sailing competitors make good use of surface currents to build and maintain speed.
Ocean currents can also be used for marine power generation , with areas of Japan, Florida and Hawaii being considered for test projects. The utilization of currents today can still impact global trade, it can reduce the cost and emissions of shipping vessels.

[ 40 ] Skipjack tuna fishery in Indonesia.

Ocean currents can also impact the fishing industry , examples of this include the Tsugaru , Oyashio and Kuroshio currents all of which influence the western North Pacific temperature, which has been shown to be a habitat predictor for the Skipjack tuna .

[ 41 ] It has also been shown that it is not just local currents that can affect a country's economy, but neighboring currents can influence the viability of local fishing industries.

[ 42 ] Distribution [ edit ] A 1943 map of the world's ocean currents Currents of the Arctic Ocean Baffin Island Current – Arctic Ocean current Beaufort Gyre – Wind-driven ocean current in the Arctic Ocean polar region East Greenland Current – Current from Fram Strait to Cape Farewell off the eastern coat of Greenland East Iceland Current – Cold water ocean current that forms as a branch of the East Greenland Current Labrador Current – Cold current in the Atlantic ocean along the coasts of Labrador, Newfoundland and Nova Scotia North Icelandic Jet – Deep-reaching current that flows along the continental slope of Iceland Norwegian Current – Current that flows northeasternly along the Atlantic coast of Norway Transpolar Drift Stream – Current in the Arctic Ocean West Greenland Current – Weak cold water current that flows to the north along the west coast of Greenland West Spitsbergen Current – Warm, salty current that runs poleward just west of Spitsbergen Currents of the Atlantic Ocean A recording current meter . It records information about currents (speed, direction, depth, temperature).

Angola Current – Temporary ocean surface current Antilles Current – Ocean current Atlantic meridional overturning circulation – System of surface and deep currents in the Atlantic Ocean Azores Current – Ocean current in the North Atlantic Ocean Benguela Current – Ocean current in the South Atlantic Brazil Current – Water current along Brazil's southern coast Canary Current – Wind-driven surface current that is part of the North Atlantic Gyre Cape Horn Current – Cold water current that flows west-to-east around Cape Horn Caribbean Current – Atlantic Ocean current East Greenland Current – Current from Fram Strait to Cape Farewell off the eastern coat of Greenland East Iceland Current – Cold water ocean current that forms as a branch of the East Greenland Current Equatorial Counter Current – Shallow eastward flowing current found in the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific Oceans Falkland Current – Northward cold water Atlantic Ocean current Florida Current – Thermal ocean current Guinea Current – Atlantic warm-water current off West Africa Gulf Stream – Warm Atlantic Ocean current Irminger Current Labrador Current – Cold current in the Atlantic ocean along the coasts of Labrador, Newfoundland and Nova Scotia Lomonosov Current – Deep current in the Atlantic Ocean. from the coast of Brazil to the Gulf of Guinea Loop Current – Ocean current between Cuba and Yucatán Peninsula North Atlantic Current – Current of the Atlantic Ocean North Brazil Current – North Atlantic ocean current North Equatorial Current – Current in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans Norwegian Current – Current that flows northeasternly along the Atlantic coast of Norway Portugal Current – Weak ocean current that flows south along the coast of Portugal South Atlantic Current – Eastward ocean current, fed by the Brazil Current South Equatorial Current – Ocean current in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Ocean West Greenland Current – Weak cold water current that flows to the north along the west coast of Greenland West Spitsbergen Current – Warm, salty current that runs poleward just west of Spitsbergen Currents of the Indian Ocean Agulhas Current – Western boundary current of the southwest Indian Ocean that flows down the east coast of Africa Agulhas Return Current – Ocean current in the southern Indian Ocean East Madagascar Current – Oceanic flow feature near Madagascar Equatorial Counter Current – Shallow eastward flowing current found in the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific Oceans Indian Monsoon Current – Seasonally-varying ocean current regime found in the tropical regions of the northern Indian Ocean Indonesian Throughflow – Ocean current Leeuwin Current – Ocean current off  Western Australia Madagascar Current – Ocean current in the West Indian Ocean Mozambique Current – Warm ocean current in the Indian Ocean North Madagascar Current – Ocean current near Madagascar that flows into the South Equatorial Current Somali Current – Ocean boundary current that flows along the coast of Somalia and Oman in the Western Indian Ocean South Equatorial Current – Ocean current in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Ocean Southwest Madagascar Coastal Current – Warm poleward ocean current flowing in the south-west of Madagascar West Australian Current – Cool oceanic current Currents of the Pacific Ocean Alaska Current – Warm-water current flowing nortwards along the coast of British Columbia and the Alaska Panhandle Aleutian Current – Eastward-flowing ocean current which lies north of the North Pacific Current; California Current – Pacific Ocean current Cape Horn Current – Cold water current that flows west-to-east around Cape Horn Cromwell Current – Eastward-flowing subsurface current that extends along the equator in the Pacific Ocean Davidson Current – Countercurrent of the Pacific Ocean East Australian Current – Currents of the Pacific Ocean East Korea Warm Current – Ocean current in the Sea of Japan Equatorial Counter Current – Shallow eastward flowing current found in the Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific Oceans Humboldt Current – Current of the Pacific Ocean Indonesian Throughflow – Ocean current Kamchatka Current – Pacific Ocean current Kuroshio Current – North flowing ocean current on the west side of the North Pacific Ocean Mindanao Current – Narrow, southward-flowing ocean current along the southeastern coast of the Philippines Mindanao Eddy – Semi-permanent cold-ring eddy formed in the retroflection area of the Mindanao Current.

North Equatorial Current – Current in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans North Korea Cold Current – Cold water current in the Sea of Japan North Pacific Current – Ocean current, Japan to British Columbia Oyashio Current – Cold subarctic ocean current in the Pacific Ocean South Equatorial Current – Ocean current in the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Ocean Subtropical Countercurrent – Narrow eastward ocean current in the central North Pacific Ocean Tasman Front – Pacific Ocean current Tasman Outflow – Deepwater current that flows from the Pacific Ocean past Tasmania into the Indian Ocean Currents of the Southern Ocean Antarctic Circumpolar Current – Ocean current that flows clockwise from west to east around Antarctica Tasman Outflow – Deepwater current that flows from the Pacific Ocean past Tasmania into the Indian Ocean Kerguelen deep western boundary current [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Oceanic gyres Beaufort Gyre – Wind-driven ocean current in the Arctic Ocean polar region Indian Ocean Gyre – Major oceanic gyre in the Indian Ocean North Atlantic Gyre – Major circular system of ocean currents North Pacific Gyre – Major circulating system of ocean currents Ross Gyre – Circulating system of ocean currents in the Ross Sea South Atlantic Gyre – Subtropical gyre in the south Atlantic Ocean South Pacific Gyre – Major circulating system of ocean currents Weddell Gyre – One of two gyres within the Southern Ocean See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Currentology – Science that studies the internal movements of water masses Deep ocean water – Cold, salty water deep below the surface of Earth's oceans Fish migration – Movement of fishes from one part of a water body to another on a regular basis Geostrophic current – Oceanic flow in which the pressure gradient force is balanced by the Coriolis effect Latitude of the Gulf Stream and the Gulf Stream north wall index List of ocean circulation models – Models used in physical oceanography.

Marine habitats § Ocean currents Marine current power – Extraction of power from ocean currents Ocean gyre – Any large system of circulating ocean surface currents Physical oceanography – Study of physical conditions and processes within the ocean Subsurface ocean current – Oceanic currents that flow beneath surface currents Thermohaline circulation – Part of large-scale ocean circulation Tidal current – Flow of water induced by astronomical gravitational effects Volta do mar – Archaic navigational technique References [ edit ] ^ "What is a current?" .

National Ocean Service .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 2009-03-01 . Retrieved 2023-03-14 .

^ "Understanding surface currents vs deep ocean currents" .

www.sofarocean.com . Retrieved 2025-06-13 .

^ a b "Massive Southern Ocean current discovered" .

ScienceDaily . Apr 27, 2010.

^ a b Yasushi Fukamachi, Stephen Rintoul; et al. (Apr 2010).

"Strong export of Antarctic Bottom Water east of the Kerguelen plateau" .

Nature Geoscience .

3 (5): 327– 331.

Bibcode : 2010NatGe...3..327F .

doi : 10.1038/NGEO842 .

hdl : 2115/44116 .

S2CID 67815755 .

^ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (16 June 2024).

"What is a current?" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2024-09-03 .

^ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (1 August 2011).

"Ocean currents" .

www.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2024-09-14 .

^ "Current" .

www.nationalgeographic.org . National Geographic. 2 September 2011. Archived from the original on 29 December 2020 . Retrieved 7 January 2021 .

^ "Ocean Currents of the World: Causes" . 29 August 2020 . Retrieved 2020-11-20 .

^ National Ocean Service (March 25, 2008).

"Surface Ocean Currents" .

noaa.gov .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2017 . Retrieved 2017-06-13 .

^ Rahmstorf, S (2003).

"The concept of the thermohaline circulation" (PDF) .

Nature .

421 (6924): 699.

Bibcode : 2003Natur.421..699R .

doi : 10.1038/421699a .

PMID 12610602 .

S2CID 4414604 .

^ Lappo, SS (1984). "On reason of the northward heat advection across the Equator in the South Pacific and Atlantic ocean".

Study of Ocean and Atmosphere Interaction Processes . Moscow Department of Gidrometeoizdat (in Mandarin): 125– 9.

^ The global ocean conveyor belt is a constantly moving system of deep-ocean circulation driven by temperature and salinity; What is the global ocean conveyor belt?

^ Primeau, F (2005).

"Characterizing transport between the surface mixed layer and the ocean interior with a forward and adjoint global ocean transport model" (PDF) .

Journal of Physical Oceanography .

35 (4): 545– 64.

Bibcode : 2005JPO....35..545P .

doi : 10.1175/JPO2699.1 .

S2CID 130736022 .

^ Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UC San Diego.

"Argo" .

Argo . Archived from the original on 1 September 2024 . Retrieved 2024-09-05 .

^ "What Is the Gulf Stream? | NOAA SciJinks – All About Weather" .

scijinks.gov . Retrieved 2024-04-15 .

^ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (1 April 2020).

"Ocean pollution and marine debris" .

www.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2024-09-08 .

^ van Sebille, Erik; Aliani, Stefano; Law, Kara Lavender; Maximenko, Nikolai; Alsina, José M; Bagaev, Andrei; Bergmann, Melanie; Chapron, Bertrand; Chubarenko, Irina; Cózar, Andrés; Delandmeter, Philippe; Egger, Matthias; Fox-Kemper, Baylor; Garaba, Shungudzemwoyo P; Goddijn-Murphy, Lonneke (2020-02-01).

"The physical oceanography of the transport of floating marine debris" .

Environmental Research Letters .

15 (2): 023003.

Bibcode : 2020ERL....15b3003V .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/ab6d7d .

hdl : 2117/187082 .

ISSN 1748-9326 .

^ Royce, William F., ed. (1996). "Circulation".

Introduction to the Practice of Fishery Science . Elsevier.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-600952-1.x5000-2 .

ISBN 978-0-12-600952-1 .

^ a b Hays, Graeme C. (5 June 2017).

"Ocean currents and marine life" .

Current Biology .

27 (11): R470 – R473 .

Bibcode : 2017CBio...27.R470H .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2017.01.044 .

PMID 28586681 .

^ a b c d Wilson, Laura J.; Fulton, Christopher J.; Hogg, Andrew McC; Joyce, Karen E.; Radford, Ben T. M.; Fraser, Ceridwen I. (2016-05-02).

"Climate-driven changes to ocean circulation and their inferred impacts on marine dispersal patterns" .

Global Ecology and Biogeography .

25 (8): 923– 939.

Bibcode : 2016GloEB..25..923W .

doi : 10.1111/geb.12456 .

ISSN 1466-822X .

^ a b c Miller, Johanna L. (2017).

"Ocean currents respond to climate change in unexpected ways" .

Physics Today .

70 (1): 17– 18.

^ a b c Peng, Qihua; Xie, Shang-Ping; Wang, Dongxiao; Huang, Rui Xin; Chen, Gengxin; Shu, Yeqiang; Shi, Jia-Rui; Liu, Wei (2022-04-22).

"Surface warming–induced global acceleration of upper ocean currents" .

Science Advances .

8 (16): eabj8394.

Bibcode : 2022SciA....8J8394P .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abj8394 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 9020668 .

PMID 35442733 .

^ Wu, Lixin; Cai, Wenju; Zhang, Liping; Nakamura, Hisashi; Timmermann, Axel; Joyce, Terry; McPhaden, Michael J.; Alexander, Michael; Qiu, Bo; Visbeck, Martin; Chang, Ping; Giese, Benjamin (2012-01-29).

"Enhanced warming over the global subtropical western boundary currents" .

Nature Climate Change .

2 (3): 161– 166.

Bibcode : 2012NatCC...2..161W .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate1353 .

hdl : 1912/5125 .

ISSN 1758-6798 .

^ Ditlevsen, Peter; Ditlevsen, Susanne (2023-07-25).

"Warning of a forthcoming collapse of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation" .

Nature Communications .

14 (1): 4254.

arXiv : 2304.09160 .

Bibcode : 2023NatCo..14.4254D .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-023-39810-w .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 10368695 .

PMID 37491344 .

^ Zhu, Chenyu; Liu, Zhengyu; Zhang, Shaoqing; Wu, Lixin (2023-03-04).

"Likely accelerated weakening of Atlantic overturning circulation emerges in optimal salinity fingerprint" .

Nature Communications .

14 (1): 1245.

Bibcode : 2023NatCo..14.1245Z .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-023-36288-4 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 9985640 .

PMID 36871075 .

^ Boulton, Chris A.; Allison, Lesley C.; Lenton, Timothy M. (2014-12-08).

"Early warning signals of Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation collapse in a fully coupled climate model" .

Nature Communications .

5 (1): 5752.

Bibcode : 2014NatCo...5.5752B .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms6752 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 4268699 .

PMID 25482065 .

^ Science Media Centre (25 July 2023).

"Expert reaction to paper warning of a collapse of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation" .

Science Media Centre . Retrieved 2024-09-12 .

^ Rahmstorf, Stefan (10 April 2024).

"Is the Atlantic Overturning Circulation Approaching a Tipping Point?" .

Oceanography .

37 (3): 1– 0.

doi : 10.5670/oceanog.2024.501 .

^ Met Office Press (2 May 2024).

"The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation in a changing climate" .

Official blog of the Met Office news team . Retrieved 2024-09-12 .

^ State of the Cryosphere 2024 Lost Ice, Global Damage (PDF) . International Cryosphere Climate Initiative. November 2024. pp. x (in the beginning), 8, 48, 52 . Retrieved 20 November 2024 .

^ "State of the Cryosphere Report 2024 Lost Ice, Global Damage" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 20 November 2024 .

^ Constantin, Adrian (2021-01-02).

"Frictional effects in wind-driven ocean currents" .

Geophysical & Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics .

115 (1): 1– 14.

Bibcode : 2021GApFD.115....1C .

doi : 10.1080/03091929.2020.1748614 .

ISSN 0309-1929 .

^ a b Dobrynin, Mikhail; Murawski, Jens; Baehr, Johanna; Ilyina, Tatiana (2015-02-15).

"Detection and Attribution of Climate Change Signal in Ocean Wind Waves" .

Journal of Climate .

28 (4): 1578– 1591.

Bibcode : 2015JCli...28.1578D .

doi : 10.1175/JCLI-D-13-00664.1 .

ISSN 0894-8755 .

^ Cai, W.; Shi, G.; Cowan, T.; Bi, D.; Ribbe, J. (2005-12-10).

"The response of the Southern Annular Mode, the East Australian Current, and the southern mid-latitude ocean circulation to global warming" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

32 (23) 2005GL024701.

Bibcode : 2005GeoRL..3223706C .

doi : 10.1029/2005GL024701 .

ISSN 0094-8276 .

^ Kininmonth, Stuart (2011-04-11).

"Dispersal connectivity and reserve selection for marine conservation" .

Ecological Modelling .

222 (7): 1272– 1282.

Bibcode : 2011EcMod.222.1272K .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2011.01.012 .

^ Vergés, Adriana; Steinberg, Peter D.; Hay, Mark E.; Poore, Alistair G. B.; Campbell, Alexandra H.; Ballesteros, Enric; Heck, Kenneth L.; Booth, David J.; Coleman, Melinda A.; Feary, David A.; Figueira, Will; Langlois, Tim; Marzinelli, Ezequiel M.; Mizerek, Toni; Mumby, Peter J. (2014-08-22).

"The tropicalization of temperate marine ecosystems: climate-mediated changes in herbivory and community phase shifts" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

281 (1789): 20140846.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2014.0846 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 4100510 .

PMID 25009065 .

^ Kumagai, Naoki H.; García Molinos, Jorge; Yamano, Hiroya; Takao, Shintaro; Fujii, Masahiko; Yamanaka, Yasuhiro (2018-09-04).

"Ocean currents and herbivory drive macroalgae-to-coral community shift under climate warming" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

115 (36): 8990– 8995.

Bibcode : 2018PNAS..115.8990K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1716826115 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 6130349 .

PMID 30126981 .

^ "Atlantic Ocean - Exploration, Currents, Marine Life | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2024-04-20 .

^ US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

"Boundary Currents - Currents: NOAA's National Ocean Service Education" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2024-04-20 .

^ Chang, Yu-Chia; Tseng, Ruo-Shan; Chen, Guan-Yu; Chu, Peter C.; Shen, Yung-Ting (November 2013).

"Ship Routing Utilizing Strong Ocean Currents" .

The Journal of Navigation .

66 (6): 825– 835.

Bibcode : 2013JNav...66..825C .

doi : 10.1017/S0373463313000441 .

hdl : 10945/36070 .

ISSN 0373-4633 .

^ Ramesh, Nandini; Rising, James A.; Oremus, Kimberly L. (2019-06-21).

"The small world of global marine fisheries: The cross-boundary consequences of larval dispersal" .

Science .

364 (6446): 1192– 1196.

Bibcode : 2019Sci...364.1192R .

doi : 10.1126/science.aav3409 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 31221860 .

^ Talley, Lynne D. (April 1, 1995).

"North Pacific Intermediate Water in the Kuroshio/Oyashio Mixed Water Region" .

American Meteorological Society .

25 (4): 475– 501.

Bibcode : 1995JPO....25..475T .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0485(1995)025<0475:NPIWIT>2.0.CO;2 – via AMS Publications.

Further reading [ edit ] Hansen, B.; Østerhus, S; Quadfasel, D; Turrell, W (2004). "Already the day after tomorrow?".

Science .

305 (5686): 953– 954.

doi : 10.1126/science.1100085 .

PMID 15310882 .

S2CID 12968045 .

Kerr, Richard A. (2004). "A slowing cog in the North Atlantic ocean's climate machine".

Science .

304 (5669): 371– 372.

doi : 10.1126/science.304.5669.371a .

PMID 15087513 .

S2CID 42150417 .

Munday, Phillip L.; Jones, Geoffrey P.; Pratchett, Morgan S.; Williams, Ashley J. (2008).

"Climate change and the future for coral reef fishes" .

Fish and Fisheries .

9 (3): 261– 285.

Bibcode : 2008AqFF....9..261M .

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00281.x .

Rahmstorf, S. (2003).

"Thermohaline circulation: The current climate" .

Nature .

421 (6924): 699.

Bibcode : 2003Natur.421..699R .

doi : 10.1038/421699a .

PMID 12610602 .

S2CID 4414604 .

Roemmich, D. (2007). "Physical oceanography: Super spin in the southern seas".

Nature .

449 (7158): 34– 35.

Bibcode : 2007Natur.449...34R .

doi : 10.1038/449034a .

PMID 17805284 .

S2CID 2951110 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ocean currents .

Current global map of sea surface currents v t e Ocean currents and gyres Currents Arctic Ocean East Greenland North Icelandic Norwegian Transpolar Drift Stream Atlantic Ocean Angola Antilles Azores Baffin Island Benguela Brazil Canary Cape Horn Caribbean East Greenland East Iceland Falkland Florida Guinea Gulf Stream Irminger Labrador Lomonosov Loop North Atlantic North Brazil North Equatorial Norwegian Portugal South Atlantic South Equatorial West Greenland West Spitsbergen Indian Ocean Agulhas Agulhas Return East Madagascar Equatorial Counter Indian Monsoon Indonesian Throughflow Leeuwin Madagascar Mozambique North Madagascar Somali South Equatorial West Australian Pacific Ocean Alaska Aleutian California Cromwell Davidson East Australian East Korea Warm Equatorial Counter Humboldt Indonesian Throughflow Kamchatka Kuroshio Mindanao North Equatorial North Korea Cold North Pacific Oyashio South Equatorial Tasman Front Southern Ocean Antarctic Circumpolar Tasman Outflow Gyres Major gyres Indian Ocean Gyre North Atlantic Gyre South Atlantic Gyre North Pacific Gyre South Pacific Gyre Other gyres Beaufort Gyre Ross Gyre Weddell Gyre Related Atmospheric circulation Boundary current Coriolis force Ekman transport Marine debris Marine garbage patches Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific Thermohaline circulation Environment portal Oceans portal v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ppbsz
Cached time: 20250817162226
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.402 seconds
Real time usage: 1.798 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19779/1000000
Revision size: 39162/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 696361/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3243/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 210418/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.797/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23708331/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1333.978      1 -total
 41.83%  558.002    100 Template:Annotated_link
 24.37%  325.032      1 Template:Reflist
 14.32%  191.039     28 Template:Cite_journal
 12.71%  169.486     39 Template:Navbox
  9.12%  121.601     16 Template:Cite_web
  6.63%   88.508      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  6.39%   85.265      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  5.39%   71.922      1 Template:Ocean
  4.20%   56.050      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:376476:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817162226 and revision id 1305852407. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ocean_current&oldid=1305852407 " Categories : Ocean currents Oceanographical terminology Physical oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2014 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 12:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ocean current 77 languages Add topic

