Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 Assumptions 1.2 Atomic sentences 1.3 Atomic formulae 1.4 Compound sentences 1.5 Compound formulae 2 Interpretations 3 Translating sentences from a natural language into an artificial language 4 Philosophical significance 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Atomic sentence 7 languages العربية Español Italiano Português Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term in logic In logic and analytic philosophy , an atomic sentence is a type of declarative sentence which is either true or false (may also be referred to as a proposition , statement or truthbearer ) and which cannot be broken down into other simpler sentences. For example, "The dog ran" is atomic whereas "The dog ran and the cat hid" is molecular in natural language .

From a logical analysis point of view, the truth of a sentence is determined by only two things: the logical form of the sentence.

the truth of its underlying atomic sentences.

That is to say, for example, that the truth of the sentence "John is Greek and John is happy" is a function of the meaning of " and ", and the truth values of the atomic sentences "John is Greek" and "John is happy". However, the truth of an atomic sentence is not a matter that is within the scope of logic itself, but rather whatever art or science the content of the atomic sentence happens to be talking about.

[ 1 ] Logic has developed artificial languages, for example sentential calculus and predicate calculus , partly with the purpose of revealing the underlying logic of natural-language statements, the surface grammar of which may conceal the underlying logical structure. In these artificial languages an atomic sentence is a string of symbols which can represent an elementary sentence in a natural language, and it can be defined as follows. In a formal language, a well-formed formula (or wff) is a string of symbols constituted in accordance with the rules of syntax of the language. A term is a variable , an individual constant or an n-place function letter followed by n terms. An atomic formula is a wff consisting of either a sentential letter or an n-place predicate letter followed by n terms. A sentence is a wff in which any variables are bound. An atomic sentence is an atomic formula containing no variables. It follows that an atomic sentence contains no logical connectives , variables, or quantifiers . A sentence consisting of one or more sentences and a logical connective is a compound (or molecular) sentence.

Examples [ edit ] Assumptions [ edit ] In the following examples: let F , G , H be predicate letters; let a , b , c be individual constants; let x , y , z be variables.

Atomic sentences [ edit ] These wffs are atomic sentences; they contain no free variables or conjunctions: F ( a ) G ( a , b ) H ( a , b , c ) Atomic formulae [ edit ] These wffs are atomic formulae, but are not sentences (atomic or otherwise) because they include free variables: F ( x ) G ( a , z ) H ( x , y , z ) Compound sentences [ edit ] Not to be confused with Compound sentence .

These wffs are compound sentences. They are sentences, but are not atomic sentences because they are not atomic formulae: ∀ x ( F ( x )) ∃ z ( G ( a , z )) ∃ x ∀ y ∃ z ( H ( x , y , z )) ∀ x ∃ z ( F ( x ) ∧ G ( a , z )) ∃ x ∀ y ∃ z ( G ( a , z ) ∨ H ( x , y , z )) Compound formulae [ edit ] These wffs are compound formulae. They are not atomic formulae but are built up from atomic formulae using logical connectives. They are also not sentences because they contain free variables: F ( x ) ∧ G ( a , z ) G ( a , z ) ∨ H ( x , y , z ) Interpretations [ edit ] Main article: Interpretation (logic) A sentence is either true or false under an interpretation which assigns values to the logical variables. We might for example make the following assignments: Individual constants a: Socrates b: Plato c: Aristotle Predicates Fα: α is sleeping Gαβ: α hates β Hαβγ: α made β hit γ Sentential variables p : It is raining.

Under this interpretation the sentences discussed above would represent the following English statements: p : "It is raining." F ( a ): "Socrates is sleeping." H ( b , a , c ): "Plato made Socrates hit Aristotle." ∀ x ( F ( x )): "Everybody is sleeping." ∃ z ( G ( a , z )): "Socrates hates somebody." ∃ x ∀ y ∃ z ( H ( x , y , z )): "Somebody made everybody hit somebody." (They may not have all hit the same person z, but they all did so because of the same person x.) ∀ x ∃ z ( F ( x ) ∧ G ( a , z )): "Everybody is sleeping and Socrates hates somebody." ∃ x ∀ y ∃ z ( G ( a , z ) ∨ H ( x , y , z )): "Either Socrates hates somebody or somebody made everybody hit somebody." Translating sentences from a natural language into an artificial language [ edit ] Sentences in natural languages can be ambiguous, whereas the languages of the sentential logic and predicate logics are precise. Translation can reveal such ambiguities and express precisely the intended meaning.

For example, take the English sentence “Father Ted married Jack and Jill”. Does this mean Jack married Jill? In translating we might make the following assignments: Individual Constants a : Father Ted b : Jack c : Jill Predicates : M αβγ: α officiated at the marriage of β to γ Using these assignments the sentence above could be translated as follows: M ( a , b , c ): Father Ted officiated at the marriage of Jack and Jill.

∃ x ∃ y ( M ( a , b , x ) ∧ M ( a , c , y )): Father Ted officiated at the marriage of Jack to somebody and Father Ted officiated at the marriage of Jill to somebody.

∃ x ∃ y ( M ( x , a , b ) ∧ M ( y , a , c )): Somebody officiated at the marriage of Father Ted to Jack and somebody officiated at the marriage of Father Ted to Jill.

To establish which is the correct translation of “Father Ted married Jack and Jill”, it would be necessary to ask the speaker exactly what was meant.

Philosophical significance [ edit ] Main article: Logical atomism Atomic sentences are of particular interest in philosophical logic and the theory of truth and, it has been argued, there are corresponding atomic facts .

An atomic sentence (or possibly the meaning of an atomic sentence) is called an elementary proposition by Ludwig Wittgenstein and an atomic proposition by Bertrand Russell : 4.2 The sense of a proposition is its agreement and disagreement with possibilities of existence and non-existence of states of affairs. 4.21 The simplest kind of proposition, an elementary proposition, asserts the existence of a state of affairs.

— Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus .

A proposition (true or false) asserting an atomic fact is called an atomic proposition.

— Russell, "Introduction to Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus " See also [ 2 ] and [ 3 ] especially regarding elementary proposition and atomic proposition as discussed by Russell and Wittgenstein Note the distinction between an elementary/atomic proposition and an atomic fact .

No atomic sentence can be deduced from (is not entailed by) any other atomic sentence, no two atomic sentences are incompatible, and no sets of atomic sentences are self-contradictory. Wittgenstein made much of this in his Tractatus . If there are any atomic sentences then there must be "atomic facts" which correspond to those that are true, and the conjunction of all true atomic sentences would say all that was the case, i.e., "the world" since, according to Wittgenstein, "The world is all that is the case". (TLP:1). Similarly the set of all sets of atomic sentences corresponds to the set of all possible worlds (all that could be the case).

The T-schema , which embodies the theory of truth proposed by Alfred Tarski , defines the truth of arbitrary sentences from the truth of atomic sentences.

See also [ edit ] Logical constant References [ edit ] ^ The Philosophy of Logic by Willard Van Orman Quine (1970).

^ "Russell's Logical Atomism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2025.

^ "Wittgenstein's Logical Atomism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2022.

Bibliography [ edit ] Benson Mates, Elementary Logic , Oxford University Press, 1972.

Elliott Mendelson, Introduction to Mathematical Logic , Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1964.

v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐rn2vf
Cached time: 20250812024623
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.248 seconds
Real time usage: 0.329 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 726/1000000
Revision size: 9457/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 66201/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 807/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 17097/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.144/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4385783/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  252.999      1 -total
 39.40%   99.680      4 Template:Navbox
 35.48%   89.761      1 Template:Mathematical_logic
 30.57%   77.341      1 Template:Reflist
 26.81%   67.841      2 Template:Cite_web
 21.76%   55.063      1 Template:Short_description
 12.45%   31.502      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.26%   20.909      1 Template:Distinguish
  5.68%   14.379      7 Template:Main_other
  4.67%   11.806      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:943457:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024623 and revision id 1304388053. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atomic_sentence&oldid=1304388053 " Categories : Predicate logic Sentences by type Syntax (logic) Propositions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 19:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Atomic sentence 7 languages Add topic

