Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Environmental Versus Ecological Economics 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 18th and 19th Century 2.2 20th Century 3 Topics and concepts Toggle Topics and concepts subsection 3.1 Market failure 3.2 Externality 3.3 Common goods and public goods 3.4 Valuation 3.5 State subsidy 4 Solutions 5 Relationship to other fields 6 Professional bodies 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 Hypotheses and theorems 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Environmental economics 37 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca भोजपुरी Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar मराठी Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sub-field of economics Growth, Development and Environmental Economics in Asia discussion at Chatham House, London Part of a series about Environmental economics Carbon price Carbon credit Carbon emission trading Carbon fee and dividend Carbon finance Carbon offset Carbon tax Emissions trading Environmental tax Personal carbon trading Pigovian tax Social cost of carbon Climate change Carbon footprint Climate change mitigation Food miles Concepts Bright green environmentalism Circular economy Climate finance Corporate sustainability Degrowth Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco commerce Eco-innovation Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological modernization Ecotechnology Efficient energy use Energy conservation Environmental accounting design enterprise finance full-cost accounting impact design planning Ethical banking Fiscal environmentalism Green accounting building development economy growth job marketing paradox recovery trading vehicle High-performance buildings Impact investing Marginal abatement cost Natural resource economics Pollution haven hypothesis Social accounting Socially responsible business Social return on investment Sustainability accounting organization reporting Sustainable advertising agriculture capitalism consumer behaviour consumption design design standards development development goals energy finance food systems industries livelihood management market procurement refurbishment sourcing tourism transport Thermoeconomics Used good Value of Earth Energy transition 2000-watt society Alternative fuel , Carbon neutrality Carbon-neutral fuel Environmental technology Feed-in tariff Fossil fuel divestment Fossil fuel phase-out Low-carbon economy Net metering Renewable energy commercialization Sustainable energy Policies Carbon leakage Environmental pricing reform Environmental tariff Free public transport Green industrial policy Green New Deal Green politics Rail subsidies v t e Environmental economics is a sub-field of economics concerned with environmental issues .

[ 1 ] It has become a widely studied subject due to growing environmental concerns in the twenty-first century. Environmental economics "undertakes theoretical or empirical studies of the economic effects of national or local environmental policies around the world. Particular issues include the costs and benefits of alternative environmental policies to deal with air pollution , water quality , toxic substances , solid waste , and global warming ." [ 2 ] Environmental Versus Ecological Economics [ edit ] Environmental economics is distinguished from ecological economics in that ecological economics emphasizes the economy as a subsystem of the ecosystem with its focus upon preserving natural capital .

[ 3 ] While environmental economics focuses on human preferences, by trying to balance protecting natural resources with people's needs for products and services.

[ 4 ] Due to these differences it can be seen that ecological economics takes a more holistic approach to traditional economic theories, while environmental economics fits within traditional economic theories.

[ 4 ] One survey of German economists found that ecological and environmental economics are different schools of economic thought , with ecological economists emphasizing "strong" sustainability and rejecting the proposition that human-made ("physical") capital can substitute for natural capital.

[ 5 ] And environmental economics focusing on the efficient allocation of natural resources in order to fulfill human wants.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] 18th and 19th Century [ edit ] Although the term "environmental economics" became popular beginning in the 1960s, the entwinement of the two fields of environmentalism and economics started much earlier. Starting with economist Marquis de Condorcet in the 18th century, who had an interest in the link between economic activity and environmental issues.

[ 6 ] This was seen in his usage of externalities while analyzing environmental issues.

[ 6 ] During the classical period of economics , Adam Smith realized while the market is able to allocate private goods efficiently for most goods, it fails to do so in some environmental circumstances.

[ 6 ] It is within these scenarios where the market fails, that the government needs to take action.

[ 6 ] This is seen in his quote "Erecting and maintaining certain public works and certain public institutions which it can never be for the interest of any individual, or small number of individuals to erect and maintain; because the profit would never repay the expense to any individual or small number of individuals, though it may frequently do much more than repay it to a great society." [ 7 ] Thomas Robert Malthus also was another classical economist whose work led to the beginnings of environmental economists.

[ 6 ] Malthus' theory of population argued that agricultural productivity faces diminishing returns, which ultimately limits the exponential growth of human populations.

[ 6 ] This thought process later led economists to think about the relationship between resource scarcity and economic development.

[ 6 ] David Ricardo 's writings connected the natural environment and the standard of living which further helped to develop environmental economics later on.

[ 6 ] He stressed that the value of land varies based on how fertile it is.

[ 6 ] The last classical economist to add to environmental economics was John Stuart Mill .

[ 6 ] In his Principles of Political Economy , he wrote that the management of the environment cannot be done by the market and individuals, and is instead a governmental obligation, "[I]s there not the earth itself, its forests and waters, and all other natural riches, above and below the surface? These are the inheritance of the human race, and there must be regulations for the common enjoyment of it. What rights, and under what conditions, a person shall be allowed to exercise over any portion of this common inheritance cannot be left undecided. No function of government is less optional than the regulation of these things, or more completely involved in the idea of civilized society." [ 8 ] 20th Century [ edit ] Environmental economics became increasingly more popular in the 19th century.

[ 9 ] This is when the Resources for the Future (RFF) was established in Washington, D.C. This independent research organization applied economics to environmental issues.

[ 9 ] During this time H. Scott Gordon released his paper "Economic Theory of a Common Property Resource: The Fishery" which claimed that open access fisheries can be exploited leading to economic rents to be dissipated.

[ 9 ] Another important paper adding to environmental economics at this time was "Spaceship Earth" by Kenneth E. Boulding .

[ 9 ] This paper describes the physical limits of earths resources and how technology cannot truly help humans push those limits.

[ 9 ] Finally, Ronald Coase created an economic solution to environmental issues, which solidified environmental economics as a sub field of economics.

[ 9 ] He believed that there were two solutions 1) to tax the creator of the polluter and to create regulation that put the burden of action on the polluter or 2) the sufferer must pay the polluter to not pollute.

[ 9 ] Topics and concepts [ edit ] Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Market failure [ edit ] Air pollution is an example of market failure, as the factory is imposing a negative external cost on the community.

Central to environmental economics is the concept of market failure.

Market failure means that markets fail to allocate resources efficiently. As stated by Hanley, Shogren, and White (2007): [ 10 ] "A market failure occurs when the market does not allocate scarce resources to generate the greatest social welfare. A wedge exists between what a private person does given market prices and what society might want him or her to do to protect the environment. Such a wedge implies wastefulness or economic inefficiency; resources can be reallocated to make at least one person better off without making anyone else worse off." This results in an inefficient market that needs to be corrected through avenues such as government intervention. Common forms of market failure include externalities, non-excludability and non-rivalry .

[ 4 ] Externality [ edit ] An externality exists when a person makes a choice that affects other people in a way that is not accounted for in the market price. An externality can be positive or negative but is usually associated with negative externalities in environmental economics. For instance, water seepage in residential buildings occurring in upper floors affect the lower floors.

[ 11 ] Another example concerns how the sale of Amazon timber disregards the amount of carbon dioxide released in the cutting.

[ 12 ] [ better source needed ] Or a firm emitting pollution will typically not take into account the costs that its pollution imposes on others. As a result, pollution may occur in excess of the 'socially efficient' level, which is the level that would exist if the market was required to account for the pollution. A classic definition influenced by Kenneth Arrow and James Meade is provided by Heller and Starrett (1976), who define an externality as "a situation in which the private economy lacks sufficient incentives to create a potential market in some good and the nonexistence of this market results in losses of Pareto efficiency ".

[ 13 ] In economic terminology, externalities are examples of market failures , in which the unfettered market does not lead to an efficient outcome.

Common goods and public goods [ edit ] When it is too costly to exclude some people from access to an environmental resource, the resource is either called a common property resource (when there is rivalry for the resource, such that one person's use of the resource reduces others' opportunity to use the resource) or a public good (when use of the resource is non-rivalrous ). In either case of non-exclusion, market allocation is likely to be inefficient.

These challenges have long been recognized.

Hardin 's (1968) concept of the tragedy of the commons popularized the challenges involved in non-exclusion and common property. "Commons" refers to the environmental asset itself, "common property resource" or "common pool resource" refers to a property right regime that allows for some collective body to devise schemes to exclude others, thereby allowing the capture of future benefit streams; and "open-access" implies no ownership in the sense that property everyone owns nobody owns.

[ 14 ] The basic problem is that if people ignore the scarcity value of the commons, they can end up expending too much effort, over harvesting a resource (e.g., a fishery). Hardin theorizes that in the absence of restrictions, users of an open-access resource will use it more than if they had to pay for it and had exclusive rights, leading to environmental degradation . See, however, Ostrom 's (1990) work on how people using real common property resources have worked to establish self-governing rules to reduce the risk of the tragedy of the commons.

[ 14 ] The mitigation of climate change effects is an example of a public good, where the social benefits are not reflected completely in the market price. Because the personal marginal benefits are less than the social benefits the market under-provides climate change mitigation. This is a public good since the risks of climate change are both non-rival and non-excludable. Such efforts are non-rival since climate mitigation provided to one does not reduce the level of mitigation that anyone else enjoys. They are non-excludable actions as they will have global consequences from which no one can be excluded. A country's incentive to invest in carbon abatement is reduced because it can " free ride " off the efforts of other countries. Over a century ago, Swedish economist Knut Wicksell (1896) first discussed how public goods can be under-provided by the market because people might conceal their preferences for the good, but still enjoy the benefits without paying for them.

Global biochemical cycles Nitrogen cycle Water cycle Carbon cycle Oxygen cycle Valuation [ edit ] Assessing the economic value of the environment is a major topic within the field. The values of natural resources often are not reflected in prices that markets set and, in fact, many of them are available at no monetary charge. This mismatch frequently causes distortions in pricing of natural assets: both overuse of them and underinvestment in them.

[ 15 ] Economic value or tangible benefits of ecosystem services and, more generally, of natural resources, include both use and indirect (see the nature section of ecological economics). Non-use values include existence, option, and bequest values. For example, some people may value the existence of a diverse set of species, regardless of the effect of the loss of a species on ecosystem services. The existence of these species may have an option value, as there may be the possibility of using it for some human purpose. For example, certain plants may be researched for drugs. Individuals may value the ability to leave a pristine environment for their children.

Use and indirect use values can often be inferred from revealed behavior, such as the cost of taking recreational trips or using hedonic methods in which values are estimated based on observed prices. These use values can also be predicted through defensive behavior against pollution or environmental hazards, which can reveal how much people are willing to spend on healthcare and other preventative measures to avoid these hazards.

[ 16 ] Another health-based predictor of environmental use value is the value of a statistical life (VSL), which provides an estimate of how much people are willing to pay for small reductions in their risk of dying from environmental hazards.

[ 17 ] Non-use values are usually estimated using stated preference methods such as contingent valuation or choice modelling . Contingent valuation typically takes the form of surveys in which people are asked how much they would pay to observe and recreate in the environment ( willingness to pay ) or their willingness to accept (WTA) compensation for the destruction of the environmental good.

Hedonic pricing examines the effect the environment has on economic decisions through housing prices, traveling expenses, and payments to visit parks.

[ 18 ] State subsidy [ edit ] Almost all governments and states magnify environmental harm by providing various types of subsidies that have the effect of paying companies and other economic actors more to exploit natural resources than to protect them. The damage to nature of such public subsidies has been conservatively estimated at $4-$6 trillion U.S. dollars per year.

[ 19 ] Solutions [ edit ] Solutions advocated to correct such externalities include: Environmental regulations . Under this plan, the economic impact has to be estimated by the regulator. Usually, this is done using cost–benefit analysis . There is a growing realization that regulations (also known as "command and control" instruments) are not so distinct from economic instruments as is commonly asserted by proponents of environmental economics. E.g.1 regulations are enforced by fines, which operate as a form of tax if pollution rises above the threshold prescribed. E.g.2 pollution must be monitored and laws enforced, whether under a pollution tax regime or a regulatory regime. The main difference an environmental economist would argue exists between the two methods, however, is the total cost of the regulation. "Command and control" regulation often applies uniform emissions limits on polluters, even though each firm has different costs for emissions reductions, i.e., some firms, in this system, can abate pollution inexpensively, while others can only abate it at high cost. Because of this, the total abatement in the system comprises some expensive and some inexpensive efforts. Consequently, modern "Command and control" regulations are oftentimes designed in a way that addresses these issues by incorporating utility parameters. For instance, CO 2 emission standards for specific manufacturers in the automotive industry are either linked to the average vehicle footprint (US system) or average vehicle weight (EU system) of their entire vehicle fleet. Environmental economic regulations find the cheapest emission abatement efforts first, and then move on to the more expensive methods. E.g. as said earlier, trading, in the quota system, means a firm only abates pollution if doing so would cost less than paying someone else to make the same reduction. This leads to a lower cost for the total abatement effort as a whole.

[ citation needed ] Quotas on pollution . Often it is advocated that pollution reductions should be achieved by way of tradeable emissions permits , which if freely traded may ensure that reductions in pollution are achieved at least cost. In theory, if such tradeable quotas are allowed, then a firm would reduce its own pollution load only if doing so would cost less than paying someone else to make the same reduction, i.e., only if buying tradeable permits from another firm(s) is costlier. These tradeable permit approaches can also, in theory, improve economic efficiency and cost-effectiveness while increasing government revenue through the use of permit auctions instead of grandfathering practices.

[ 20 ] This entails the government selling off a certain number of these tradeable permits, allowing the government to capture the value of emissions and use it to reduce marginal tax rates.

[ 21 ] In practice, tradeable permits approaches have had some success, such as the U.S.'s sulphur dioxide trading program or the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, and interest in its application is spreading to other environmental problems.

Taxes and tariffs on pollution . Increasing the costs of polluting will discourage polluting, and will provide a "dynamic incentive", that is, the disincentive continues to operate even as pollution levels fall. A pollution tax that reduces pollution to the socially "optimal" level would be set at such a level that pollution occurs only if the benefits to society (for example, in form of greater production) exceeds the costs. This concept was introduced by Arthur Pigou , a British economist active in the late nineteenth through the mid-twentieth century. He showed that these externalities occur when markets fail, meaning they do not naturally produce the socially optimal amount of a good or service. He argued that “a tax on the production of paint would encourage the [polluting] factory to reduce production to the amount best for society as a whole.” [ 22 ] These taxes are known amongst economists as Pigouvian Taxes , and they regularly implemented where negative externalities are present. Some advocate a major shift from taxation from income and sales taxes to tax on pollution – the so-called " green tax shift ".

Better defined property rights . The Coase Theorem states that assigning property rights will lead to an optimal solution, regardless of who receives them, if transaction costs are trivial and the number of parties negotiating is limited. For example, if people living near a factory had a right to clean air and water, or the factory had the right to pollute, then either the factory could pay those affected by the pollution or the people could pay the factory not to pollute. Or, citizens could take action themselves as they would if other property rights were violated. The US River Keepers Law of the 1880s was an early example, giving citizens downstream the right to end pollution upstream themselves if the government itself did not act (an early example of bioregional democracy ). Many markets for "pollution rights" have been created in the late twentieth century—see emissions trading . Supply-side environmental policy implements efficiency by letting countries that are affected by climate change " buy coal " or other fossil fuel reserves abroad with the intention of conserving them: Bohm (1993); Harstad (2012). According to the Coase Theorem, the involved parties will bargain with each other, which results in an efficient solution. However, modern economic theory has shown that the presence of asymmetric information may lead to inefficient bargaining outcomes.

[ 23 ] Specifically, Rob (1989) has shown that pollution claim settlements will not lead to the socially optimal outcome when the individuals that will be affected by pollution have learned private information about their disutility already before the negotiations take place.

[ 24 ] Goldlücke and Schmitz (2018) have shown that inefficiencies may also result if the parties learn their private information only after the negotiations, provided that the feasible transfer payments are bounded.

[ 25 ] Using cooperative game theory, Gonzalez, Marciano and Solal (2019) have shown that in social cost problems involving more than three agents, the Coase theorem suffers from many counterexamples and that only two types of property rights lead to an optimal solution.

[ 26 ] Accounting for environmental externalities in the final price . In fact, the world's largest industries burn about $7.3 trillion of free natural capital per year.

[ 27 ] Thus, the world's largest industries would hardly be profitable if they had to pay for this destruction of natural capital. Trucost has assessed over 100 direct environmental impacts and condensed them into 6 key environmental performance indicators (EKPIs).

[ 28 ] The assessment of environmental impacts is derived from different sources (academic journals, governments, studies, etc.) due to the lack of market prices. The table below gives an overview of the 5 regional sectors per EKPI with the highest impact on the overall EKPI: Ranking of the 5 region-sectors by EKPI with the greatest impact across all EKPIs when measured in monetary terms [ 28 ] Rank IMPACT SECTOR REGION NATURAL CAPITAL COST$, BN REVENU$, BN IMPACT RATIO 1 GHG Coal Power Generation Eastern Asia 361.0 443.1 0.8 2 Land Use Cattle Ranching and Farming South America 312.1 16.6 18.7 3 GHG Iron and Steel Mills Eastern Asia 216.1 604.7 0.4 4 Water Wheat Farming Southern Asia 214.4 31.8 6.7 5 GHG Coal Power Generation Northern America 201.0 246.7 0.8 If companies are allowed to include some of these externalities in their final prices, this could undermine the Jevons paradox and provide enough revenue to help companies innovate.

Relationship to other fields [ edit ] Environmental economics is related to ecological economics but there are differences. Most environmental economists have been trained as economists. They apply the tools of economics to address environmental problems, many of which are related to so-called market failures—circumstances wherein the " invisible hand " of economics is unreliable. Most ecological economists have been trained as ecologists, but have expanded the scope of their work to consider the impacts of humans and their economic activity on ecological systems and services, and vice versa. This field takes as its premise that economics is a strict subfield of ecology . Ecological economics is sometimes described as taking a more pluralistic approach to environmental problems and focuses more explicitly on long-term environmental sustainability and issues of scale.

Environmental economics is viewed as more idealistic in a price system ; ecological economics as more realistic in its attempts to integrate elements outside of the price system as primary arbiters of decisions. These two groups of specialisms sometimes have conflicting views which may be traced to the different philosophical underpinnings.

Another context in which externalities apply is when globalization permits one player in a market who is unconcerned with biodiversity to undercut prices of another who is – creating a race to the bottom in regulations and conservation. This, in turn, may cause loss of natural capital with consequent erosion, water purity problems, diseases, desertification , and other outcomes that are not efficient in an economic sense. This concern is related to the subfield of sustainable development and its political relation, the anti-globalization movement .

The three pillars of sustainability (clickable) Environmental economics was once distinct from resource economics .

[ 29 ] Natural resource economics as a subfield began when the main concern of researchers was the optimal commercial exploitation of natural resource stocks. But resource managers and policy-makers eventually began to pay attention to the broader importance of natural resources (e.g. values of fish and trees beyond just their commercial exploitation). It is now difficult to distinguish "environmental" and "natural resource" economics as separate fields as the two became associated with sustainability . Many of the more radical green economists split off to work on an alternate political economy .

Environmental economics was a major influence on the theories of natural capitalism and environmental finance , which could be said to be two sub-branches of environmental economics concerned with resource conservation in production, and the value of biodiversity to humans, respectively. The theory of natural capitalism (Hawken, Lovins, Lovins) goes further than traditional environmental economics by envisioning a world where natural services are considered on par with physical capital .

The more radical green economists reject neoclassical economics in favour of a new political economy beyond capitalism or communism that gives a greater emphasis to the interaction of the human economy and the natural environment, acknowledging that "economy is three-fifths of ecology".

[ 30 ] This political group is a proponent of a transition to renewable energy.

These more radical approaches would imply changes to money supply and likely also a bioregional democracy so that political, economic, and ecological "environmental limits" were all aligned, and not subject to the arbitrage normally possible under capitalism .

An emerging sub-field of environmental economics studies its intersection with development economics . Dubbed "envirodevonomics" by Michael Greenstone and B. Kelsey Jack in their paper "Envirodevonomics: A Research Agenda for a Young Field", the sub-field is primarily interested in studying "why environmental quality [is] so poor in developing countries." [ 31 ] A strategy for better understanding this correlation between a country's GDP and its environmental quality involves analyzing how many of the central concepts of environmental economics, including market failures, externalities, and willingness to pay, may be complicated by the particular problems facing developing countries, such as political issues, lack of infrastructure, or inadequate financing tools, among many others.

[ 32 ] In the field of law and economics , environmental law is studied from an economic perspective. The economic analysis of environmental law studies instruments such as zoning, expropriation, licensing, third party liability, safety regulation, mandatory insurance, and criminal sanctions. A book by Michael Faure (2003) surveys this literature.

[ 33 ] Professional bodies [ edit ] The main academic and professional organizations for the discipline of Environmental Economics are the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists (AERE) and the European Association for Environmental and Resource Economics (EAERE) . The main academic and professional organization for the discipline of Ecological Economics is the International Society for Ecological Economics (ISEE). The main organization for Green Economics is the Green Economics Institute .

See also [ edit ] Agroecology Carbon fee and dividend Carbon finance Carbon negative fuel Circular economy Earth Economics (policy think tank) Eco-capitalism Eco commerce Economics of global warming Ecometrics Eco-Money Eco-socialism Ecosystem Marketplace Ecotax Energy balance Environmental accounting Environmental economists (category) Environmental credit crunch Environmental enterprise Environmental Investment Organisation Environmental pricing reform Environmental tariff Fair trade Fiscal environmentalism Free-market environmentalism Green banking Green libertarianism Green syndicalism Green trading Gross domestic product § Further criticisms ISO 14000 (environmental standards) List of scholarly journals in environmental economics Natural capital Natural resource Natural resource economics Principles of ecopreneurship Property rights (economics) Renewable resource Risk assessment Strategic Sustainable Investing (SSI) Systems ecology World Ecological Forum Hypotheses and theorems [ edit ] Coase theorem Porter hypothesis Notes [ edit ] ^ "Understanding Environmental Economics" .

Investopedia . Retrieved May 1, 2022 .

^ "Environmental Economics" .

NBER Working Group Descriptions . National Bureau of Economic Research . Retrieved July 23, 2006 .

^ Jeroen C.J.M. van den Bergh (2001). "Ecological Economics: Themes, Approaches, and Differences with Environmental Economics," Regional Environmental Change , 2(1), pp.

13-23 Archived 2008-10-31 at the Wayback Machine (press + ).

^ a b c d Omer, Abdeen Mustafa (March 17, 2023).

"Environmental and Ecological Economics" .

HSOA Journal of Environmental Science: Current Research .

^ Illge L, Schwarze R. (2009).

A Matter of Opinion: How Ecological and Neoclassical Environmental Economists Think about Sustainability and Economics . Ecological Economics.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Sandmo, Agnar.

"The Early History of Environmental Economics" .

Chicago Journals .

9 (1).

^ Smith, Adam (1776). "An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations".

Ocford University Press .

^ Mill, John Stuart (1848). "Principles of political economy: Collected works of John Stuart Mill".

University of Toronto Press .

2– 3 .

^ a b c d e f g Pearce, David (2002).

"An Intellectual History of Environmental Economics" .

Annual Review .

27 : 57– 81.

^ Hanley, N., J. Shogren, and B. White (2007). Environmental Economics in Theory and Practice, Palgrave, London.

^ Rita Yi Man Li (2012), The Internalisation Of Environmental Externalities Affecting Dwellings: A Review Of Court Cases In Hong Kong, Economic Affairs, Volume 32, Issue 2, pages 81–87 ^ Chapman, Same (May 3, 2012). "Environmental degradation replaces classic imperialism".

The Whitman College Pioneer: Whitman College .

^ Heller, Walter P. and David A. Starrett (1976), On the Nature of Externalities, in: Lin, Stephen A.Y. (ed.), Theory and Measurement of Economic Externalities, Academic Press, New York, p.10 ^ a b Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the Commons. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ UK Government Official Documents, February 2021, "The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review Headline Messages" ^ Williams, Austin M. (September 1, 2019).

"Understanding the micro-determinants of defensive behaviors against pollution" .

Ecological Economics .

163 : 42– 51.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.05.007 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ US EPA, OP (April 20, 2014).

"Mortality Risk Valuation" .

www.epa.gov . Retrieved May 7, 2025 .

^ Harris J. (2006).

Environmental and Natural Resource Economics: A Contemporary Approach . Houghton Mifflin Company.

^ UK Government Official Documents, February 2021, "The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review Headline Messages" p. 2 ^ Álvarez, Francisco; André, Francisco J. (December 1, 2015).

"Auctioning Versus Grandfathering in Cap-and-Trade Systems with Market Power and Incomplete Information" .

Environmental and Resource Economics .

62 (4): 873– 906.

doi : 10.1007/s10640-014-9839-z .

ISSN 1573-1502 .

^ Keohane, Nathaniel O. (January 1, 2009).

"Cap and Trade, Rehabilitated: Using Tradable Permits to Control U.S. Greenhouse Gases" .

Review of Environmental Economics and Policy .

3 (1): 42– 62.

doi : 10.1093/reep/ren021 .

ISSN 1750-6816 .

^ Kishtainy, Niall (February 27, 2018).

A little history of economics . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-23452-7 .

OCLC 1039849897 .

^ Myerson, Roger B; Satterthwaite, Mark A (1983).

"Efficient mechanisms for bilateral trading" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Theory .

29 (2): 265– 281.

doi : 10.1016/0022-0531(83)90048-0 .

hdl : 10419/220829 .

ISSN 0022-0531 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 1, 2006.

^ Rob, Rafael (1989). "Pollution claim settlements under private information".

Journal of Economic Theory .

47 (2): 307– 333.

doi : 10.1016/0022-0531(89)90022-7 .

ISSN 0022-0531 .

^ Goldlücke, Susanne; Schmitz, Patrick W. (2018).

"Pollution claim settlements reconsidered: Hidden information and bounded payments" .

European Economic Review .

110 : 211– 222.

doi : 10.1016/j.euroecorev.2018.08.005 .

ISSN 0014-2921 .

^ Gonzalez, Stéphane; Marciano, Alain; Solal, Philippe (2019). "The social cost problem, rights, and the (non)empty core".

Journal of Public Economic Theory .

21 (2): 347– 365.

doi : 10.1111/jpet.12334 .

S2CID 158059174 .

^ Roberts, David (April 17, 2013).

"None of the world's top industries would be profitable if they paid for the natural capital they use" .

Grist . Retrieved December 14, 2022 .

^ a b Joseph (April 1, 2013).

"Natural Capital at Risk: The Top 100 Externalities of Business" .

Capitals Coalition . Retrieved December 14, 2022 .

^ "THE EVOLUTION OF ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS: A VIEW FROM THE INSIDE" (PDF) .

^ Mike Nickerson.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Greenstone, Michael; Jack, B. Kelsey (2015). "Envirodevonomics: A Research Agenda for an Emerging Field".

Journal of Economic Literature .

53 (1): 5– 42.

doi : 10.1257/jel.53.1.5 .

S2CID 73594686 .

^ Inclusive green growth the pathway to sustainable development (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: World Bank. May 2012. pp.

12– 13.

ISBN 978-0-8213-9552-3 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 21, 2012 . Retrieved January 15, 2015 .

^ Faure, Michael G. (2003).

The Economic Analysis of Environmental Policy and Law: An Introduction . Edward Elgar.

ISBN 978-1-84376-234-8 .

References [ edit ] Kneese, Allen V.

; Russell, Clifford S. (1987). "environmental economics". In Eatwell, John; Milgate, Murray; Newman, Peter (eds.).

The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics . Vol. 2. pp.

159– 164.

Stavins, Robert N.

(February 28, 2008).

"environmental economics" . In Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E. (eds.).

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2nd ed.). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan .

doi : 10.1057/9780230226203.0486 .

ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5 . Archived from the original on December 29, 2010.

Cropper, Maureen L.; Oates, Wallace E.

(June 1992).

"Environmental economics: A survey" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Literature .

30 (2): 675– 740.

JSTOR 2727701 . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 23, 2010.

Pearce, David (2002).

"An intellectual history of environmental economics" .

Annual Review of Energy and the Environment .

27 : 57– 81.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.energy.27.122001.083429 .

Tausch, Arno (March 22, 2016). " 'Smart development': An essay on a new political economy of the environment".

SSRN Electronic Journal .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2752988 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

SSRN 2752988 .

UNEP (2007).

"Guidelines for conducting economic valuation of coastal ecosystem goods and services" . UNEP/GEF/SCS Technical Publication No. 8. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008.

UNEP (2007).

"Procedure for determination of national and regional economic values for ecotone goods and services, and total economic values of coastal habitats in the context of the UNEP/GEF Project entitled: "Reversing environmental degradation trends in the South China Sea and Gulf of Thailand" " . South China Sea Knowledge Document No. 3. UNEP/GEF/SCS/Inf.3. Archived from the original on July 6, 2008.

Perman, Roger; et al. (2003).

Natural resource and environment economics (PDF) (3 ed.). Pearson.

ISBN 978-0-273-65559-6 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 18, 2018.

Field, Barry (2017).

Environmental economics: An introduction . New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-802189-3 .

OCLC 931860817 .

Sandmo, Agnar (2015).

"The Early History of Environmental Economics" .

Review of Environmental Economics and Policy .

9 : 43– 63.

doi : 10.1093/reep/reu018 .

hdl : 11250/194577 .

Further reading [ edit ] Anderson, David A. (June 30, 2024).

Environmental Economics and Natural Resource Management (6th ed.). London: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003428732 .

ISBN 978-1-032-55039-8 .

Banzhaf, H. Spencer (October 31, 2023).

Pricing the priceless: A history of environmental economics . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781108867184 .

ISBN 978-1-108-86718-4 .

Kumekawa, Ian (June 1, 2024). "Measuring the Cost of Pollution: Economic Life, Economic Theory, and the Origins of Environmental Economics".

The Journal of Modern History .

96 (2): 332– 361.

doi : 10.1086/730038 .

ISSN 0022-2801 .

Links to related articles v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric science Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental humanities Environmental statistics Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Radioecology Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Public transport encouragement Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary Environment by year See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Technogaianism Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Industrial ecology Tools Agent-based model Cost–benefit analysis DPSIR Ecolabel Ecological footprint Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental impact assessment Environmental management system EIO-LCA Input–output model Integrated chain management ISO 14000 Life-cycle assessment Life-cycle cost analysis Material flow analysis MET Matrix Stakeholder analysis Concepts Circular economy Cradle-to-cradle design Dematerialization Eco-efficiency Eco-industrial development Eco-industrial park Ecological modernization Efficient energy use Exergy Extended producer responsibility Industrial metabolism Industrial symbiosis Polluter pays principle Precautionary principle Rebound effect Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste valorization Related fields Cleaner production Design for environment Earth systems engineering and management Ecological economics Ecological modernization Environmental economics Green chemistry Sustainable development Urban ecology Urban metabolism v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐47nzb
Cached time: 20250812010017
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.691 seconds
Real time usage: 0.833 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4232/1000000
Revision size: 44185/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 271147/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 65802/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 202286/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.388/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8468182/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  622.147      1 -total
 17.91%  111.399      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.21%   88.431     18 Template:Cite_journal
 14.09%   87.672      8 Template:Cite_web
 11.00%   68.452      1 Template:Green_economics_sidebar
 10.54%   65.574      1 Template:Navboxes
  8.83%   54.918      1 Template:Short_description
  7.30%   45.436      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
  7.29%   45.339      4 Template:Navbox
  5.41%   33.675      7 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47763:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812010017 and revision id 1301398539. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_economics&oldid=1301398539 " Categories : Environmental economics Environmental social science Industrial ecology Market failure Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012 CS1: unfit URL This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 16:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental economics 37 languages Add topic

