Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Pre-European history 2.2 European settlement 2.3 Initial restoration 2.4 Wairarapa Moana Wetlands Project 2.5 Predator control 3 Recreation 4 References Toggle the table of contents Wairarapa Moana Wetlands 1 language Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°14′02″S 175°11′35″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.2339913°S 175.1930894°E ﻿ / -41.2339913; 175.1930894 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wetland in the Wellington Region of New Zealand Wairarapa Moana Wetlands Western shore of Lake Wairarapa Type Reserve Location South Wairarapa District , Wellington Region , New Zealand Coordinates 41°14′02″S 175°11′35″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.2339913°S 175.1930894°E ﻿ / -41.2339913; 175.1930894 Area 9,000 hectares (22,000 acres) Operated by Wellington Regional Council Open 24 hours Status Open Website waiwetlands .org .nz The Wairarapa Moana Wetlands are a major wetland, located in the South Wairarapa District in the Wellington Region at the southern end of New Zealand's North Island .

[ 1 ] The wetland is the largest in the lower North Island, [ 2 ] one of the largest in New Zealand, [ 3 ] and was recognised as a wetland of international significance under the Ramsar Convention in August 2020.

[ 4 ] It covers 9,000 hectares (22,000 acres), [ 1 ] and includes Lake Wairarapa , which covers 7,800 hectares (19,000 acres).

[ 5 ] The wetland is a administered by Wellington Regional Council , in conjunction with Kahungunu ki Wairarapa , the Department of Conservation , South Wairarapa District Council , and Rangitāne o Wairarapa .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Geography [ edit ] The area has a range of wetlands, including sedgelands , open water and lagoons , lakeshore mudflats , saltmarsh and ephemeral wetlands .

Raupō (bullrush) grows up to three metres tall.

[ 6 ] The main Lake Wairarapa is relatively shallow, with a depth of about 2.5 metres.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] In the lake and wetlands, there are populations of tuna kūwharuwharu (longfin eels), tuna hao (shortfin eels), toitoi (common bully), īnanga , kanae (yellow eyed mullet), kākahi (freshwater mussel), mohoao (black flounder), waikaka or hauhau (brown mudfish), kōuru (freshwater crayfish), panoko (torrentfish), giant kōkopu and redfin bully .

[ 6 ] The area is a habitat for a range of birds, including matuku (Australasian bittern), kuaka (bar-tailed godwit), pohowera (banded dotterel), taranui (caspian tern), weweia (New Zealand dabchick), pūwheto (spotless crake), kawau (black shag), tarāpuka (black-billed gull), kuriri (Pacific golden plover), pūtangitangi (paradise shelduck), kōtuku ngutupapa (royal spoonbill) and poaka (pied stilt).

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Pre-European history [ edit ] The name Wairarapa means "glistening waters" in the Māori language . According to some oral histories, the Polynesian explorer Kupe named the wetlands after touching down in the area several times. According to other oral histories, explorer Haunui named the wetlands after the way the lake appeared to glisten from the Remutaka Ranges to the west.

[ 8 ] Rangitāne began settling in the region in the 15th century.

Ngāti Ira also settled in the wetlands before moving to the Wellington Harbour .

Ngāti Kahungunu came later and were in regular conflict with Rangitāne until a political agreement was reached in the 17th century.

[ 8 ] The wetlands became an important place to gather food and plant material.

[ 7 ] The area became known for its abundance of tuna ( eel ), as well as plentiful inanga ( whitebait ) and kōkopu (freshwater fish).

[ 8 ] During the early 19th century, Ngāti Whātua and Ngāti Maniapoto took control of parts of the area.

Taranaki invaded.

Ngāti Tama settled on the western shore in a short-lived alliance with Rangitāne. Many Rangitāne and Ngāti Kahungunu fled the area, until a peace agreement signed at Pito-one in 1840 allowed them to return.

[ 8 ] European settlement [ edit ] The first European sighting of the wetlands was by James Cook in 1777.

Georg Forster , a naturalist on Cook's ship, said it was the "“most convenient spot for European settlement", with extensive land suitable for cultivation.

[ 9 ] European farmers established sheep and cattle stations in the wetlands in 1844, including the first extensive sheep station in New Zealand. Many early farmers struggled with mosquitoes and floods, and relied on purchasing food from their Māori landlords.

[ 9 ] In 1872, farmers petitioned the Government to purchase the wetlands and control the summer and autumn floods. The wetland's Māori owners wanted the high waters to continue, to allow for a harvest of the highly prized taonga of eels. The Government rejected the campaign, and in 1882 the Native Land Court confirmed Māori ownership of the area.

[ 9 ] From 1886, farmers under police escort began opening the outlet to stop seasonal flooding. They continued do so after an 1891 Royal Commission of Enquiry confirmed Māori ownership, and after Piripi Te Maari and other local Māori began peacefully protesting the opening in 1892. The dispute was not resolved until local Māori gifted the lake and wetland to the Government in 1896. In return, Māori retained rights over the water and fisheries, and were promised a lakeside reserve they never received.

[ 9 ] During the early 20th century, there were ongoing disputes between farmers about how to dam and flood properties.

[ 9 ] After major floods in June 1947, authorities began to extensively drain the wetlands.

[ 10 ] Initial restoration [ edit ] Plans to drain Lake Wairarapa were abandoned in 1989. A National Water Conservation Order, issued in 1989, recognised minimum water levels should be maintained to protect native habitats and wildlife. An oversight committee was established which recognised the wetland's spiritual and cultural significance to Māori people.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Several further steps were taken to protect the wetland, including the establishment of legal protections under the Resource Management Act in 1991, the development of an action plan by the Department of Conservation in 2000, the establishment of a clean streams accord by Fonterra in 2003, and the conversion of 130 hectares (320 acres) of marginal farmland to wetlands in 2004.

[ 10 ] Wairarapa Moana Wetlands Project [ edit ] The current coordinated wetland restoration project began in 2008.

[ 10 ] The project aims to restore the wetland, which has been heavily polluted with high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus and has been facing erosion and sedimentation.

[ 12 ] The Government announced $3.5 million in funding towards wetland restoration in July 2020.

[ 13 ] [ 12 ] Wellington Regional Council contributed $1 million, [ 14 ] and the Department of Conservation an additional $450,000.

[ 15 ] Almost 13,000 plants were planted in winter 2020, but many did not survive in the dry and exposed conditions.

[ 16 ] Wairarapa Moana was recognised as a wetland of international significance under the Ramsar Convention in August 2020.

[ 4 ] It was the seventh New Zealand wetland to receive the recognition.

[ 17 ] Restorative plantings were damaged or uprooted in September 2020.

[ 18 ] An open day was held in the park in March 2021.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Predator control [ edit ] In 2023, the Greater Wellington Regional Council reported that since the installation of a network of predator traps in 2013, they had removed hundreds of ferrets, feral cats and mice, and thousands of hedgehogs and rats. Control of these predators has been linked to increasing populations of the nationally critical Australasian bittern or matuku hūrepo .

[ 21 ] Recreation [ edit ] The Wairarapa Moana Wetlands has walking tracks, there are cycling routes around the lake, and there are several spots for bird-watching , kayaking , windsurfing and fishing. Swimming can also be safe away from the sea, provided there has been no heavy rain in the past 48 hours.

[ 22 ] The park can be accessed via a road from Featherston and is open 24 hours a day.

[ 1 ] Dogs are permitted, but must be kept under control and away from bird nesting areas. Fireworks are not permitted.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lake Wairarapa .

^ a b c d e f "Wairarapa Moana Wetlands" .

gw.govt.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ "Wairarapa Moana Wetlands" .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ "Friends of Onoke Spit call for extra manpower in conservation" .

Wairarapa Times-Age . 9 June 2021. Archived from the original on 16 July 2023.

^ a b Fuller, Piers (21 August 2020).

" 'A lake worth saving': Wairarapa Moana named 'a wetland of international significance' " .

stuff.co.nz .

Dominion Post .

^ a b "About the project" .

waiwetlands.org.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ a b c "Plants and ecoystems" .

waiwetlands.org.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ a b "Lake Wairarapa & Wairarapa Moana" .

wairarapanz.com . Destination Wairarapa.

^ a b c d Smith, Sophronia.

"Ko ngā kōrero taketake o Wairarapa Moana" .

waiwetlands.org.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ a b c d e Winters, Gareth.

"Disputed Waters" .

waiwetlands.org.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ a b c d Flack, Jim.

"Disputed Waters" .

waiwetlands.org.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

^ Cromarty, Pam (1996). "Lake Wairarapa Wetlands". In Scott, Derek A. (ed.).

A directory of wetlands in New Zealand (PDF) . Wellington, N.Z.: Department of Conservation, New Zealand. pp.

145– 149.

ISBN 0-478-01776-6 .

OCLC 38890560 .

^ a b "Wetland work boost for Wairarapa mana" . waateanews.com.

Radio Waatea . 1 February 2021.

^ "World Wetlands Day – $3.5 million boost in funding ramping up wetland restoration in the Wairarapa" .

New Zealand Government .

Ministry for the Environment . April 2021.

^ Woolf, Amber-Leigh (6 July 2020).

"Wellington wetlands and rivers get $10m for new jobs and cleaner waterways" .

stuff.co.nz .

Dominion Post .

^ "Saving Wairarapa Moana Wetlands" . New Zealand Institute of Landscape Architects. Landscape Architecture Aotearoa. 23 February 2021.

^ Fuller, Piers (5 March 2021).

"Thousands of wetland project plants dead and dying after dry spell" .

stuff.co.nz .

Dominion Post .

^ "SWDC offers congratulations on Wairarapa Moana RAMSAR" . swdc.govt.nz.

South Wairarapa District Council . 25 August 2020.

^ "World-renowned Wairarapa wetlands project damaged" .

Radio New Zealand . RNZ News. 29 September 2020.

^ "Wairarapa Moana Wetlands Project Invites Community To Feel The Land's Rhythms At Lake Domain" .

scoop.co.nz .

Wellington Regional Council . 12 March 2021.

^ "Wairarapa Moana celebrated" .

Wairarapa Times-Age . 26 March 2021.

^ "Boom Of Rare Native Birds In Wairarapa Moana" .

www.scoop.co.nz . 13 December 2023 . Retrieved 14 December 2023 .

^ "Visitors" .

waiwetlands.org.nz .

Wellington Regional Council .

v t e South Wairarapa District , New Zealand Seats : Martinborough Populated places Greytown Featherston Kahutara Lake Ferry Martinborough Ngawi Pāpāwai Pirinoa Tauwharenīkau Geographic features Cape Palliser Wairarapa Moana Wetlands Lake Wairarapa Facilities and attractions Aorangi Forest Park Cape Palliser Lighthouse Cobblestones Museum Fell Locomotive Museum Fernside Homestead Hau Nui Wind Farm Wairarapa Dark Sky Reserve Railway stations Featherston Fernside Woodside Matarawa Government District Council Mayor Regional Council Schools Kuranui College v t e Greater Wellington Regional Council Regional parks Akatarawa Forest Baring Head Battle Hill Farm Forest Park Belmont Regional Park East Harbour Regional Park Hutt River Trail Hutt Water Collection Area Kaitoke Regional Park Pakuratahi Forest Queen Elizabeth Park Te Awarua-o-Porirua Harbour Wainuiomata Regional Park Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Wairarapa Moana Wetlands Wellington Harbour Whitireia Park v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wairarapa_Moana_Wetlands&oldid=1285503477 " Categories : South Wairarapa District Ramsar sites in New Zealand Wetlands of the Wellington Region Parks in the Wellington Region Birdwatching sites in New Zealand Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2021 Use New Zealand English from September 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 14 April 2025, at 02:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wairarapa Moana Wetlands 1 language Add topic

