Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Open season 2 Closed season 3 References Toggle the table of contents Hunting season 12 languages Čeština Deutsch Eesti فارسی 한국어 Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Time when it is legal to hunt and kill a particular species This article is about the activity of hunting. For other uses, see Hunting Season .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hunting season" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A hunting season is the designated time in which certain game animals can be killed in certain designated areas. In the United States , each state determines and sets its own specific dates to hunt the certain game animal, such as California, in which they designate certain zones, in which each have their own separate dates in order to legally hunt.

[ 1 ] In the United States, each state has primary responsibility and authority over the hunting of wildlife that resides within state boundaries. State wildlife agencies that sell hunting licenses are the best source of information regarding hunting seasons, areas open/closed to hunting, etc. Hunting of migratory birds such as ducks and geese is managed cooperatively by state fish and wildlife agencies and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . Migratory waterfowl hunters must possess both a state hunting license and a Federal Migratory Bird Hunting and Conservation Stamp (Duck Stamp) , and each hunter needs a Harvest Information Program number for each state in which they hunt migratory birds.

[ 2 ] Open season [ edit ] Open season is the time of the year when a particular wildlife species is allowed to be hunted as per local wildlife conservation law. In the US, for example, each state creates laws and codes governing the season dates and species, established on a complex process including citizen input, a state fish and game agency or department, and often an independent game council. This process updates a game code for each state which outlines all rules and regulations including hunting seasons. In each of the 50 states, abstracts of the larger game code are then presented in the official state hunting regulations for that given year. Season dates are often timed to occur when the population is at its maximum. It avoids the peak breeding period when members of a species are particularly vulnerable, and avoids any disruption to mating, which may affect productivity.

[ 3 ] Open seasons are determined by a multitude of factors. Those include migrating seasons, mating seasons, and birthing seasons. For migrating waterfowl, the season is determined by when the waterfowl have migrated into the area. Since waterfowl migrate south, in the United States, the seasons for waterfowl begin earlier in the Northern states and later for the southern states.

[ 4 ] For other animals such as elk, the archery hunting season is during their breeding time, making it a little easier for archers to get within ethical shooting range. The non-hunting season for elk is from late winter to early fall. During this non-hunting season the cow elk are giving birth to calves while the bull elk are preparing to grow back a new set of antlers.

[ 5 ] Although all states control most hunting seasons and regulations, the season for migratory waterfowl is controlled by the federal government. The government provides the states with specific dates and then states have the opportunity to decide whether to use the full season length, make into sections, or overall make the season shorter in that state. Using California as an example again, it decides to use the entire length of the season that has been determined by the federal government.

[ 6 ] Closed season [ edit ] Closed season is the time of the year during which hunting an animal of a given species is contrary to law. Typically, closed seasons are designed to protect a species when it is most vulnerable or, sometimes, to protect animals during their breeding season .

The closed season is timed to prevent hunting during times of peak reproductive activity, impaired flying ability during moulting (of game birds such as waterfowl ), and temperature extremes, low population levels and food shortage.

[ 3 ] A closed season is enforced by local conservation law for the conservation of the species and wildlife management ; any hunting during closed season is punishable by law and termed as illegal hunting or poaching .

References [ edit ] ^ "Deer Hunting" .

wildlife.ca.gov . Retrieved 16 May 2020 .

^ Fish and Wildlife Service ^ a b When can I hunt, Game Hunting, Recreation and Tourism; The Department of Sustainability and Environment (DSE), Government of Victoria, Australia.

Archived 1 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved 4 December 2008.

^ "Understanding Waterfowl Migration and Winter Distribution" .

ducks.org . Retrieved 15 May 2020 .

^ "Elk Facts" .

Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation . Retrieved 16 May 2020 .

^ "Waterfowl Hunting" .

wildlife.ca.gov . Retrieved 15 May 2020 .

v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐74cbc45b88‐nt48b
Cached time: 20250812020014
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.457 seconds
Real time usage: 0.751 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 903/1000000
Revision size: 5794/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 62899/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9116/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 29843/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.305/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5362922/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  647.752      1 -total
 25.60%  165.799      1 Template:Hunting_topics
 25.45%  164.823      1 Template:Reflist
 25.44%  164.782      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 24.53%  158.911      1 Template:Navbox
 19.82%  128.402      4 Template:Cite_web
 14.83%   96.065      1 Template:Short_description
 11.08%   71.782      2 Template:Ambox
  8.54%   55.286      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.12%   52.623      1 Template:Globalize Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16886629:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020014 and revision id 1248885557. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hunting_season&oldid=1248885557 " Categories : Hunting Wildlife Animal law Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from May 2016 Articles needing additional references from January 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from April 2023 This page was last edited on 2 October 2024, at 00:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hunting season 12 languages Add topic

