Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Critique 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hermeneutic circle 16 languages Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards , as it lacks encyclopedic content defining and explaining the subject material, directly addresses the reader (2nd person tense), and contains incomplete sentences..

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( February 2025 ) This article provides insufficient context for those unfamiliar with the subject .

Please help improve the article by providing more context for the reader .

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The process of understanding a text Hermeneutic circle The hermeneutic circle ( German : hermeneutischer Zirkel ) describes the process of understanding a text hermeneutically . It refers to the idea that one's understanding of the text as a whole is established by reference to the individual parts and one's understanding of each individual part by reference to the whole. The circle is a metaphor for the procedure of transforming one's understanding of the part and the whole through iterative recontextualization.

History [ edit ] St.

Augustine of Hippo was the first philosopher and theologian to have introduced the hermeneutic cycle of faith and reason (in Latin : credo ut intellegam and intellego ut credam ). The circle was conceived to improve the Biblical exegesis and it was activated by the personal belief in the truthfulness of God. According to the Confessions , misleading verses of the Bible shall be read at the light of the Holy Spirit God and in the context of "the spirit of the Bible as a whole", [ 1 ] intended as a unique and non-contradictory text divinely inspired.

[ 2 ] Friedrich Schleiermacher 's approach to interpretation focuses on the importance of the interpreter understanding the text as a necessary stage to interpreting it. Understanding involved repeated circular movements between the parts and the whole. Hence the idea of an interpretive or hermeneutic circle.

Understanding the meaning of a text is not about decoding the author's intentions.

[ 3 ] It is about establishing real relationships between reader, text, and context." [ 4 ] Even reading a sentence involves these repeated circular movements through a hierarchy of parts–whole relationships. Thus, as you are reading this sentence, you are analysing single words as the text unfolds, but you are also weighing the meaning of each word against our changing sense of the overall meaning of the sentence you are reading, or perhaps misunderstanding, or maybe this sentence is reminding you of, or clashing with, another view about interpretation you have, in the past, advocated or disparaged. Hence we are brought to the sentence's larger historical context, depending on its location, and our own circumstances.

Wilhelm Dilthey used the example of understanding a sentence as an example of the circular course of hermeneutic understanding. He particularly stressed that meaning and meaningfulness were always contextual. Thus the meaning of any sentence cannot be fully interpreted unless we know the historical circumstances of its utterance. And this means that interpretation is always linked to the situation of the interpreter, because one can only construct a history from the particular set of circumstances in which one currently exists. Thus Dilthey says: "Meaningfulness fundamentally grows out of a relation of part to whole that is grounded in the nature of living experience." [ 5 ] For Dilthey, "Meaning is not subjective; it is not projection of thought or thinking onto the object; it is a perception of a real relationship within a nexus prior to the subject-object separation in thought." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Martin Heidegger (1927) developed the concept of the hermeneutic circle to envision a whole in terms of a reality that was situated in the detailed experience of everyday existence by an individual (the parts). So understanding was developed on the basis of "fore-structures" of understanding, that allow external phenomena to be interpreted in a preliminary way.

Another instance of Heidegger's use of the hermeneutic circle occurs in his examination of The Origin of the Work of Art (1935–1936). Here Heidegger argues that both artists and art works can only be understood with reference to each other, and that neither can be understood apart from 'art,' which, as well, cannot be understood apart from the former two. The 'origin' of the work of art is mysterious and elusive, seemingly defying logic: "thus we are compelled to follow the circle. This is neither a makeshift or a defect. To enter upon the path is the strength of thought, to continue on it is the feast of thought, assuming thinking is a craft. Not only is the main step from work to art a circle like the step from art to work, but every separate step that we attempt circles this circle. In order to discover the nature of the art that really prevails in the work, let us go to the actual work and ask the work what and how it is." [ 6 ] : 18 Heidegger continues, saying that a work of art is not a simple thing (as a doorknob or a shoe is, which do not normally involve aesthetic experience ), but it cannot escape its "thingly character," that is, being part of the larger order of things in the world, apart from all aesthetic experience.

[ 6 ] : 19 The synthesis of thingly and artistic is found in the work's allegorical and symbolic character, "but this one element in a work that manifests another, this one element that joins another, is the thingly feature in the art work".

[ 6 ] : 20 At this point, however, Heidegger raises the doubt of "whether the work is at bottom something else and not a thing at all." Later he tries to break down the metaphysical opposition between form and matter, and the whole other set of dualisms which include: rational and irrational, logical and illogical/alogical, and subject and object. Neither of these concepts is independent of the other, yet neither can be reduced to the other: Heidegger suggests we have to look beyond both.

[ 6 ] : 27 Hans-Georg Gadamer (1975) further developed this concept, leading to what is recognized as a break with previous hermeneutic traditions. While Heidegger saw the hermeneutic process as cycles of self-reference that situated our understanding in a priori prejudices, Gadamer reconceptualized the hermeneutic circle as an iterative process through which a new understanding of a whole reality is developed by means of exploring the detail of existence. Gadamer viewed understanding as linguistically mediated, through conversations with others in which reality is explored and an agreement is reached that represents a new understanding.

[ 7 ] The centrality of  conversation to the hermeneutic circle is developed by Donald Schön , who characterizes design as a hermeneutic circle that is developed by means of "a conversation with the situation." [ 8 ] Paul de Man , in his essay "Form and Intent in the American New Criticism," talks about the hermeneutic circle with reference to paradoxical ideas about "textual unity" espoused by and inherited from American criticism. De Man points out that the "textual unity" New Criticism locates in a given work has only a "semi-circularity" and that the hermeneutic circle is completed in "the act of interpreting the text." Combining Gadamer and Heidegger into an epistemological critique of interpretation and reading, de Man argues that with New Criticism, American Criticism "pragmatically entered" the hermeneutic circle, "mistaking it for the organic circularity of natural processes." [ 9 ] Critique [ edit ] Judith N. Shklar (1986) points out the ambiguity in the meaning and function of the "circle" as a metaphor for understanding. It is taken to refer to a geometric circle, rather than a circular process, it seems to imply a center, but it is unclear whether the interpreter him/herself stands there, or whether, on the contrary, some "organizing principle and illuminating principle apart from him [is] there waiting to be discovered." [ 10 ] Furthermore, and more problematic for Shklar, "the hermeneutic circle makes sense only if there is a known and closed whole, which can be understood in terms of its own parts and which has as its core God, who is its anchor and creator. Only the Bible really meets these conditions. It is the only possibly wholly self-sufficient text." [ 10 ] A further problem relates to the fact that Gadamer and others assume a fixed role for tradition (individual and disciplinary/academic) in the process of any hermeneutic understanding, while it is more accurate to say that interpreters have multiple and sometimes conflicting cultural attachments, yet this does not prevent intercultural and/or interdisciplinary dialogue. Finally, she warns that, at least in social science, interpretation is not a substitute for explanation.

Heidegger (1935–1936) [ 6 ] : 18 and Schockel (1998) [ 11 ] respond to critics of this model of interpretation who allege it is a case of invalid reasoning by asserting that any form of reflection or interpretation must oscillate between particular and general, part and whole. It does not ' beg the question ' because it is a different approach than formal logic. While it does imply presuppositions, it does not take any premise for granted. Schokel suggests a spiral as a better metaphor for interpretation, but admits that Schleiermacher's influence may have 'acclimatized' the term.

See also [ edit ] Critical reading Georg Anton Friedrich Ast Experiential learning Notes [ edit ] ^ "Digital hermeneutics" .

^ "Augustine on Faith and Reason Part II" .

^ Intentionalism , however, does not necessarily exclude an embrace of the notion of the hermeneutic circle, as Søren Harnow Klausen shows in "Levels of Literary Meaning," Philosophy and Literature , Vol. 41, No. 1 (April 2017): 70-90.  "I conclude, almost to my own surprise, that something like the traditional idea of the hermeneutic circle is indispensable.  We must work back and forth among intentions of lower and higher order, assigning to them varying relative weights as we go along, striving for some kind of balance, coherence, or overall appropriateness that cannot, however, be defined in advance or analyzed in terms of more basic principles.

^ Ramberg, Bjørn and Kristin Gjesdal, "Hermeneutics: Continuations" , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2003, 2005.

^ a b Richard Palmer, ed. (1969).

Hermeneutics: Interpretation Theory in Schleiermacher, Dilthey, Heidegger, and Gadamer . Evanston: Northwestern University Press. p. 120.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b c d e f Heidegger, Martin. "The Origin of the Work of Art." Poetry, Language, Thought.

Trans. Albert Hofstadter. NY: Harper Collins, 1971.

^ "Hans-Georg Gadamer" , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005.

^ Schön 1983: 78-79 ^ de Man 1983: 29 ^ a b Shklar, Judith N. "Squaring the Hermeneutic Circle." Social Research.

71 (3), 2004, pg. 657–658 (Originally published Autumn 1986).

^ Schokel, Luis Alonso and Jose Maria Bravo.

A Manual of Hermeneutics (Biblical Seminar).

Trans. Liliana M. Rosa. Brook W. R. Pearson (Ed.). Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1998, pg. 74.

References [ edit ] de Man, Paul (1983).

Blindness and Insight: Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary Criticism . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 0-8166-1135-1 .

Gadamer, Hans-Georg (1975). "Hermeneutics and Social Science".

Cultural Hermeneutics .

2 (4): 307– 316.

doi : 10.1177/019145377500200402 .

S2CID 144463701 .

Heidegger, Martin (1962).

Being and Time . New York: Harper & Row [Originally published in German, in 1927].

ISBN 0-612-11114-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Schön, Donald Alan (1983).

The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think In Action . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 0-465-06874-X .

Wæver, Ole (1996). "The rise and fall of the inter-paradigm debate". In Steve Smith; et al. (eds.).

International Theory: Positivism and Beyond . Cambridge: Cambridge U. P.

External links [ edit ] Hermeneutics: Beginnings (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) v t e Martin Heidegger Philosophy Aletheia Dasein Ekstase Fundamental ontology Gestell Hermeneutic circle " Language speaks " Metaphysics of presence Ontic Terminology Thrownness World disclosure Works Being and Time (1927) " What Is Metaphysics?

" (1929) Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics (1929) " Introduction to Metaphysics " (1935) Black Notebooks (1931–41) " The Age of the World Picture " (1938) Contributions to Philosophy (1936–1938) " Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister" " (1942) " Letter on Humanism " (1947) The Question Concerning Technology (1949) " The Origin of the Work of Art " (1950) What Is Called Thinking?

(1951–2) What Is Philosophy?

(1955) " Only a God Can Save Us " (1966) Heidegger Gesamtausgabe Film and TV Der Zauberer von Meßkirch (1989) Human, All Too Human (1999) The Ister (2004) Being in the World (2010) Related topics Heidegger scholars Heidegger Studies Studia Heideggeriana Relationship with Nazism Cassirer–Heidegger debate Thing theory Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hermeneutic_circle&oldid=1285264006 " Categories : Hermeneutics Wilhelm Dilthey Philosophy of Martin Heidegger Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from February 2025 All articles needing rewrite Wikipedia articles needing context from February 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing context All pages needing cleanup Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2025 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 17:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hermeneutic circle 16 languages Add topic

