Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Modern examples Toggle Modern examples subsection 1.1 To avoid responsibility 1.2 To examine the system from the inside 2 Historical examples 3 In fiction and mythology 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Feigned madness 1 language Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fabrication of a mental disorder This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Feigned madness" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this article , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) " Feigned madness " is a phrase used in popular culture to describe the assumption of a mental disorder for the purposes of evasion, deceit or the diversion of suspicion. In some cases, feigned madness may be a strategy—in the case of court jesters , an institutionalised one—by which a person acquires a privilege to violate taboos on speaking unpleasant, socially unacceptable, or dangerous truths.

Modern examples [ edit ] To avoid responsibility [ edit ] Vincent Gigante , American Mafia don , was seen wandering the streets of Greenwich Village , Manhattan in his bathrobe and slippers, mumbling incoherently to himself, in what he later admitted was an elaborate act.

Allegedly, Shūmei Ōkawa , Japanese nationalist , on trial for war crimes after World War II .

Garrett Brock Trapnell , a professional thief and confidence man, frequently pretended to be affected by schizophrenia or dissociative identity disorder in order to be sent to mental institutions rather than prison for his crimes. This strategy eventually failed when he was brought to trial for aircraft hijacking . He was later the subject of a book by Eliot Asinof , entitled The Fox Is Crazy Too .

To examine the system from the inside [ edit ] Investigative journalists and psychologists have feigned madness to study psychiatric hospitals from within: American muckraker Nellie Bly ; see Ten Days in a Mad-House (1887) The Rosenhan experiment in the 1970s also provides a comparison of life inside several mental hospitals.

The Swedish artist Anna Odell created the project Okänd, kvinna 2009-349701 to examine power structures in healthcare, the society's view of mental illness and the victimhood imposed on the patient.

Historical examples [ edit ] Lucius Junius Brutus , who feigned stupidity, causing the Tarquins to underestimate him as a threat until the time when he was able to drive the Roman people to insurrection.

Ibn al-Haytham , also known as Alhazen, who was ordered by the sixth Fatimid Caliph , al-Hakim , to regulate the flooding of the Nile ; he later perceived the insanity and futility of what he was attempting to do and, fearing for his life, feigned madness to avoid the Caliph 's wrath. The Caliph, believing him to be insane, placed him under house arrest rather than execute him for failure. Alhazen remained there until the Caliph's death, thereby escaping punishment for his failure to accomplish a task that had been impossible from the beginning.

Kamo , a Bolshevik revolutionary, successfully feigned madness when in a German prison in 1909, [ 1 ] : 237 and then in a Russian prison in 1910.

[ 1 ] : 239 Ion Ferguson , an Irish psychiatrist in the British Army in a World War II German prisoner-of-war camp , successfully feigned madness to get himself repatriated.

[ 2 ] He also assisted two other prisoners in doing the same.

[ 3 ] Ephrem the Syrian , a prominent Christian theologian and writer of Christian literature , avoided presbyteral consecration by feigning madness because he thought he was unworthy of it.

[ 4 ] In fiction and mythology [ edit ] Odysseus fakes insanity , early 17th century tapestry. Ptuj Ormož Regional Museum, Ptuj Slovenia Shakespeare 's Hamlet , who feigns madness in order to speak freely and gain revenge—possibly based on a real person; see Hamlet (legend) .

Madness in Valencia is a 1590s comedy by Lope de Vega in which the male lead gets himself into an asylum to escape prosecution for murder. Other characters also feign for love.

[ 5 ] Odysseus feigned madness by yoking a horse and an ox to his plow and sowing salt [ 6 ] or plowing the beach.

Palamedes believed that he was faking and tested it by placing his son, Telemachus right in front of the plow. When Odysseus stopped immediately, his sanity was proven.

"Feign madness but keep your balance" is one of the Thirty-Six Stratagems One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest , Randle McMurphy feigns insanity in order to serve out his criminal sentence in a mental hospital rather than a prison.

In Henry IV by Luigi Pirandello , the main character feigns insanity.

In Goodbyeee , the last episode of BBC sitcom Blackadder , Blackadder feigns madness to try to avoid being sent into battle.

[ 7 ] The protagonist of the film Shock Corridor is a journalist who fakes insanity in order to gain access to an institution.

In Ricochet , Denzel Washington plays an assistant district attorney who feigns madness to catch a criminal by extraordinary means. He remarks: "Going insane, it's strangely liberating, isn't it?" Another notable example is Primal Fear , adapted from the William Diehl novel of the same name . In the film, Martin Vail ( Richard Gere ) defends a timid, young altar boy named Aaron Stampler ( Edward Norton ) accused of murdering an archbishop. Halfway through, Vail discovers Stampler has dissociative identity disorder , with one sociopathic personality called "Roy," who was responsible for killing the Archbishop. However, after Stampler is released due to plea of insanity, Vail discovers Stampler faked the disorder in order to avoid execution. The film was Edward Norton's debut, which earned him an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor .

Jose Manalo and Wally Bayola 's roles in Scaregivers feigned madness by eating peanut butter disguised as stool samples, which landed them in a mental facility.

In Colditz , a British television series about prisoners-of-war in WWII Germany, Wing Commander George Marsh feigns madness as a way of escaping. He successfully convinces his captors that he is insane and is duly repatriated. But there is a twist: after his return to Britain, Marsh becomes genuinely insane.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Münchausen syndrome Malingering References [ edit ] ^ a b Shub, David (July 1960). "Kamo-the Legendary Old Bolshevik of the Caucasus".

Russian Review .

19 (3): 227– 247.

doi : 10.2307/126539 .

JSTOR 126539 .

^ Anne Wynne-Jones, Fascinating life of doctor, Lancashire Telegraph, 16 August 2011 ^ Haygood, Tamara Miner.

"Malingering and Escape: Anglo-American Prisoners of War in World War II Europe" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ "Saint Ephrem" . 9 June 2022. p. Franciscan Media . Retrieved 17 August 2023 .

^ Lope De Vega (tr. David Johnston). Madness in Valencia (Absolute Classics, 1998).

^ the story does not appear in Homer , but was apparently mentioned in Sophocles ' lost tragedy The Mad Ulysses : James George Frazer , ed.

, Apollodorus: Library, Epitome 3.7 : footnote 2 ; Hyginus , Fabulae 95 mentions the mismatched animals but not the salt.

^ "Goodbyeee" . BBC Comedy . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ "BFI Screenonline: Colditz (1972-74)" .

David and king Achish Lucius Junius Brutus Hamlet Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feigned_madness&oldid=1304820610 " Categories : Criminal law Factitious disorders Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from March 2015 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from March 2015 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 10:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feigned madness 1 language Add topic

