Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History of knowledge 3 Habitat and ecology 4 Description Toggle Description subsection 4.1 Life cycles 4.2 Genetics 4.2.1 Mitochondrial genome 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Tsukubamonas 6 languages Bosanski Español Français 한국어 Magyar Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Tsukubamonas globosa ) Genus of excavates Tsukubamonas Scientific classification Domain: Eukaryota Clade : Discoba Class: Tsukubea Cavalier-Smith 2012 Order: Tsukubamonadida Yabuki et al.

2011 Family: Tsukubamonadidae Yabuki et al.

2011 Genus: Tsukubamonas Yabuki et al.

2011 Species: T. globosa Binomial name Tsukubamonas globosa Yabuki et al.

2011 Tsukubamonas is a unicellular heterotrophic , biflagellated excavate of the Discoba clade (along with jakobids , euglenozoans and percolozoans ) with only one species known, Tsukubamonas globosa .

[ 1 ] It inhabits fresh-water, feeds on bacteria, and can exist as a vegetative cell or cyst. The cells are characterised with a spherical or semi-spherical shape, are highly vacuolated with thin subsurface vesicles and the absence of a contractile vacuole, tubular cristae in its mitochondria, and two flagella of an apparatus with five main structures (four basal bodies, three major microtubule roots, four major fibres, one microtubule organization center, and several internal microtubules).

Tsukubamonas is notable for having a backwards right root, a differentiation of its anterior root orientation, and for having a lack of a left root. Other notable differences are in the morphology of its singlet root and associated fibre, the lack of flagella vanes, and in its cytoskeletal structure.

[ 1 ] The research has currently acknowledged its placement within the Discoba clade as its own individual group, with its mitochondrial genome to be around 48,643 base pairs long.

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] “ Tsukuba” is derived from the geographical location of the University of Tsukuba, Japan, where th organism was found. “ Monas” is a suffix commonly used to describe single-celled organisms within taxonomic rank, originating from Ancient Greek word "μονάς" (monás), meaning "unit" or "single".

[ 1 ] History of knowledge [ edit ] The genus was first discovered in Hyoutaro pond at the University of Tsukuba, Japan in October, 2002. Providing a general idea of its phylogenetic position, they determined the genus to be categorized within the supergroup, Excavata, due to the presence of a ventral feeding groove. However, with a number of differing characteristics from the supergroup, they further used SSU rDNA phylogeny analysis to determine the precise positioning. Although this method provided no results of statistical significance, a multigene phylogeny analysis using 5 protein datasets was able to place the group ambiguously under the Discoba clade along with Jakobids, Euglenozoans, and Heteroloboseans. The novelty of the morphological features provided lead to the classification of its own new taxa, the Tsukubamonadidae n. fam. and Tsukubamonadida n. ord.

Tsukubamonas globosa is currently the only species in the genus. Since the initial collection from Hyoutaropond, T. globosa has never been found again. An established strain has been created and maintained through a small aliquot of water sample and URO1YT(1/10) media, along with bacterial prey.

[ 1 ] From the works of Yabuki et al., further research has been done to complete the mitochondrial genome sequence and to determine its evolutionary relationship to other Discobids. From this, Tsukubamonas is currently recognized as an independent discobid lineage.

[ 2 ] Habitat and ecology [ edit ] Tsukubamonas is identified to be a free-living, fresh-water organism. It feeds on bacterial prey through a ventral feeding groove with assistance of its spinning swimming movement.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] Tsukubamonas is characterised by having a spherical or semi-spherical cell shape in its vegetative form that is around 9-15μm in diameter. The cells are described to be naked (lacking a cell wall), colorless, highly vacuolated, and biflagellated, swimming in a clockwise spinning manner. The mitochondria present tubular cristae with no rough endoplasmic reticulum associated. In addition, cysts. with a spherical shape around  5-12μm in diameter without a flagellum, are also observed within this genus, although precisely where in its life cycle this occurs has not yet been determined by research.

[ 1 ] The vacuoles of Tsukubamonas can be seen throughout the cell in a high number, at times derived from the endoplasmic reticulum. Cells lack contractile vacuole and contain food vacuoles that digest prey. In addition, thin flattened vesicles underneath the dorsal surface of the cell membrane, common amongst genus outside of the Excavata, are also a characteristic of this genera.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] This characteristic is only seen within one species of the Excavate group, Kinetoplastids, Hemistasia phaeocysticola .

[ 5 ] [ 1 ] Tsukubamonas possesses two flagella, each around 20μm long, with the standard 9 x 2 + 2 axoneme pattern. They emerge from a flat area to form a shallow groove on the ventral side as a feeding structure that is the hallmark to Excavates (“Ventral feeding groove”). The groove occurs temporarily for the engulfment of prey, most often bacterial cells, with the rim being supported by microtubules. In addition, the flagellar apparatus contains 5 major structures and their associated fibres and roots (four basal bodies, three major microtubular roots, four major fibres, one microtubule organization center, and several internal microtubules), with the absence of vanes and hair or scale-like structures.

The flagellar apparatus is composed of five major structures including four basal bodies, three major microtubular roots, four major fibres, one microtubule organization center, and several internal microtubules. Of the four basal bodies, two give rise to flagella. The non-flagellated bodies are shorter in length and are found pointed laterally on the ventral right side of the flagellated basal bodies.

Associated with the flagellated basal bodies are the three major microtubular roots: The singlet root, anterior root, and right root. The singlet root runs posteriorly, originating between the dorsal right side of the posterior basal body and A fibre, while the anterior root originates from the left side of the anterior basal body. The anterior root consists of 6 microtubules and stretches down the dorsal left side of the cell, just beneath the cell surface, stopping at around 3μm from its origin. The right root is the main supportive structure of the ventral groove and is composed of over 30 microtubules;  a broad band that stretches as an S shape posteriorly from the origin shared with the singlet root at the right of the posterior basal body. It is split into the inner and outer right root, derived from the left and right section of the right root respectively. The inner right root extends to the posterior end of the cell and connects with the lobate part of the singlet root associated fibre. The outer right root begins adjacent to the inner right root with the angle becoming less acute along the cell membrane. Microtubules are widely spread at the central area of the right root, drawing to the dorsal side of the cell.

The four major fibres found in Tsukubamonas are the A fibre, I fibre, and the singlet root associated fibre.

Tsukubamonas cells include several internal microtubules nucleating from one microtubule organization center seen from the diesel left side of both the anterior and posterior basal body. These microtubules then spread to the dorsal region of the cell.

[ 1 ] Life cycles [ edit ] There are two forms of Tsukubamonas that can take place within a life cycle: a free-living biflagellate vegetative cell, or a cyst.

[ 1 ] Having been recently discovered, the specific description of the life cycle is currently unknown.

Genetics [ edit ] Mitochondrial genome [ edit ] The mitochondrial genome is a 48,643 base pair long circular molecule. 90% of the mitochondrial genome consists of coding regions, with 26 transfer RNA(tRNA) genes, 3 ribosomal RNA genes, and 52 open reading frames. 41 out of the 52 open reading frames are present in Jakobid mitochondrial genome.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Introns are absent, and the genetic code only differs from the standard one with the initiation codon being atp1.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Yabuki, Akinori; Nakayama, Takeshi; Yubuki, Naoji; Hashimoto, Tetsuo; Ishida, Ken-Ichiro; Inagaki, Yuji (2011).

"Tsukubamonas globosa n. gen., n. sp., A Novel Excavate Flagellate Possibly Holding a Key for the Early Evolution in "Discoba" " .

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

58 (4): 319– 331.

doi : 10.1111/j.1550-7408.2011.00552.x .

ISSN 1550-7408 .

PMID 21569159 .

^ a b c Kamikawa, Ryoma; Kolisko, Martin; Nishimura, Yuki; Yabuki, Akinori; Brown, Matthew W.; Ishikawa, Sohta A.; Ishida, Ken-ichiro; Roger, Andrew J.; Hashimoto, Tetsuo; Inagaki, Yuji (February 2014).

"Gene Content Evolution in Discobid Mitochondria Deduced from the Phylogenetic Position and Complete Mitochondrial Genome of Tsukubamonas globosa" .

Genome Biology and Evolution .

6 (2): 306– 315.

doi : 10.1093/gbe/evu015 .

ISSN 1759-6653 .

PMC 3942025 .

PMID 24448982 .

^ Cavalier-Smith, T (2002-03-01).

"The phagotrophic origin of eukaryotes and phylogenetic classification of Protozoa" .

International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology .

52 (2): 297– 354.

doi : 10.1099/00207713-52-2-297 .

ISSN 1466-5026 .

PMID 11931142 .

^ Klaveness, Dag; Shalchian-Tabrizi, Kamran; Thomsen, Helge Abildhauge; Eikrem, Wenche; Jakobsen, Kjetill S. (2005-11-01).

"Telonema antarcticum sp. nov., a common marine phagotrophic flagellate" .

International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology .

55 (6): 2595– 2604.

doi : 10.1099/ijs.0.63652-0 .

ISSN 1466-5026 .

PMID 16280533 .

^ Elbrächter, Malte; Schnepf, Eberhard; Balzer, Ivonne (September 1996).

"Hemistasia phaeocysticola (Scherffel) comb. nov., Redescription of a Free-living, Marine, Phagotrophic Kinetoplastid Flagellate" .

Archiv für Protistenkunde .

147 (2): 125– 136.

doi : 10.1016/S0003-9365(96)80028-5 .

^ Lang, B. Franz; Seif, Elias; Gray, Michael W.; O'Kelly, Charles J.; Burger, Gertraud (July 1999).

"A Comparative Genomics Approach to the Evolution of Eukaryotes and their Mitochondria1" .

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

46 (4): 320– 326.

doi : 10.1111/j.1550-7408.1999.tb04611.x .

ISSN 1066-5234 .

PMID 10461380 .

^ Burger, Gertraud; Gray, Michael W.; Forget, Lise; Lang, B. Franz (February 2013).

"Strikingly Bacteria-Like and Gene-Rich Mitochondrial Genomes throughout Jakobid Protists" .

Genome Biology and Evolution .

5 (2): 418– 438.

doi : 10.1093/gbe/evt008 .

ISSN 1759-6653 .

PMID 23335123 .

External links [ edit ] Taxonomy Browser By National Center for Biotechnology Information v t e Eukaryote classification Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Amorphea Amoebozoa Discosea Tubulinea Variosea Archamoebea Cutosea Eumycetozoa (true slime molds) Obazoa Apusomonadida Breviatea Opisthokonta Holomycota Rotosphaerida Fungi ¹ Holozoa Tunicaraptor † Bicellum Ichthyosporea Pluriformea Filozoa Filasterea Choanozoa Choanoflagellata Animalia (animals) ¹ Diaphoretickes Telonemia Haptista Centroplasthelida Haptophytina SAR Rhizaria Cercozoa Endomyxa Retaria Foraminifera Radiolaria * Alveolata Colponemida * Ciliophora (ciliates) Myzozoa Apicomplexa Chrompodellida Dinoflagellata Perkinsozoa Stramenopiles Platysulcus Kaonashia Bigyra * Bicosoecida Placidozoa Sagenista Gyrista Developea Pirsoniales Hyphochytriomycetes Ochrophyta (brown algae, diatoms and relatives) Oomycetes (water molds) Actinophryida CAM Pancryptista Microheliella Cryptista Palpitomonas Katablepharidida Cryptomonada Archaeplastida ( plants sensu lato ) Picozoa Rhodophyta (red algae) Rhodelphidia Glaucophyta Viridiplantae (green plants or plants sensu stricto ) Prasinodermophyta Chlorophyta Streptophyta Mesostigmatophyceae Chlorokybophyceae Spirotaenia Klebsormidiophyceae Charophyceae Coleochaetophyceae Zygnematophyceae Embryophyta (land plants or plants sensu strictissimo ) ¹ " Excavates "* Discoba Jakobea Tsukubamonas Discicristata Heterolobosea Euglenozoa Metamonada * Anaeramoebidae Parabasalia Barthelona Skoliomonas Fornicata Preaxostyla Malawimonadida Malawimonadidae Imasidae Incertae sedis Provora Nebulidia Nibbleridia Hemimastigophora Spironematellidae Paramastigidae Ancyromonadida Ancyromonadidae Planomonadidae Divimonas CRuMs Diphylleida Mantamonadida Rigifilida Glissandrida Genera of uncertain affiliation Acinetactis Actinastrum Berkeleyaesol Kamera Magosphaera Meringosphaera Meteora Parakaryon (?) Quasibodo Tetrahelia Acritarchs and other fossils † Algospongia † Archaeochaeta † Cephalonyx † Changchengia † Cheleutochroa † Chitinozoa † Coryphidium † Cucumiforma † Dictyosphaera † Diskagma (?) † Eosolena † Francevillian biota (?) † Germinosphaera † Grandilingulata † Granomarginata † Grypania † Gunflint microbiota † Horodyskia † Introvertocystis † Korilophyton † Leiosphaeridia † Navifusa † Portalites † Protosterol biota † Pterospermopsimorpha † Qingshania † Quadrisporites † Schizofusa † Shuiyousphaeridium † Simia † Tappania † Tawuia (?) † Tetraporina † Thuchomyces (?) † Tuanshanzia † Valeria † Vernanimalcula ¹non- protist groups *possibly paraphyletic groups bold denotes groups with over 1,000 species Taxonomy of protists v t e Discoba classification Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Eolouka * Tsukubea Tsukubamonadidae Tsukubamonas Jakobea Ophirinina Agogonidae Agogonia Ophirinidae Ophirina Andalucina Andaluciidae Andalucia Stygiellidae Stygiella Velundella Histionina Histionidae Histiona Reclinomonas Jakobidae Jakoba Moramonadidae Moramonas Seculamonas Discicristata Euglenozoa Euglenida Petalomonadida Scytomonadidae Atraktomonas Biundula Calycimonas Dolium Dylakosoma Notosolenus Pentamonas Petalomonas Scytomonas Tropidoscyphus Sphenomonadidae Sphenomonas Ploeotiida * Entosiphonidae Entosiphon Gaulosia Chelandium Olkasia Alistosa Decastavidae Decastava Keelungiidae Keelungia Ploeotiidae Ploeotia Serpenomonas Lentomonadidae Lentomonas Karavia Hemiolia Liburna Spirocuta Anisonemia Anisonemida Anisonemidae Anisonema Dinema Heteronema Natomonadida Metanemina Neometanemidae Neometanema Aphagea Astasiidae Astasia Rhabdomonas Gyropaigne Menoidium Parmidium Distigmidae Distigma Peranemida Peranemidae Chasmostoma Jenningsia Peranema Teloprocta Urceolus Euglenophyceae Rapazida Rapazidae Rapaza Eutreptiales Eutreptiaceae Eutreptia Eutreptiella Euglenales Euglenaceae Colacium Cryptoglena Euglena Euglenaformis Euglenaria Monomorphina Strombomonas Trachelomonas Phacaceae Discoplastis Flexiglena Lepocinclis Phacus incertae sedis Ascoglena Euglenamorpha Euglenopsis Glenoclosterium Hegneria Klebsina Euglenocapsa incertae sedis Peranemopsis Tropidoscyphus Michajlowastasia Parastasiella Dinemula Paradinemula Mononema Ovicola Naupliicola Embryocola Copromonas Symbiontida Bihospites Calkinsia Postgaardi Glycomonada Diplonemea Diplonemidae Diplonema Rhynchopus Lacrimia Sulcionema Flectonema Hemistasiidae Hemistasia Eupelagonemidae Eupelagonema Kinetoplastea Prokinetoplastina Ichthyobodonidae Ichthyobodo Perkinsela Metakinetoplastina Allobodonidae Allobodo Novijibodo Neobodonida Neobodonidae Actuariola Avlakibodo Azumiobodo Cruzella Cryptaulaxella Klosteria Neobodo Phanerobia Rhynchobodo Rhynchomonadidae Rhynchomonas Dimastigella Parabodonida Cryptobiidae Cryptobia Jarrellia Procryptobia Trypanoplasma Parabodonidae Parabodo Eubodonida Bodonidae Bodo Trypanosomatida Trypanosomatinae Trypanosoma Leishmaniinae Borovskyia Crithidia Leptomonas Lotmaria Novymonas Porcisia Zelonia Endotrypanum Leishmania Herpetomonadinae Herpetomonas Lafontella Phytomonas Strigomonadinae Angomonas Kentomonas Strigomonas Blastocrithidiinae Blastocrithidia Obscuromonas Blechomonadinae Blechomonas Paratrypanosomatinae Paratrypanosoma Jaenimonas Vickermania Sergeia Wallacemonas Cercoplasma Malacozoomonas Nematodomonas Rhynchoidomonas incertae sedis Bordnamonas Cephalothamnium Rhynchoidomonas Heterolobosea Pharyngomonada Pharyngomonadea Pharyngomonadida Pharyngomonadidae Pharyngomonas Tetramitia Orodruinidae ?

Orodruina Gruberella Stachyamoeba Selenaionea Selenaionida Selenaionidae Selenaion Neovahlkampfiida Neovahlkampfiidae Neovahlkampfia Eutetramitea Euplaesiobystra Fumarolamoeba Heteramoeba Parafumarolamoeba Paravahlkampfia Oramoeba Vrihiamoeba Naegleriida Aurem Marinamoeba Acrasidae Acrasis Allovahlkampfia Pocheina Naegleriidae Naegleria Willaertia Trimastigamoeba ?

Tulamoebidae Pleurostomum Tulamoeba Vahlkampfiidae Tetramitus Vahlkampfia Pseudovahlkampfia ?

Tetramastigamoeba ?

Percolomonadida Barbeliidae Barbelia Nonamonas Lulaidae Lula Percolomonadidae Percolomonas Pseudociliatida Stephanopogonidae Stephanopogon Creneida Creneidae Creneis Lyromonadida Psalteriomonadidae Harpagon Psalteriomonas Monopylocystis Pseudoharpagon Sawyeria Lyromonas * paraphyletic or polyphyletic groups ?

uncertain position Taxon identifiers Tsukubamonas Wikidata : Q24048485 Wikispecies : Tsukubamonas CoL : 6486J GBIF : 103454591 IRMNG : 1478855 NCBI : 1084708 Tsukubamonadidae Wikidata : Q61968703 CoL : HKN GBIF : 103454589 IRMNG : 122848 NCBI : 1084709 Open Tree of Life : 4739011 Tsukubamonadida Wikidata : Q26226428 CoL : 49V GBIF : 9647194 IRMNG : 12962 Tsukubea Wikidata : Q61968739 CoL : K4 GBIF : 9775313 IRMNG : 11905068 Open Tree of Life : 7646210 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tsukubamonas&oldid=1299211059 " Categories : Discoba genera Monotypic eukaryote classes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Taxonbars with multiple manual Wikidata items This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 02:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tsukubamonas 6 languages Add topic

