Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Regional traditions Toggle Regional traditions subsection 2.1 Northern Europe 2.2 Western and Southern Europe 2.3 Central and Eastern Europe 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents European folklore 10 languages العربية Català Español Euskara Français Igbo Papiamentu Română Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Folklore of the Western world Robin Shoots with Sir Guy European folklore or Western folklore refers to the folklore of the Western world , especially when discussed comparatively.
The history of Christendom during the Early Modern period has resulted in a number of traditions that are shared in many European ethnic and regional cultures.

This concerns notably common traditions based on Christian mythology , i.e. certain commonalities in celebrating Christmas , such as the various Christmas gift-bringers , or customs associated with All Souls' Day .

In addition, there are certain apotropaic gestures or practices found in large parts of the Western world, such as the knocking on wood or the fingers crossed gesture.

History [ edit ] Further information: Classical mythology , Proto-Indo-European mythology , Folk Christianity , Christianization , Germanic mythology , Slavic mythology , and Celtic mythology Many tropes of European folklore can be identified as stemming from the Proto-Indo-European peoples of the Neolithic and Bronze Age, although they may originate from even earlier traditions. Examples of this include the 'Chaoskampf' myth-archetype as well as possibly the belief in knocking on wood for good luck.

[ 1 ] The culture of Classical Antiquity , including mythology , Hellenistic religion and magical or cultic practice was very influential on the formative stage of Christianity , and can be found as a substrate in the traditions of all territories formerly colonized by Greeks and the Roman Empire , and by extension in those territories reached by Christianization during the Middle Ages . This includes all of Europe , and much of the Middle East and North Africa . These traditions inherited from folk beliefs in the Roman era were syncretized with local traditions, notably Germanic , Celtic and Slavic .
Many folk traditions also originated by contact with the Islamic world , especially in the Balkans and in the Iberian Peninsula , which were ruled by Islamic empires before being re-conquered (in the case of the Balkans , partially) by Christian forces. The result of such cultural contact is visible e.g. in the tradition of the Morris Dance in England, an adaptation of the "moorish" dances of the late medieval period.

The result were the related, but regionally distinct, folk traditions as they existed in European society on the eve of the Early Modern period .
In modern times, and especially since the 19th century, there has been much cross-pollination between these traditions, often by the detour of American folklore .

Regional traditions [ edit ] Northern Europe [ edit ] British Folklore English folklore Anglo-Saxon paganism Estonian folklore Finnish folklore Lithuanian folklore Scandinavian folklore Celtic mythology Matter of Britain Irish folklore Manx folklore Hebridean mythology and folklore Scottish folklore Welsh folklore Dutch folklore Western and Southern Europe [ edit ] Alpine folklore Spanish folklore French folklore German folklore Modern / Ancient Greek folklore Portuguese folklore Italian folklore Swiss folklore Folk Catholicism Central and Eastern Europe [ edit ] Albanian folklore Hungarian folklore Romanian folklore Slavic folklore Polish culture Czech folklore Russian folklore Ukrainian folklore Serbian folklore Montenegrin folklore Bulgarian folklore Georgian folklore See also [ edit ] Western Folklore American folklore Australian folklore Brazilian folklore Ethnic groups of Europe Folk Catholicism Crypto-paganism European culture European mythology Sailors' superstitions References [ edit ] ^ Ray (2017-05-18).

"Why do we knock on wood?" .

TED-Ed Blog . Retrieved 2021-09-03 .

Leach, Maria (ed.), Funk & Wagnalls Standard Dictionary of Folklore, Mythology and Legend New York: Funk & Wagnalls Co, 1949.

Newhall, Venetia J., European Folklore: An Encyclopedia ,  Garland Publishing, 2005, ISBN 978-0-8153-1451-6 .

Ziavras, Mary, "Greek Folk Stories, Old and New:, ComteQ Publishing, 2012, ISBN 978-0-615-40612-1 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to European folklore at Wikimedia Commons "folklore europaea", Festivals-Customs-Traditions in Europe (at Freiburg University) v t e Folklore of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_folklore&oldid=1288546410 " Categories : European folklore Western culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 May 2025, at 10:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European folklore 10 languages Add topic

