Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 North America 1.2 South America and Antarctica 2 References 3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents American Cordillera 50 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from American cordillera ) Series of mountain ranges in the western Americas See also: Continental Divide of the Americas This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "American Cordillera" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) American Cordillera Andes in Peru Coast Mountains in British Columbia, Canada Highest point Peak Aconcagua , Las Heras Department , Mendoza , Argentina Elevation 6,961 m (22,838 ft) [ 1 ] Geography Map of the Americas, showcasing the North American Cordillera in maroon , the mountains of Central America in lavender , and the South American Cordillera in pink .

Map of Antarctica, showcasing the extension of the American Cordillera into Graham Land in the northwest.

Countries United States Canada Mexico Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Costa Rica Panama Colombia Venezuela Ecuador Peru Bolivia Argentina Chile The American Cordillera ( / ˌ k ɔːr d əl ˈ j ɛ r ə / KOR -dəl- YERR -ə ) is a chain of mountain ranges ( cordilleras ), consisting of an almost continuous sequence of mountain ranges that form the western "backbone" of the Americas .

[ 2 ] Aconcagua is the highest peak of the chain. It is also the backbone of the volcanic arc that forms the eastern half of the Pacific Ring of Fire .

Description [ edit ] North America [ edit ] Main article: North American Cordillera The overlapping and parallel ranges begin in the north with the Alaska Range and Brooks Range in Alaska , and run through the Yukon into British Columbia . The main belt of the Rocky Mountains along with the parallel Columbia Mountains and Coast Ranges of mountains and islands continue through British Columbia and Vancouver Island . In the United States , the Cordillera branches include the Rockies , the Sierra Nevada , the Cascades , and various small Pacific coastal ranges . In Mexico , the Cordillera continues through the Sierra Madre Occidental and Sierra Madre Oriental , as well as the backbone mountains of the Baja California peninsula .

The Cordillera carries on through the mountain ranges of Central America in Guatemala , Honduras , Nicaragua , Costa Rica , and Panama , and becomes the Andes Mountains of South America .

South America and Antarctica [ edit ] The Cordillera, having extended through Central America , continues through South America and even to the Antarctic .  In South America, the Cordillera is known as the Andes Mountains . The Andes, with their parallel chains and the island chains off the coast of Chile , extend through Colombia , Venezuela , Ecuador , Peru , Bolivia , Argentina , and Chile to the southernmost tip of South America at Tierra del Fuego . The Cordillera continues along the Scotia Arc before reaching the mountains of the Antarctic Peninsula .

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Topographic map of Cerro Aconcagua" .

opentopomap.org . Retrieved June 10, 2023 .

^ a b "The North American Cordillera: A Color Shaded-Relief Map in Oblique Mercator Projection About the Pacific-North America Pole of Rotation, Scale Circa 1:5,000,000" .

pubs.usgs.gov . Retrieved April 26, 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Silberling, N.J. et al. (1992).

Lithotectonic terrane map of the North American Cordillera [Miscellaneous Investigations Series I-2176]. Reston, Va.:  U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.

v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wfcnd
Cached time: 20250817044001
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.620 seconds
Real time usage: 0.801 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2770/1000000
Revision size: 4784/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 158972/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14457/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 30303/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.428/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18390147/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  690.960      1 -total
 44.69%  308.806      1 Template:Infobox_mountain
 42.00%  290.207      1 Template:Infobox
 16.80%  116.054     13 Template:Navbox
 13.58%   93.865      1 Template:Native_name_checker
 13.47%   93.060      1 Template:Reflist
 12.03%   83.136      1 Template:Regions_of_the_world
 11.16%   77.112      1 Template:Cite_opentopomap
  9.89%   68.310     19 Template:If_empty
  9.47%   65.462      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1256241:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044001 and revision id 1297387149. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Cordillera&oldid=1297387149 " Categories : Mountain ranges of North America Mountain ranges of Central America Mountain ranges of South America Mountain ranges of Antarctica North American Cordillera Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2018 Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 22:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American Cordillera 50 languages Add topic

