Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Contributions to non-Euclidean geometry 3 Works 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Eugenio Beltrami 31 languages Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Svenska Тоҷикӣ Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian mathematician (1835–1900) Eugenio Beltrami Eugenio Beltrami Born ( 1835-11-16 ) 16 November 1835 Cremona , Lombardy , Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia , Austrian Empire Died 18 February 1900 (1900-02-18) (aged 64) Rome , Kingdom of Italy Nationality Italian Alma mater Ghislieri College , Pavia (no degree) Known for Beltrami equation Beltrami identity Beltrami's theorem Laplace–Beltrami operator Beltrami vector field Beltrami–Klein model Scientific career Fields Mathematician Institutions University of Bologna University of Pisa University of Rome University of Pavia Academic advisors Francesco Brioschi Doctoral students Giovanni Frattini Eugenio Beltrami (16 November 1835 – 18 February 1900) was an Italian mathematician notable for his work concerning differential geometry and mathematical physics . His work was noted especially for clarity of exposition. He was the first to prove the consistency of non-Euclidean geometry by modelling it on a surface of constant curvature , the pseudosphere , and in the interior of an n -dimensional unit sphere , the so-called Beltrami–Klein model . He also developed singular value decomposition for matrices , which has been subsequently rediscovered several times. Beltrami's use of differential calculus for problems of mathematical physics indirectly influenced the development of tensor calculus by Gregorio Ricci-Curbastro and Tullio Levi-Civita .

Life [ edit ] Beltrami was born in 1835 in Cremona ( Lombardy ), then a part of the Austrian Empire , and now part of Italy. Both parents were artists, Giovanni Beltrami and the Venetian Elisa Barozzi. He began studying mathematics at University of Pavia in 1853, but was expelled from Ghislieri College in 1856 due to his political opinions—he was sympathetic with the Risorgimento . During this time, he was taught and influenced by Francesco Brioschi . He had to discontinue his studies because of financial hardship and spent the next several years as a secretary working for the Lombardy–Venice railroad company. He was appointed to the University of Bologna as a professor in 1862, the year he published his first research paper. Throughout his life, Beltrami had various professorial positions at the universities of Pisa , Rome and Pavia. From 1891 until the end of his life, Beltrami lived in Rome. He became the president of the Accademia dei Lincei in 1898 and a senator of the Kingdom of Italy in 1899.

Contributions to non-Euclidean geometry [ edit ] In 1868, Beltrami published two memoirs (written in Italian; French translations by J. Hoüel appeared in 1869) dealing with consistency and interpretations of non-Euclidean geometry of János Bolyai and Nikolai Lobachevsky .  In his "Essay on an interpretation of non-Euclidean geometry", Beltrami proposed that this geometry could be realised on a surface of constant negative curvature , a pseudosphere . For Beltrami's concept, lines of the geometry are represented by geodesics on the pseudosphere and theorems of non-Euclidean geometry can be proved within ordinary three-dimensional Euclidean space , and not derived in an axiomatic fashion, as Lobachevsky and Bolyai had done previously. In 1840, Ferdinand Minding already considered geodesic triangles on the pseudosphere and remarked that the corresponding "trigonometric formulas" are obtained from the corresponding formulas of spherical trigonometry by replacing the usual trigonometric functions with hyperbolic functions ; this was further developed by Delfino Codazzi in 1857, but apparently neither of them noticed the association with Lobachevsky's work. In this way, Beltrami attempted to demonstrate that two-dimensional non-Euclidean geometry is as valid as the Euclidean geometry of the space, and in particular, that Euclid 's parallel postulate could not be derived from the other axioms of Euclidean geometry. It is often stated that this proof was incomplete due to the singularities of the pseudosphere, which means that geodesics could not be extended indefinitely. However, John Stillwell remarks that Beltrami must have been well aware of this difficulty, which is also manifested by the fact that the pseudosphere is topologically a cylinder , and not a plane, and he spent a part of his memoir designing a way around it. By a suitable choice of coordinates, Beltrami showed how the metric on the pseudosphere can be transferred to the unit disk and that the singularity of the pseudosphere corresponds to a horocycle on the non-Euclidean plane. On the other hand, in the introduction to his memoir, Beltrami states that it would be impossible to justify "the rest of Lobachevsky's theory", i.e., the non-Euclidean geometry of space, by this method.

In the second memoir published during the same year (1868), "Fundamental theory of spaces of constant curvature", Beltrami continued this logic and gave an abstract proof of equiconsistency of hyperbolic and Euclidean geometry for any dimension. He accomplished this by introducing several models of non-Euclidean geometry that are now known as the Beltrami–Klein model , the Poincaré disk model , and the Poincaré half-plane model , together with transformations that relate them. For the half-plane model, Beltrami cited a note by Joseph Liouville in the treatise of Gaspard Monge on differential geometry . Beltrami also showed that n -dimensional Euclidean geometry is realised on a horosphere of the ( n + 1)-dimensional hyperbolic space , so the logical relation between consistency of the Euclidean and the non-Euclidean geometries is symmetric. Beltrami acknowledged the influence of Bernhard Riemann 's groundbreaking Habilitation lecture "On the hypotheses on which geometry is based" (1854; published posthumously in 1868).

Although today Beltrami's "Essay" is recognised as very important for the development of non-Euclidean geometry, the reception at the time was less enthusiastic.

Luigi Cremona objected to perceived circular reasoning , which even forced Beltrami to delay the publication of the "Essay" by one year. Subsequently, Felix Klein failed to acknowledge Beltrami's priority in the construction of the projective disk model of non-Euclidean geometry. This reaction can be attributed in part to the novelty of Beltrami's reasoning, which was similar to the ideas of Riemann concerning abstract manifolds . J. Hoüel published Beltrami's proof in his French translation of the works of Lobachevsky and Bolyai.

Works [ edit ] Sulla teoria dell'induzione magnetica secondo Poisson , 1884 Beltrami, Eugenio (1868). "Saggio di interpretazione della geometria non-euclidea".

Giornale di Matematiche .

6 : 284– 312.

Beltrami, Eugenio (1868).

"Teoria fondamentale degli spazii di curvatura costante" .

Annali di Matematica Pura ed Applicata . Series II.

2 : 232– 255.

doi : 10.1007/BF02419615 .

S2CID 120773141 .

Sulla teoria dell'induzione magnetica secondo Poisson (in Italian). Bologna. 1884.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Opere matematiche di Eugenio Beltrami  pubblicate per cura della Facoltà di scienze della r. Università di Roma (volumes 1–2) (U. Hoepli, Milano, 1902–1920) [ 1 ] Same edition, vols. 1–4 Notes [ edit ] ^ Study, E.

(1909).

"Book Review: Opere Matematiche di Eugenio Beltrami " .

Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society .

16 (3): 147– 149.

doi : 10.1090/s0002-9904-1909-01882-8 .

References [ edit ] Stillwell, John (1996).

Sources of hyperbolic geometry . History of Mathematics. Vol. 10. Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society .

ISBN 978-0-8218-0529-9 .

MR 1402697 .

Jeremy Gray , Poincaré and Klein — Groups and Geometries.

In 1830–1930: a Century of Geometry (ed L.Boi, D.Flament and J.-M.Salanskis), Springer, 1992, 35–44 Pirotta (1839).

Glissons n'appuyons pas. Giornale critico-letterario, d'Arti, Teatri e Varieta (in Italian). Pirotta. p. 216.

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Eugenio Beltrami" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Eugenio Beltrami at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Eugenio Beltrami - Œuvres complètes Gallica-Math Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Italian People Structurae Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eugenio_Beltrami&oldid=1304969609 " Categories : 1835 births 1900 deaths Hyperbolic geometers Scientists from Cremona Differential geometers 19th-century Italian mathematicians University of Pavia alumni Academic staff of the University of Bologna Academic staff of the University of Pisa Members of the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2025 Articles with hCards CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 07:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eugenio Beltrami 31 languages Add topic

