Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The Verein für Kultur und Wissenschaft der Juden 2 The Wissenschaft des Judentums movement Toggle The Wissenschaft des Judentums movement subsection 2.1 Goals 2.2 Attitude toward religion 2.3 Attitude toward earlier scholarship 3 Legacy 4 Opposition 5 Guttmann and his Philosophie des Judentums 6 List of Wissenschaft des Judentums personalities 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Wissenschaft des Judentums 5 languages Deutsch Français Italiano עברית 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Jewish academic movement Part of a series on Jews and Judaism Etymology Who is a Jew?

Jewish studies Religion God in Judaism ( names ) Principles of faith Mitzvot ( 613 ) Halakha Shabbat Holidays Prayer Tzedakah Land of Israel Brit Bar and bat mitzvah Marriage Bereavement Baal teshuva Philosophy Ethics Kabbalah Messiah Claimants Customs Rites Synagogue Rabbi Texts Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Talmud Mishnah Gemara Rabbinic Midrash Tosefta Targum Beit Yosef Mishneh Torah Tur Shulchan Aruch Zohar History General Timeline Land of Israel Name "Judea" Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Persecution Leaders Modern historiography Historical population comparisons Ancient Israel Twelve Tribes of Israel Kingdom of Judah Kingdom of Israel Jerusalem ( in Judaism timeline ) Temple in Jerusalem ( First Second ) Assyrian captivity Babylonian captivity Second Temple period Yehud Medinata Maccabean Revolt Hasmonean dynasty Sanhedrin Schisms ( Pharisees , Sadducees , Essenes , Zealots , Sicarii ) Second Temple Judaism ( Hellenistic Judaism ) Jewish–Roman wars ( Great Revolt , Diaspora , Bar Kokhba ) Rabbinic period and Middle Ages Rabbinic Judaism History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire Christianity and Judaism ( Jews and Christmas ) Hinduism and Judaism Islamic–Jewish relations Middle Ages Golden Age Expulsion from Spain Modern era Haskalah Sabbateans Hasidism Jewish atheism Emancipation Old Yishuv Zionism Soviet Union The Holocaust Israel Arab–Israeli conflict Communities Ashkenazim Galician Litvak Mizrahim Sephardim Teimanim (Yemenite Jews) Beta Israel Gruzinim (Georgian Jews) Juhurim (Mountain Jews) Bukharim Italkim Romanyotim Cochinim Bene Israel Berber Crimean Karaites Krymchaks Kaifeng Jews Related groups Bnei Anusim Lemba Igbo Jews Samaritans Crypto-Jews Anusim Dönmeh Marranos Neofiti Xueta Mosaic Arabs Subbotniks Noahides Population Judaism by country Lists of Jews Diaspora Historical population by country Population by city Genetic studies Israel and Palestine Old Yishuv New Yishuv Israeli Jews Palestinian Jews Africa Algeria Angola Bilad-el-Sudan Botswana Cameroon Cape Verde Benin Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Ethiopia Beta Israel Eritrea Eswatini Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria ( Igbo ) Republic of the Congo São Tomé and Príncipe Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Uganda ( Abayudaya ) Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Bahrain Cambodia China Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kurdistan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lebanon Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia South Korea Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Romaniote Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Italkim Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Moldova Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Soviet Union Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sephardim Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern America Canada United States Greenland Latin America and Caribbean Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Puerto Rico Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji Guam New Zealand Palau Denominations Orthodox Modern Haredi Hasidic Reform Conservative Karaite Reconstructionist Renewal Science Haymanot Humanistic Culture Customs Minyan Wedding Clothing Niddah Pidyon haben Kashrut Shidduch Zeved habat Conversion to Judaism Aliyah Hiloni Music Religious Secular Art Ancient Yiddish theatre Dance Humour Cuisine American Ashkenazi Bukharan Ethiopian Israeli Israelite Mizrahi Sephardic Literature Israeli Yiddish Judeo-Tat American Surnames Ashkenazi Mizrahi Sephardic Languages Hebrew Biblical Mishnaic Medieval Modern Bukharian Ghardaïa Sign Jewish Koine Greek Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Aramaic Judeo-Berber Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Georgian Judaeo-Iranian Judeo-Italian Judeo-Malayalam Judaeo-Spanish Judeo-Tat Knaanic Shassi Yeshivish Yevanic Yiddish Zarphatic Politics Jewish political movements Autonomism Bundism Feminism Leftism Secularism Territorialism World Agudath Israel Zionism General Green Labor Kahanism Maximalism Neo-Zionism Religious Revisionist Post-Zionism Category Portal v t e " Wissenschaft des Judentums " (literally in German the expression means "Science of Judaism"; more recently in the United States it started to be rendered as "Jewish Studies" or "Judaic Studies," a wide academic field of inquiry in American universities) refers to a nineteenth-century movement premised on the critical investigation of Jewish literature and culture, including rabbinic literature , to analyze the origins of Jewish traditions.

The Verein für Kultur und Wissenschaft der Juden [ edit ] The  first organized attempt at developing and disseminating Wissenschaft des Judentums was the Verein für Kultur und Wissenschaft der Juden ( Society for Jewish Culture and Jewish Studies ), founded around 1819 by Eduard Gans , (a pupil of Hegel ), and his associates. Other members included Heinrich Heine , Leopold Zunz , Moses Moser , and Michael Beer , (youngest brother of Meyerbeer ). It was an attempt to provide a construct for the Jews as a Volk or people in their own right, independent of their religious traditions. As such it sought to validate their secular cultural traditions as being on an equal footing with those adduced by Johann Gottfried Herder and his followers for the German people . Immanuel Wolf’s  influential essay Über den Begriff einer Wissenschaft des Judentums (On the Concept of Jewish Studies) of 1822,  has such ideas in mind. Its principal objective, as it was then defined in the Zeitschrift für die Wissenschaft des Judentums (1822), was the study of Judaism by subjecting it to criticism and modern methods of research.

[ 1 ] The failure of the Verein, attributable largely to the far greater attraction, amongst German Jews, of identification with German culture, was followed, significantly, by the conversion to Christianity of many of its leading figures, including Gans and Heine.

[ 2 ] The Wissenschaft des Judentums movement [ edit ] First edition from 1822 Despite the lack of success of the Verein für Kultur und Wissenschaft der Juden , its principles inspired many Jewish thinkers to invest their efforts in a wider Wissenschaft des Judentums movement, and also provoked a conservative reaction (see Opposition ).  The historian Amos Elon , in his book The Pity of It All , places the movement in the context of anti-Semitic riots in Germany in 1819. The purpose, Elon writes, "was to bring ordinary Jews into the orbit of German Kultur and at the same time reinforce their Jewish identity by bridging the gulf between secular and religious education"; the movement sought to explore Judaism as "both secular civilization and religion", and thereby "help young Jews to remain Jews", even as they moved to a more secular view.

[ 3 ] According to Dr.

Henry Abramson , the primary aim of the proponents of the movement was to articulate a modality of Jewish identity that was consonant with nineteenth century values, and where Jews had to demonstrate that they were patriotic members of their own societies, and at the same time express their Judaism proudly.

[ 4 ] The movement took on slightly differing characteristics in different national contexts so that, for example, the nature of the Anglo-Jewish movement was affected by the more ambivalent, less overtly hostile, state of Jewish-Christian relations in England; historical critical approaches to Bible were unpopular; a strong interest in rabbinic theology, liturgy, and prayer; an emphasis upon eccentricity, marginality, and challenges to normative rabbinic Judaism; and a widening of the scholarly franchise in England to women and non-established scholars.

[ 5 ] Goals [ edit ] Proponents of Wissenschaft des Judentums attempted to place Jewish culture on par with Western European culture , as evinced in Goethe 's ideas of Bildung , and endeavored to have " Jewish Studies " introduced into the university curriculum as a respectable area of study, freeing the field from the prevailing bias that regarded Judaism as an inferior precursor to Christianity and studied it as such.  They also developed and advocated a style of scholarship which allowed complete freedom in the interpretation of traditional texts, and which might be pursued without concerns about the practical ramifications such interpretations might have for religious observance and religious life ( Glatzer 1964 ).

Leopold Zunz (1794–1886), one of the movement's leading figures, devoted much of his work to rabbinic literature. At the time, Christian thinkers maintained that the Jews' contribution ended with the Bible , and Zunz began to publish in the area of post-biblical rabbinic literature . His essays "Etwas über die rabbinische Literatur" and "Zur Geschichte und Literatur" addressed this issue. His biography of Rashi of Troyes was pivotal. When the Prussian government forbade preaching sermons in German synagogues, on the grounds that the sermon was an exclusively Christian institution, Zunz wrote History of the Jewish Sermon in 1832. This work has been described as "the most important Jewish book published in the 19th century."  It lays down principles for the investigation of the Rabbinic exegesis ( Midrash ) and of the siddur (prayer-book of the synagogue).

Attitude toward religion [ edit ] Despite the outstanding scholarship of Wissenschaft personalities such as Zunz and Heinrich Graetz (most of whom pursued their scholarly labors on their own time as Privatgelehrte ), the Wissenschaft movement as a whole had a tendency to present Judaism as an historical relic [ 6 ] with frequently apologetic overtones, [ 7 ] and often ignored matters of contemporary relevance: Zunz felt obliged to assume that Judaism had come to an end, and that it was the task of Wissenschaft des Judentums to provide a judicious accounting of the varied and rich contributions which Judaism had made to civilization.  In a similar spirit, Steinschneider is said to have once quipped that Wissenschaft des Judentums seeks to ensure that Judaism will receive a proper burial, in which scholarship amounts to an extended obituary properly eulogizing the deceased.

[ 8 ] Nevertheless, throughout most of its existence and despite certain of its most prominent practitioners, such as Moritz Steinschneider , being  vocal opponents of religion, Wissenschaft des Judentums was very much a religious movement—pursued largely by rabbis at Jewish seminaries who were engaged in preparing their students for rabbinical careers.

[ 9 ] In a foreshadowing of the reform movement, Zunz often led services, which were accompanied by an organ, in the vernacular German, rather than Hebrew.

[ 10 ] Wissenschaft scholars such as Rabbi Zacharias Frankel , the first head of the Jewish Theological Seminary of Breslau , and his colleague at the seminary, historian Heinrich Graetz, considered Jewish history to be reflective of a divine revelation and guidance.

[ 11 ] Wissenschaft des Judentums was not restricted to progressive Judaism. In 1873, Israel Hildesheimer founded the neo-orthodox modern Rabbinerseminar in Berlin. One of its most prominent scholars, David Hoffmann , defended a literal reading of the Biblical word which he understood to be the exact product of divine revelation.

[ citation needed ] It was this essentially religious nature of Wissenschaft des Judentums that made it even more dangerous in the eyes of its opponents.

[ 12 ] Christians even thought that a more liberal form of Judaism would attract converts, or would keep Jews from converting to Christianity, and so the government forced Zunz's synagogue to close.

[ 13 ] Attitude toward earlier scholarship [ edit ] Indeed, one detects in the writings of many Wissenschaft scholars not only an intense love of scholarship "for its own sake", but also a genuine affinity for the rabbis and scholars of old, whose works they find themselves documenting, editing, publishing, analyzing, and critiquing.  Indeed, far from disparaging or despising the Jewish religion and its many generations of rabbinical scholars, the majority of Wissenschaft practitioners are very keen to take ownership of the Jewish scholarly tradition.  They see themselves as the rightful heirs and successors to Saadia Gaon and Rashi and Hillel the Elder and Abraham ibn Ezra , and in those prior generations of scholars they see their own Wissenschaft spirit and likeness.

In the Wissenschaft approach to scholarship, then, the earlier generations of scholars become  "de-sanctified" and "re-humanized".  Wissenschaft scholars feel completely free to pass judgment on the intellectual  and scholarly capacities of earlier scholars, evaluating their originality, competence, and credibility, and pointing out their failures and limitations.  The Wissenschaft scholars, while respectful of their predecessors, have no patience for a concept such as yeridat ha-dorot .  For them, the classical authorities are no more beyond dispute and critique than are contemporary scholars; the opinions of ibn Ezra and Steinschneider may be presented in the same sentence without any sense of impropriety, and either one may then be debunked with the same forwardness.  No doubt this de-sanctification of the Jewish luminaries provided further grist for the opponents of the movement.

Legacy [ edit ] Although the Wissenschaft movement produced a vast number of scholarly publications of lasting value, and its influence still reverberates through Jewish Studies departments (and, indeed, some yeshivas ) around the world, it is possible to regard the publication of the Jewish Encyclopedia in 1901–1906 as the culmination and final flowering of this era in Jewish studies ( Levy 2002 ).  The choice of English over German as the language for this epochal work is a further sign that an era of German scholarship was drawing to a close.  In the early years of the new century the Wissenschaft culture and style of scholarship was transplanted to a certain extent to bodies such as the Institute for Jewish Studies at Hebrew University (e.g., Gershom Scholem )  and Jewish Studies departments at American universities such as Brandeis and Harvard (e.g., Harry Austryn Wolfson ).

Opposition [ edit ] The Wissenschaft movement drew criticism from traditional elements in the Jewish community, who regarded it as sterile at best, and at worst damaging to the religious community.  A key opposition leader was Samson Raphael Hirsch .  He and other traditional religious scholars representing urban and sophisticated Orthodox constituencies regarded the Wissenschaft movement as failing to meet the needs of the living Jewish community; Mendes-Flohr observes in this context that historians, by virtue of their craft, necessarily "transform traditional knowledge, draining it of its sacral power." [ 14 ] The Orthodox orientation of Wissenschaft figures such as David Zvi Hoffmann did not spare them from Hirsch's condemnation.

Guttmann and his Philosophie des Judentums [ edit ] Julius Guttmann is best known for Die Philosophie des Judentums (Reinhardt, 1933), translations of which are available in Hebrew , Spanish , English , Japanese , etc.  The English title is The Philosophy of Judaism: The History of Jewish Philosophy from Biblical Times to Franz Rosenzweig (New York, 1964).

Roth sees in this publication "the last product in the direct line of the authentic Judaeo-German 'Science of Judaism'" (more commonly known as Wissenschaft des Judentums).

[ 15 ] While the movement did not utterly expire with the publication Guttman's work—its spirit living on in the work of G. Scholem and H.A. Wolfson among many others—it is certainly the case that the Wissenschaft movement in Germany had by the 1930s already ceased to thrive.

[ 16 ] The original German edition of Philosophie des Judentums ends with Hermann Cohen , the primary influence on Guttman's own philosophy, while the later Hebrew edition includes Franz Rosenzweig .  It is also notable that Guttman's work excludes major thinkers of the Kabbalistic school, which reflects his own attitude toward Jewish philosophy .

[ 17 ] List of Wissenschaft des Judentums personalities [ edit ] Leopold Zunz (1794–1886), a founder of the Verein für Wissenschaft des Judentums Heinrich Graetz , (1817–1891): his magnum opus History of the Jews was written in the spirit of Wissenschaft des Judentums .

Hermann Cohen Wilhelm Bacher Eduard Gans Heinrich Graetz Julius Guttmann Heinrich Heine David Zvi Hoffmann Moses Moser Solomon Judah Loeb Rapoport Solomon Schechter Moritz Steinschneider Leopold Zunz Samuel David Luzzatto Ismar Elbogen Isaiah Sonne See also [ edit ] Jewish portal Judaism portal Hochschule für die Wissenschaft des Judentums Jewish studies Sociology of Jewry Notes [ edit ] ^ Benzion Dinur (Dinaburg), "Wissenschaft des Judentums" , Encyclopaedia Judaica (2nd. Ed., 2007) ^ VEREIN FÜR CULTUR UND WISSENSCHAFT DER JUDEN in the Jewish Encyclopedia (1901-1906).

^ Elon 2003 , p. 110.

^ Dr. Henry Abramson, Who Was Philo Judaeus of Alexandria?

, minutes: 49:41–50:19, speaking on the Wissenschaft des Judentums .

^ Langton, Daniel R. "Wandering Jews in England’s Green and Pleasant Land: Wissenschaft des Judentums in an Anglo-Jewish Context" in Wissenschaft des Judentums in Europe: Comparative and Transnational Perspectives Studia Judaica 76. editor Christian Wiese; Mirjam Thulin. Berlin: de Gruyter, Walter GmbH & Co, 2014.

^ Mendes-Flohr1998 [ page needed ] ^ Meyer 2004 [ page needed ] ^ Mendes-Flohr 1998 , p. 41.

^ Meyer 2004 , pp. 105–106.

^ Elon 2003 , p. 112.

^ Meyer 2004 , p. 106.

^ Meyer 2004 [ page needed ] ^ Elon 2003 , p. 112.

^ Mendes-Flohr 1998 , p. 45 ^ Roth (1999 , p. 3).

^ Roth (1999) .

[ page needed ] ^ Werblowsky (1964 , p. ix).

References [ edit ] Elon, Amos (2003).

The Pity of it All . Picador.

ISBN 978-0-312-42281-3 .

Glatzer, Nahum N. (1964), "The beginnings of modern Jewish studies", in Altmann, Alexander (ed.), Studies in Nineteenth-Century Jewish Intellectual History , Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp.

27– 45 .

Levy, David B. (2002), "The Making of the ENCYCLOPAEDIA JUDAICA and the JEWISH ENCYCLOPEDIA" (PDF) , Proceedings of the 37th Annual Convention of the Association of Jewish Libraries , Denver, CO , retrieved January 1, 2007 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

Mendes-Flohr, Paul (1998), "Jewish scholarship as a vocation", in Alfred L. Ivry, Elliot R. Wolfson & Allan Arkush (ed.), Perspectives on Jewish Thought and Mysticism: Proceedings of the International Conference held by The Institute of Jewish Studies, University College London, 1994, in Celebration of its Fortieth Anniversary , Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Harwood Academic Publishers, pp.

33– 48, ISBN 9789057021947 .

Meyer, Michael A. (2004), "Two persistent tensions within Wissenschaft des Judentums" (PDF) , Modern Judaism , 24 (2): 105– 119, doi : 10.1093/mj/kjh009 Kommunikation Unternehmen .

Roth, Leon (1999) [1962].

Is there a Jewish Philosophy? Rethinking Fundamentals . London: Littman Library of Jewish Civilization .

Schorsch, Ismar From Text to Context: The Turn to History in Modern Judaism (1994) ISBN 0-87451-664-1 Werblowsky, R. J. Zwi (1964). Introduction.

Philosophies of Judaism: The History of Jewish Philosophy from Biblical Times to Franz . By Julius Guttmann. Translated by David W. Silverman. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Further reading [ edit ] George Y. Kohler, "Judaism Buried or Revitalised? ‘Wissenschaft des Judentums’ in Nineteenth Century Germany – Impact, Actuality and Applicability Today", in: Jewish Thought and Jewish Belief, (ed. Daniel J. Lasker), Beer Sheva 2012, p. 27-63.

Michael A. Meyer, “Jewish Religious Reform and Wissenschaft des Judentums: The Positions of Zunz, Geiger and Frankel”, in: Leo Baeck Institute Year Book 16 (1971), pp. 19–41.

Michael A. Meyer, “Two Persistent Tensions within Wissenschaft des Judentums”, in: Modern Judaism and Historical Consciousness, (ed. C. Wiese and A. Gotzmann), Leiden 2007, p. 73-89.

Ismar Schorsch “Scholarship in the Service of Reform”, Leo Baeck Institute Year Book 35, 1990, pp. 73–101.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Leopold Zunz .

Entry "Wissenschaft Des Judentums" by Benzion Dinur (Dinaburg) in the Encyclopaedia Judaica (2nd. Ed., 2007) Goldestein Goren Intl. Center, e-lectures Wissenschaft des Judentums [1] Iancu, Carol From the "Science of Judaism" to the "New Israeli historians" - landmarks for a history of Jewish historiography [2] " The Freimann Collection ." Digitized books based on Aron Freimann ’s Wissenschaft des Judentums bibliography ( Katalog der Judaica und Hebraica, Erster Band: Judaica , Frankfurt am Main: Stadtbibliothek Frankfurt am Main, 1932), from the collections of the Leo Baeck Institute, American Jewish Historical Society, American Sephardi Federation, YIVO Institute for Jewish Research, and other international collections Cultures of Wissenschaft des Judentums at 200. Zeitschrift der Vereinigung für Jüdische Studien e. V. / Journal of the German Association for Jewish Studies Online access to English articles v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wissenschaft_des_Judentums&oldid=1299115703 " Categories : German words and phrases Reform Judaism in Germany Jewish studies Jewish movements Jewish historiography Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 CS1 maint: location missing publisher This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 17:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wissenschaft des Judentums 5 languages Add topic

