Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 2.1 Congresses 3 Members 4 Publications 5 Affiliated people Toggle Affiliated people subsection 5.1 General Secretaries 5.2 Presidents 5.3 Other people 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents International Organization of Journalists 8 languages Čeština Esperanto 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from International Organisation of Journalists ) Soviet-era press organisation Not to be confused with International Federation of Journalists .

Logotype of the IOJ The International Organization of Journalists ( IOJ , French : Organisation internationale des journalistes ) was an international press workers' organization based in Prague , Czechoslovakia , during the Cold War . It was one of dozens of front organizations launched by the Soviet Union in the late 1940s and early 1950s.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It was controlled in Prague by the Central Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist Party , with the assistance of KGB agents.

[ 3 ] It was described by the U.S.

Central Intelligence Agency as "an instrumentality of Soviet propaganda".

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The International Organization of Journalists was formed at a congress held in Copenhagen in June 1946. At this meeting, the International Federation of Journalists and the International Federation of Journalists of the Allied and Free Countries merged into the new organization and for a time the new organization was broadly representative of the journalists of the world. However, by 1950 the IOJ had become dominated by communists and the non-communist member organizations had withdrawn. These would re-launch the International Federation of Journalists in 1952.

[ 5 ] A declassified Central Intelligence Agency document from 1955, described the IOJ as "an instrumentality of Soviet propaganda".

[ 4 ] In a 2009 interview with the newspaper Helsingin Sanomat , the Finnish professor Kaarle Nordenstreng who was the chairman of the IOJ 1976–1990, acknowledged that they took orders from the Kremlin but maintained that their operations were far from straightforwardly following their directives.

[ 6 ] Organization [ edit ] The decision-making body of the IOJ was Congress, which met every four years. Members of the IOJ, and delegations representing groups that had less than 20 members, had a voice, but no vote in the deliberation. Congress elected the Executive Committee, whose members could be nominated either by member federations or by the Congress itself. The Executive Committee met once a year. The IOJ Bureau was also elected by the Congress and consisted of the President, Secretary-General and a number of Vice-Presidents and met as required. Members of the Bureau were ex-officio members of the Executive Committee. The General Secretariat handled day-to-day administration of the IOJ and was headed by the General Secretary under the direction of the Bureau.

[ 7 ] Originally headquartered in London, in June 1947, the IOJ moved to Opletalova 5, Prague II , [ 8 ] and in 1966, to Vinohradska 3, Prague 1 , [ 9 ] and by 1978, to Parizska 9, 11001 Prague 1.

[ 10 ] Congresses [ edit ] The IOJ held the following Congresses: [ 11 ] Copenhagen, June 1946 Prague, June 1947 Helsinki , September 1950 Bucharest , May 1956 Budapest , August 1962 East Berlin , October 1966 Members [ edit ] In October 1955 the International Organization of Journalists claimed to have 60,000 members in 51 countries: "national organizations" in 14 countries - Albania , Bulgaria , People's Republic of China , Czechoslovakia , Finland , France , German Democratic Republic , Hungary , Democratic People's Republic of Korea , Mongolia , Poland , Romania , Soviet Union and North Vietnam ; "national groups" in Mexico and Ceylon . It apparently had individual members in 33 further countries.

[ 12 ] In 1957, representatives of the French Journalists Union (an affiliated of the CGT ), the Association of Polish Journalists , the All-China Journalists Association were mentioned as officers of the IOJ.

[ 13 ] In 1970 it declared that it had 150,000 members.

[ 14 ] In 1978 the following organizations were affiliated with IOJ: [ 15 ] Algeria - Union of Algerian Journalists Argentina - Press Syndicate of Cordoba Argentina - Association of Journalists of Buenos Aires Bolivia - Democratic Union of Workers of the Bolivian Press Cameroon - National Union of Journalists (Cameroon) Colombia - National Collegium of Journalists Congo - National Union of Congolese Journalists Czechoslovakia - Czechoslovak Union of Journalists Dominican Republic - National Syndicate of Professional Journalists El Salvador - National Union of Journalists (El Salvador) Gambia - Gambia Journalists' Association Guyana - Union of Guyanese Journalists Japan - Japan Congress of Journalists Japan - Association of Japanese Journalists North Korea , Japan - Association of Korean Journalists and Publishers in Japan Madagascar - Press Syndicate of Madagascar Namibia - SWAPO , Journalists Branch Nicaragua - National Union of Journalists (Nicaragua) Palestine - General Union of Palestinian Writers and Journalists Peru - Federation of Journalists of Peru Romania - Council of Romanian Journalists South Africa - South African Journalists Union , African National Congress Syria - Syrian Journalists' Union Uruguay - Association of the Uruguayan Press South Yemen - Democratic Yemeni Journalists Organization Zimbabwe - Association of Journalists of Zimbabwe In addition to these, there were also "organizations, committees, groups or individuals" who were members in the following states: Afghanistan , Albania, Angola , Australia , Austria , Bangladesh , Belgium , Benin , Brazil , Bulgaria, Burma , Kampuchea , Canada , Chile , Costa Rica , Cuba , Cyprus , Denmark , Ecuador , Egypt , Ethiopia , Finland, France, West Germany , East Germany, Ghana , Great Britain , Guinea , Guinea-Bissau , Honduras , Hong Kong , Hungary, India , Indonesia , Iran , Iraq , Italy , Ivory Coast , Jordan , Kenya , North Korea, Kuwait , Laos , Lebanon , Libya , Luxembourg , Malawi , Malaysia , Mali , Mauritania , Mauritius , Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco , Mozambique , Nepal , Netherlands , New Zealand , Nigeria , Norway , Pakistan , Panama , Paraguay , Poland, Puerto Rico , Senegal , Sierra Leone , Somalia , the USSR, Spain , Sri Lanka , Sudan , Sweden , Switzerland , Tanzania , Togo , Trindiad and Tobago , Tunisia , Turkey , Uganda , the United States , Venezuela , Vietnam and Zaire .

[ 16 ] Publications [ edit ] The IOJ published a monthly The Democratic Journalist in English, French, Spanish, German and Russian.

[ 17 ] Other publications included Interpressgrafik , Journalists' affairs and Afrique mass media.

[ 18 ] Kaarle Nordenstreng published 3 parts of Useful Recollections on the history of IOJ.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Affiliated people [ edit ] General Secretaries [ edit ] 1947: Jiří Hronek 1953: Jaroslav Knobloch 1959: Jiři Meisner 1966: Jiri Kubka 1988: Dusan Ulcak 1990: Gerard Gatinot 1995: Antonio Nieva Presidents [ edit ] 1947: Archibald Kenyon 1950: Jean-Maurice Hermann 1976: Kaarle Nordenstreng 1990: Armando Rollemberg Manuel Tomé 1995: Suleiman Al-Qudah Other people [ edit ] Krassimir Ivandjiiski , Bulgarian journalist Marimuthu Pragalathan Naicker , South African journalist, communist and anti-apartheid activist Don Rojas , worked in the Prague office See also [ edit ] Journalism portal World Federation of Scientific Workers Committee to Protect Journalists Reporters Without Borders The Coalition For Women In Journalism References [ edit ] ^ Jeffrey T. Richelson (1997).

A century of spies: intelligence in the twentieth century . p. 252.

^ Ralph And Brown Fred R. Sanders (2008).

National Security Management: Global Psychological Conflict . p. 31.

^ Political posters in Central and Eastern Europe, 1945-95: signs of the times. James Aulich, Marta Sylvestrová. p. 66 ^ a b Hettena, Seth (2020-03-09).

"Is Zero Hedge a Russian Trojan Horse?" .

The New Republic .

ISSN 0028-6583 . Retrieved 2020-03-09 .

Ivandjiiski also proudly informed me of his membership, since 1974, in the International Organization of Journalists, a front organization that a declassified CIA study described as 'an instrumentality of Soviet propaganda.' ^ Facts about international Communist front organisations p. 73 ^ Räikkä, Jyri (27 May 2009).

"Myötäjuoksija vaihtaa vapaalle" .

Helsingin Sanomat (in Finnish) . Retrieved 15 June 2015 .

^ Hoover Institution Yearbook on International Communist Affairs 1966 Stanford, Calif., Hoover Institution Press. pp.503-4 ^ Facts about international Communist front organisations p. 73 ^ Hoover Institution Yearbook on International Communist Affairs 1966 Stanford, Calif., Hoover Institution Press. p.503 ^ Coldrick, A. Percy and Jones, Philip .

The international directory of the trade union movement New York : Facts on File, [1978] p.189 ^ Hoover Institution Yearbook on International Communist Affairs 1966 Stanford, Calif., Hoover Institution Press. p.503 ^ Facts about international Communist front organisations p. 74 ^ Facts about international Communist front organisations pp. 73-4 ^ Hazan, Barukh (1976).

Soviet propaganda: a case study of the Middle East conflict . New York: Wiley. p. 112 – via Internet Archive.

^ Coldrick and Jones pp.190-1 ^ Coldrick and Jones p.191 ^ Facts about international Communist front organisations p. 74 ^ Coldrick and Jones p.190 ^ Kubka, Jiri; Nordenstreng, Kaarle (1986-08-15).

Useful Recollections Part I: Excursion Into the History of the International Movement of Journalists . International Organization of Journalists.

^ Nordenstreng, Kaarle; Kubka, Jiri (1988-09-15).

Useful Recollections Part II: Excursion Into the History of the International Movement of Journalists . International Organization of Journalists.

^ "The Rise and Fall of the International Organization of Journalists Based in Prague 1946–2016 - Karolinum" .

karolinum.cz . Retrieved 2023-06-07 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Portugal Norway Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Organization_of_Journalists&oldid=1303867437 " Categories : 1946 establishments in Denmark Organizations established in 1946 Organizations based in Prague Communist front organizations International journalism organizations Global union federations Hidden categories: CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 14:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Organization of Journalists 8 languages Add topic

