Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Parallel vs. convergent evolution 2 Parallel evolution between marsupials and placentals 3 Parallel coevolution of traits between hummingbirds and sunbirds contributing to ecological guilds 4 References Toggle the table of contents Parallel evolution 27 languages العربية Aragonés Български Bosanski Català Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Parallel evolution" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Similar evolution in distinct species Part of a series on Evolutionary biology Darwin's finches by John Gould Index Introduction Main Outline Glossary Evidence History Processes and outcomes Population genetics Variation Diversity Mutation Natural selection Adaptation Polymorphism Genetic drift Gene flow Speciation Adaptive radiation Co-operation Coevolution Coextinction Contingency Divergence Convergence Parallel evolution Extinction Natural history Origin of life Common descent History of life Timeline of evolution Human evolution Recent human evolution Phylogeny Biodiversity Biogeography Classification Evolutionary taxonomy Cladistics Transitional fossil Extinction event History of evolutionary theory Overview Renaissance Before Darwin Darwin Origin of Species Before synthesis Modern synthesis Molecular evolution Evo-devo Current research History of speciation History of paleontology ( timeline ) Fields and applications Applications of evolution Biosocial criminology Ecological genetics Evolutionary aesthetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary computation Evolutionary ecology Evolutionary economics Evolutionary epistemology Evolutionary ethics Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary linguistics Evolutionary medicine Evolutionary neuroscience Evolutionary physiology Evolutionary psychology Experimental evolution Invasion genetics Island biogeography Phylogenetics Paleontology Selective breeding Speciation experiments Sociobiology Systematics Universal Darwinism Social implications Eugenics Evolution as fact and theory Dysgenics Social effects Creation–evolution controversy Theistic evolution Objections to evolution Level of support Nature-nurture controversy Evolutionary biology portal Category v t e Parallel evolution is the similar development of a trait in distinct species that are not closely related, but share a similar original trait in response to similar evolutionary pressure.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Parallel vs. convergent evolution [ edit ] Evolution at an amino acid position. In each case, the left-hand species changes from incorporating alanine (A) at a specific position within a protein in a hypothetical common ancestor deduced from comparison of sequences of several species, and now incorporates serine (S) in its present-day form. The right-hand species may undergo divergent evolution (alanine replaced with threonine instead), parallel evolution (alanine also replaced with serine), or convergent evolution (threonine replaced with serine) at this amino acid position relative to that of the first species.

Given a trait that occurs in each of two lineages descended from a specified ancestor, it is possible in theory to define parallel and convergent evolutionary trends strictly, and distinguish them clearly from one another.

[ 2 ] However, the criteria for defining convergent as opposed to parallel evolution are unclear in practice, so that arbitrary diagnosis is common. When two species share a trait, evolution is defined as parallel if the ancestors are known to have shared that similarity; if not, it is defined as convergent. However, the stated conditions are a matter of degree; all organisms share common ancestors. Scientists differ on whether the distinction is useful.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Parallel evolution between marsupials and placentals [ edit ] A number of examples of parallel evolution are provided by the two main branches of the mammals , the placentals and marsupials , which have followed independent evolutionary pathways following the break-up of land-masses such as Gondwanaland roughly 100 million years ago. In South America , marsupials and placentals shared the ecosystem (before the Great American Interchange ); in Australia , marsupials prevailed; and in the Old World and North America the placentals won out. However, in all these localities mammals were small and filled only limited places in the ecosystem until the mass extinction of dinosaurs sixty-five million years ago. At this time, mammals on all three landmasses began to take on a much wider variety of forms and roles. While some forms were unique to each environment, surprisingly similar animals have often emerged in two or three of the separated continents. Examples of these include the placental sabre-toothed cats ( Machairodontinae ) and the South American marsupial sabre-tooth ( Thylacosmilus ) ; the Tasmanian wolf and the European wolf ; likewise marsupial and placental moles , flying squirrels , and (arguably) mice .

[ citation needed ] Parallel coevolution of traits between hummingbirds and sunbirds contributing to ecological guilds [ edit ] Hummingbirds and sunbirds , two nectarivorous bird lineages in the New and Old Worlds have parallelly evolved a suite of specialized behavioral and anatomical traits. These traits (bill shape, digestive enzymes, and flight ) allow the birds to optimally fit the flower-feeding-and-pollination ecological niche they occupy, which is shaped by the birds' suites of parallel traits. Thus, a parallel coevolved behavioral syndrome within the birds creates an emergent guild of highly specialized birds and highly adapted plants, each exploiting the other's involvement in the flowers' pollination in the Old World and New World alike.

[ 5 ] The bill shape of nectarivores, being long and needle-like, allows them to reach down a flower's pistil/stamen and get at the nectar within. Nectarivores may also use their specialized bills to engage in nectar robbing , a practice seen in both hummingbirds and sunbirds in which the bird gets nectar by making a hole in the base of the flower's corolla tube instead of inserting its bill through the tube as is standard, thus "robbing" the flower of nectar since it is not pollinated it in return.

[ 6 ] Nectarivores and ornithophilous flowers often exist in mutualistic guild relationships facilitated by the bird's bill shape, food source, and digestive ability acting in concert with the flower's tube shape and adaptation to pollination by hovering or perching birds. The birds eat nectar using their long, thin bills and, in so doing, collect pollen on their bills; this pollen is then transferred to the next flower they feed on. This mutualism coevolved in parallel between the Old World and New World birds and their respective flowers.

[ 7 ] Moreover, the digestive enzyme activity in nectarivores matching the nectar composition in their respective flowers appears to have coevolved in parallel between plants and pollinators across continents, as the nectarivorous lineages independently evolved the ability to digest the nectar specific to their flowers, resulting in distinct guilds.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The capacity of nectarivores to digest sucrose is far greater than that of other avian taxa . This difference is due to an analogous high concentration of sucrase-isomaltase , an enzyme that hydrolyzes sucrose. Sucrase activity per unit intestinal surface area appears to be higher in nectarivores than in other birds, meaning these nectarivorous avians can digest more sucrose more rapidly than other taxa.

[ 8 ] Moreover, the Adaptive Modulation Hypothesis does not apply for nectarivores and sugar-digesting enzymes, meaning that two lineages of nectarivores should not necessarily both have high sucrase-isomaltase concentrations even though they both eat nectar. Thus, parallel acquisition of analogous sucrose digestive capability is a reasonable conclusion because there is no apparent cause for the two lineages to share this high enzyme concentration.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ Parallel evolution, an example may be the Pyrotherians evolved a body plan similar to proboscideans: Online Biology Glossary Archived 2007-07-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Zhang, J. and Kumar, S. 1997.

Detection of convergent and parallel evolution at the amino acid sequence level Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine .

Mol. Biol. Evol.

14 , 527-36.

^ Arendt, J.; REZNICK, D. (January 2008). "Convergence and parallelism reconsidered: what have we learned about the genetics of adaptation?".

Trends in Ecology & Evolution .

23 (1): 26– 32.

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2007.09.011 .

PMID 18022278 .

^ Pearce, T. (10 November 2011). "Convergence and Parallelism in Evolution: A Neo-Gouldian Account".

The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science .

63 (2): 429– 448.

doi : 10.1093/bjps/axr046 .

^ Janeček, Štěpán; Chmel, Kryštof; Uceda Gómez, Guillermo; Janečková, Petra; Chmelová, Eliška; Sejfová, Zuzana; Luma Ewome, Francis (February 2020).

"Ecological fitting is a sufficient driver of tight interactions between sunbirds and ornithophilous plants" .

Ecology and Evolution .

10 (4): 1784– 1793.

doi : 10.1002/ece3.5942 .

ISSN 2045-7758 .

PMC 7042734 .

PMID 32128116 .

^ Juan Francisco Ornelas. Serrate Tomia: An Adaptation for Nectar Robbing in Hummingbirds?.

The Auk , Volume 111, Issue 3, January 1994, pp. 703-710.

^ a b Janeček, Štěpán; Bartoš, Michael; Njabo, Kevin Yana (2015-01-22).

"Convergent evolution of sunbird pollination systems of Impatiens species in tropical Africa and hummingbird systems of the New World" .

Biological Journal of the Linnean Society .

115 (1): 127– 133.

doi : 10.1111/bij.12475 .

ISSN 0024-4066 .

^ a b McWhorter, Todd J.; Rader, Jonathan A.; Schondube, Jorge E.; Nicolson, Susan W.; Pinshow, Berry; Fleming, Patricia A.; Gutiérrez-Guerrero, Yocelyn T.; Martínez del Rio, Carlos (July 2021).

"Sucrose digestion capacity in birds shows convergent coevolution with nectar composition across continents" .

iScience .

24 (7): 102717.

doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2021.102717 .

ISSN 2589-0042 .

PMC 8246590 .

PMID 34235412 .

^ Karasov, W. H. (1992-09-01).

"Tests of the adaptive modulation hypothesis for dietary control of intestinal nutrient transport" .

American Journal of Physiology. Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology .

263 (3): R496 – R502 .

doi : 10.1152/ajpregu.1992.263.3.R496 .

ISSN 0363-6119 .

PMID 1415633 .

Notes Dawkins, R. 1986.

The Blind Watchmaker . Norton & Company.

Mayr. 1997. What is Biology. Harvard University Press Schluter, D., E. A. Clifford, M. Nemethy, and J. S. McKinnon. 2004.

Parallel evolution and inheritance of quantitative traits . American Naturalist 163: 809–822.

McGhee, G.R. 2011.

Convergent Evolution: Limited Forms Most Beautiful . Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, Cambridge (MA). 322 pp.

v t e Evolutionary ecology Patterns of evolution Coloration evidence for natural selection Convergent evolution examples Parallel evolution Divergent evolution Paradox of the plankton Predator satiation Signals Signalling theory Anti-predator adaptation Alarm signal Aposematism Apparent death Deimatic behaviour Distraction display Crypsis Camouflage Mimicry Unkenreflex Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parallel_evolution&oldid=1295661772 " Category : Evolutionary biology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles needing additional references from September 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 03:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parallel evolution 27 languages Add topic

