Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 During the Communist era 1.2 Late 20th century 1.3 21st century 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Slovakia 1 language Čeština Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of liberalism in Slovakia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism in Slovakia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Liberalism in Slovakia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e This article is intended to give an overview of liberalism in Slovakia .

History [ edit ] During the Communist era [ edit ] In 1944, the conservative Democratic Party was founded. In 1948, the Democratic Party was replaced by the pro-communist Party of Slovak Revival .

Late 20th century [ edit ] In 1989, Hungarian liberals established the Independent Hungarian Initiative [ cs ] . In 1992, the party was renamed to the Hungarian Civic Party . In 1998, the party merged into the Hungarian Coalition Party [ cs ] .

Also in 1989, the Party of Slovak Revival renamed itself to Democratic Party . During the same year, Public Against Violence was formed. In 1991, Public Against Violence was renamed to Civic Democratic Union .

In 1993, Dissidents from the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia established the Alliance of Democrats of the Slovak Republic , led by Milan Kňažko In 1994, the party merged with a second dissident group, the Alliance for Political Realism, into the Democratic Union of Slovakia ( Demokratická Únia na Slovensku ). In 1995, Democratic Union of Slovakia merged with the National Democratic Party into the Democratic Union .

21st century [ edit ] In 2001, liberals around Pavol Rusko established the Alliance of the New Citizen (ANC). In 2006, Hope split from ANC. In March 2009, liberals around the economist Richard Sulík established the Freedom and Solidarity party, which is the ideological successor of the Alliance of the New Citizen. In 2016–17, liberals founded Progressive Slovakia . In 2018, Together – Civic Democracy led by former SDKÚ-DS member Miroslav Beblavý split from the Slovak Conservative Party .

In 2018, widespread protests over the murder of Ján Kuciak were seen as a signal of a comeback for Slovak liberals. In the 2019 Slovak presidential election , Zuzana Čaputová 's election as president was described by Foreign Policy as "[seeming] to confirm the ascendance of Slovak liberals that had started the previous year".

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] History of Slovakia Politics of Slovakia List of political parties in Slovakia References [ edit ] ^ Hockenos, Paul (2023-12-27).

"The End of Eastern Europe's Great Liberal Hope" . Retrieved 2023-12-05 .

v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard This liberalism -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Slovakia&oldid=1194163796 " Categories : Liberalism in Slovakia Liberalism by country Political history of Slovakia Liberalism stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts All stub articles This page was last edited on 7 January 2024, at 15:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Slovakia 1 language Add topic

