Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 Use 3 Developmental dysplasia of the hips 4 See also 5 External links 6 References Toggle the table of contents Cradleboard 10 languages Atikamekw Deutsch Español Français Italiano Русский Simple English Svenska Tsetsêhestâhese Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cradle board ) Indigenous baby carrier A Navajo-style cradleboard A Skolt Sámi mother with her child in a ǩiõtkâm Cradleboards ( Cheyenne : pâhoešestôtse , Navajo : awéétsʼáál , Northern Sami : gietkka , Skolt Sami : ǩiõtkâm , Inari Sami : kietkâm , Pite Sami : gietkam , Kazakh : бесік , Kyrgyz : бешік ) are traditional protective baby-carriers used by many indigenous cultures in North America , throughout northern Scandinavia among the Sámi , and in the traditionally nomadic cultures of Central Asia . There is a variety of styles of cradleboard, reflecting the diverse artisan practices of indigenous cultures. Many Central Asian communities and some indigenous communities in North America still use cradleboards.

Structure [ edit ] Atikamekw cradleboard Cradleboards are used for the first few months of an infant's life, when a portable carrier for the baby is a necessity. Some cradleboards are woven, as with the Apache . Woven cradleboards are made of willow, dogwood, tule, or cattail fibres. Wooden cradleboards are made by the Iroquois and Penobscot .

Navajo cradleboards are made with a Ponderosa pine frame with buckskin laces looped through the frame.

[ 1 ] Whatever materials are used to make cradleboards, they share certain structural elements. Cradleboards are built with a broad, firm protective frame for the infant's spine. A footrest is incorporated into the bottom of the cradleboard, as well as a rounded cover over the infant's head that arcs out from the cradleboard, similar to a canopy or a modern-day baby carriage hood. The purpose of this headpiece is to provide shade for the infant, since it could be covered with an animal skin, or a blanket in winter to protect against the elements in colder climates. The headpiece also provides extra head protection in case anything bumps against the cradleboard. Ornaments and sacred amulets are often attached to the headpiece as well, for example "beaded umbilical cord cases, and dream catchers or medicine wheels", to amuse and help the infant develop his or her eyesight.

[ 2 ] The inside of the cradleboard is padded with a lining of fresh plant fibres, such as sphagnum moss , cattail down, or shredded bark from juniper or cliffrose . The lining serves as a disposable diaper , although the Navajo could clean and reuse the lining made of shredded juniper or cliffrose bark. These plant fibres have antiseptic properties, and thus nurture healthy skin in the infant.

[ 2 ] The Chippewa tradition was to make a lining for the cradleboard usually from moss growing in cranberry marshes, which is smoked over a fire to kill insects, then rubbed and pulled to soften it. In cold weather, the infant's feet may be wrapped in rabbit skin with the fur facing inward. The moss lining is surrounded by a birch bark tray insert placed into the cradleboard, which could be removed for cleaning.

[ 3 ] Cradleboards used in Central Asia are often freestanding of varying heights and often made of walnut. The wood frames are often ornately carved and painted, with a cloth drape to shield the infant from light.

[ 4 ] Use [ edit ] Iroquois cradle board James Quesace, his wife and their infant in north west Manitoba , Canada, in 1886.

Kiowa cradle board in the Indianapolis Children's Museum Cradleboards have been used in cultures ranging from the sub-Arctic regions of present-day Canada, down to Mexico and Central America. In Arctic regions, cold weather does not make a cradleboard feasible for the infant's survival, and infants are carried by being placed in a sling worn under the mother's parka.

[ 5 ] Cradleboards were widely used by indigenous people across present-day North America. Cradleboards are used by the Kickapoo people in Mexico [ 6 ] and were used by Aztecs [ 7 ] and the Seri people [ 8 ] and Mayan communities as far south as Belize .

[ 9 ] In present-day South America, most indigenous cultures used slings or pouches, sometimes called a rebozo , for carrying infants rather than cradleboards. Cradleboards were used as in the Americas as far south as the Patagonia region.

[ 5 ] Cradleboards were used during periods when the infant's mother had to travel or otherwise be mobile for work, and needed to protect the infant. The cradleboard could be carried on the mother's back, using support from "tumplines", or "burden straps" that would wrap around her forehead, chest or shoulders; if she carried a pack as well as the cradleboard, the pack strap would go around her chest and the cradleboard strap would go around her forehead.

[ 3 ] [ 10 ] The cradleboard can also be stood up against a large tree or rock if the infant is small, or hung from a pole (as inside an Iroquois longhouse), or even hung from a sturdy tree branch. They were also used when longer travel was required, as the cradleboard could be attached to a horse for transportation.

In the southwest United States and northern Mexico, among cultures such as the Hopi and Apache, infants would spend most of their day and night in the cradleboard, being taken out of it for progressively longer periods, for up to five times per day. When the infant reaches the age when it can sit up unsupported, it is then gradually weaned from the use of the cradleboard, and spends progressively less time in it. At this time, the infant may use a second, larger cradleboard that replaces the first. By the time the infant is a year old and begins to walk, they are generally finished with cradleboard use.

[ 11 ] Cradleboard use and its effect on mother-infant interaction has been studied in Navajo communities. It has been shown that cradleboard use has no significant negative effect on this development. In the first few months of infancy, cradleboards have a soothing effect on babies. After 6 months of age or more, infants begin to resist being placed in cradleboards more vigorously as they become more mobile, and they are often placed in the cradleboard with their arms and hands free, so that they can play with objects hung from the cradleboard for their amusement.

[ 12 ] Contemporary opinions on the usage of the Kyrgyz beshik have been collected in the Kyrgyz Republic . In the capital city of Bishkek, there was a direct correlation between the level of Russification and the likelihood to use the traditional cradleboard where households who spoke Russian at home were least likely to use it.

[ 13 ] In an additional study comparing these attitudes to the southern regions of Kyrgyzstan, such as Jalalabad and Osh, the initial findings were supported with further evidence showing families who did not speak Russian at home were much more likely to use the traditional cradleboard.

Developmental dysplasia of the hips [ edit ] Cradleboard use has been associated with increased incidence of developmental dysplasia of the hip .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] The technique requires straightening the legs, which encourages dislocation of the femur and malformation of the acetabulum . This can be avoided by placing padding between the baby's legs to keep the knees slightly bent with the hips angled outward. Some modern cradleboard users contend that the small 1968 study of Navajo babies was intentionally designed to denigrate a traditional cultural practice, [ 17 ] although a 2012 study produced hip dysplasia in laboratory rats by subjecting them to similar conditions.

[ 16 ] More than 90% of mothers surveyed in the southern provinces of the Kyrgyz Republic had used the traditional cradleboard.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cradle boards .

Baby jumper Baby sling Baby transport Papoose Swaddling External links [ edit ] Victor F. Lotrich, "Indian terms for the Cradle and the Cradleboard" , The Colorado Magazine, May 1941 References [ edit ] ^ Kavasch, E. Barrie and Karen Baar (1999).

American Indian Healing Arts . Bantam Books. p.

14 .

ISBN 0-553-37881-3 .

^ a b Kavasch, E. Barrie and Karen Baar (1999).

American Indian Healing Arts . Bantam Books. p.

15 .

ISBN 0-553-37881-3 .

^ a b Densmore, Frances (1929).

Chippewa Customs .

Minnesota Historical Society Press . p.

49 .

ISBN 978-0-87351-142-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Zawlacki, Jake; Derrick, Matthew.

"AN EXAMINATION OF CONTEMPORARY USE OF THE TRADITIONAL NOMADIC INFANT CRADLE BOARD (BESHIK) AMONG THE KYRGYZ OF BISHKEK, KYRGYZSTAN International Journal of Russian Studies" .

www.ijors.net .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2024 . Retrieved 2023-10-31 .

^ a b Whiting, John Wesley Mayhew and Eleanor Hollenberg Chasdi (1994).

Culture and human development: the selected papers of John Whiting: Volume 6 of Publications of the Society for Psychological Anthropology . Cambridge University Press. p.

114 .

ISBN 978-0-521-43515-4 .

^ Latorre, Felipe A.; Latorre, Dolores L. (1991).

The Mexican Kickapoo Indians . University of Texas Press. p.

166 .

ISBN 978-0-486-26742-5 .

^ "Aztec Cradleboard Figurine and Drawing (Object)" .

Children & Youth in History .

Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2012 . Retrieved 5 February 2023 .

^ "2010.50.1.132-t - San Diego History Center - San Diego, CA - Our City, Our Story" .

^ Hammond, Norman (2009).

Cuello: An Early Maya Community in Belize . Cambridge University Press. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-521-11767-8 .

^ Kavasch, E. Barrie and Karen Baar (1999).

American Indian Healing Arts . Bantom Books. pp.

14– 5.

ISBN 0-553-37881-3 .

^ Hrdlicka, Ales (2005).

Physiological and Medical Observations Among the Indians of Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico . Kessinger Publishing. p. 81.

ISBN 978-1-4179-3837-7 .

^ Chisholm, James S. and Cary Michael Carney (2009).

Navajo Infancy: An Ethological Study of Child Development . Transaction Publishers. p. 187.

ISBN 978-0-202-36251-9 .

^ a b Zawlacki, Jake; Derrick, Matthew (2020-10-08).

"The Persistence of Traditional Cradle Board (Beshik) Usage among Post-Soviet Central Asian Mothers: Survey Analysis from Southern Kyrgyzstan" .

Global Journal of Social Sciences Studies .

6 (2): 96– 105.

doi : 10.20448/807.6.2.96.105 .

ISSN 2518-0614 .

^ Coleman, S. S. (1968). "Congenital dysplasia of the hip in the Navajo infant".

Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research .

56 : 179– 93.

doi : 10.1097/00003086-196801000-00020 .

PMID 5652776 .

^ Mahan, S. T.; Kasser, J. R. (2008). "Does Swaddling Influence Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip?".

Pediatrics .

121 (1): 177– 8.

doi : 10.1542/peds.2007-1618 .

PMID 18166571 .

S2CID 37598276 .

^ a b Wang, Enbo; Liu, Tianjing; Li, Jianjun; Edmonds, Eric W.; Zhao, Qun; Zhang, Lijun; Zhao, Xiaoming; Wang, Kang (2012). "Does Swaddling Influence Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip?".

The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery .

94 (12): 1071– 7.

doi : 10.2106/JBJS.K.00720 .

PMID 22573131 .

^ "Reviving Tradition: One Cradleboard at a Time" .

www.culturalsurvival.org . March 2015.

Archived from the original on January 17, 2024 . Retrieved 2019-09-28 .

Links to related articles v t e Indigenous peoples of the Americas Pre-history Paleo-Indians Pre-Columbian era Classification Archaeology Genetics Solutrean hypothesis Clovis First hypothesis Mythology/Religion Mythologies ‎ List of deities Religions Human sacrifice North America Arborglyph Fifth World Great Spirit Medicine man Medicine wheel The red road Totem pole Turtle Island Mesoamerica Common Cosmovision Creation Religion World tree Variations Aztec Maya Olmec South America Inca Mapuche Muisca Culture Andes Colombia Ecuador Peru Art Music Visual arts Painting Artists Writers European colonization European colonization Population history Columbian exchange Modern groups by country North America Belize Canada Costa Rica Dominica El Salvador Greenland Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Trinidad and Tobago United States South America ( list ) Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Related topics Ethnobotany Cherokee Iroquois Navajo Zuni Identity Languages Movements Philosophy Studies Trade Deerskin In popular culture Category Portal v t e Cultural areas of Indigenous North Americans Arctic Subarctic Northwest Coast Plateau California Great Basin Plains Eastern Woodlands Northeastern Southeastern Southwest Caribbean Mexico Aridoamerica Mesoamerica v t e Pre-Columbian civilizations and cultures Americas Paleo-Indians Genetic history Archaeology Cultures Indigenous peoples Classification North America Archaeological periods Adena Ancestral Puebloans Anishinaabe Caddoan Mississippian Chichimeca Coles Creek Dorset Fremont Glades Hohokam Hopewell tradition Marksville Mississippian Mogollon Oshara Patayan Picosa Plaquemine Plum Bayou Poverty Point Sierra de Guadalupe Sinagua St. Johns Thule Troyville Weeden Island Mesoamerica Mesoamerican chronology Acolhua Altepetl Ameca Azcapotzalco Cabécar Calixtlahuaca Capacha Chalcatzingo Chichimeca Cholula Chupícuaro Coclé Cocollán Cuicuilco Diquis Epi-Olmec Huastec Huetar Izapa Lenca Mezcala Mixtec Nicarao Nicoya Nonoalca Olmecs Pipil Purépecha Quelepa / Yarumela Shaft tomb tradition Teotenango Teotihuacan Tepanec Teuchitlán Tlatilco Tlaxcaltec Toltec / Altepetl Tollan Totonac / Totonacapan Veracruz Veraguas Xaltocan Xochipala Zapotec South America Andean civilizations Indigenous peoples Cultures of Pre-Cabraline Brazil Cultures of Pre-Columbian Bolivia Cultures of Pre-Columbian Chile Archaeological sites in Chile Cultures of Pre-Columbian Colombia Archaeological sites in Colombia Cultures of Pre-Columbian Ecuador Cultural periods of Peru Archaeological sites in Peru Cultures of Pre-Columbian Venezuela El Abra Amotape Arawak Atacameño Aymara Calima Cañaris Capulí Caral–Supe Casma–Sechin Chachapoya Chancay Chango Chanka Chavín Chimú Chinchorro Chiripa Chorrera Cupisnique Diaguita Gran Chaco Huetar Ichma Kalina Kuhikugu La Tolita (Tumaco) Las Vegas Lauricocha Llanos de Moxos (Bolivia) Lima Lokono Lupaca Luzia Manteño-Huancavilca Mapuche Marajoara Moche Mollo Monte Verde Nazca Omagua Paiján Piaroa Pucará Pucará de Tilcara Quebrada de Humahuaca Quimbaya Saladoid San Agustín Shuar Sican Taíno Tairona Tierradentro Timoto–Cuica Tiwanaku Toyopán Tuncahuán Upano Valley Valdivia Wankarani Wari / Huari Zenú Aztec Maya Muisca Inca Capital Tenochtitlan Multiple Hunza and Bacatá Cusco Language Nahuatl Mayan Languages Muysc Cubun Quechua Writing Script Script ( Numerals ) Numerals Quipu Religion Religion ( Human Sacrifice ) Religion ( Human Sacrifice ) Religion Religion Mythology Mythology Mythology Mythology Mythology Calendar Calendar Calendar ( Astronomy ) Calendar ( Astronomy ) Mathematics Society Society Society ( Trade ) Economy Society Warfare Warfare Warfare Warfare Army Women Women Women Women Gender Roles Architecture Architecture Architecture Architecture Architecture ( Road System ) Art Art Art Art Art Music Music Music Music Andean Music Agriculture Chinampas Agriculture Agriculture Agriculture Cuisine Cuisine Cuisine Cuisine Cuisine History History History History Inca history Neo-Inca State Peoples Aztecs Mayans Muisca Incas Notable Rulers Moctezuma I Moctezuma II Cuitláhuac Cuauhtémoc Kʼinich Janaabʼ Pakal Uaxaclajuun Ubʼaah Kʼawiil Jasaw Chan Kʼawiil I Nemequene Quemuenchatocha Tisquesusa Tundama Zoratama Manco Cápac Pachacuti Atahualpa Manco Inca Yupanqui Túpac Amaru Conquest Spanish Conquest ( Hernán Cortés ) Spanish Conquest Spanish Conquest of Yucatán ( Francisco de Montejo ) Spanish Conquest of Guatemala ( Pedro de Alvarado ) Spanish Conquest ( Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada ) ( Hernán Pérez de Quesada ) ( List of Conquistadors ) Spanish Conquest ( Francisco Pizarro ) See also Category: Archaeological sites in the Americas Portal:Indigenous peoples of the Americas Portal:Mesoamerica Ceramics of Indigenous peoples of the Americas Columbian exchange Indigenous cuisine of the Americas Mesoamerican writing systems Population history of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas Pre-Columbian art Painting Civilizations portal v t e Indigenous peoples of the world by continent Africa Eurasia North America Oceania South America Indigenous peoples by geographic regions Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cradleboard&oldid=1305609613#Cradle_board " Categories : Baby products Babycare Child safety Human-powered vehicles Infancy Sámi culture Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Cheyenne-language text Articles containing Northern Sami-language text Articles containing Skolt Sami-language text Articles containing Inari Sami-language text Articles containing Pite Sami-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 02:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cradleboard 10 languages Add topic

