Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin of term 2 Character of the cyclones 3 Frequency and effects Toggle Frequency and effects subsection 3.1 Kona winds 3.2 Examples 4 In popular culture 5 References Toggle the table of contents Kona storm 4 languages Español Français Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of Pacific seasonal cyclone A subtropical storm on December 19, 2010, originally a Kona storm Kona storms (also called Kona lows ) are a type of seasonal cyclone in the Hawaiian Islands , usually formed in the winter from winds coming from the westerly "kona" (normally leeward ) direction.

[ 1 ] They are mainly cold core cyclones, which places them in the extratropical cyclone rather than the subtropical cyclone category. Hawaii typically experiences two to three annually, which can affect the state for a week or more.   Among their hazards are heavy rain , hailstorms , flash floods and their associated landslides , high elevation snow , high winds which result in large surf and swells , and waterspouts .

Origin of term [ edit ] Kona is a Hawaiian language term (related to similar words in other Polynesian languages) for the  western (to southwestern) side of an island.

[ 2 ] The Kona District for example on the Big Island of Hawaiʻi still uses this name.
Although normally dry and leeward , 
the traditional easterly (to northeasterly) tradewinds slacken and reverse during one of these cyclones.

Character of the cyclones [ edit ] Once termed as subtropical cyclones , a change in the definition of the term during the early 1970s makes categorization of the systems not straightforward. Kona lows are typically cold core, making them extratropical cyclones .

[ 3 ] However, they generally share the subtropical cyclone characteristic of losing their associated weather fronts with time, since the cyclones tend to retrograde slowly.

Otkin and Martin identified three types of kona storms: cold-frontal cyclogenesis cyclones (CFCs), trade wind easterlies, and cold-frontal cyclogenesis/trade wind easterlies cyclones. Of the three, CFC cyclones are the most common.

[ 4 ] Rainfall in a Kona storm is more pronounced than a cold front storm , and most intense from south to east of the storm and in front of the storm's center. Steady rains may last from several hours to days, with longer lasting storms typically  interrupted by intervals of lighter rain and partial clearing.  Intense showers may appear on more moderate but steady rain.

[ 1 ] Frequency and effects [ edit ] While some winters occur without a single Kona storm, other winters see a high of four or five.
Hawaii typically experiences two to three annually [ 5 ] between October and April.

[ 6 ] The cyclone events for Hawaii can be long-lived, affecting the state for a week or more.

[ 7 ] Kona lows produce a wide range of weather hazards for Hawaii.  Among them are heavy rain, hailstorms, flash floods and their associated landslides, high winds which result in large surf and swells, waterspouts, and heavy snows on the higher mountains.

[ 8 ] Kona winds [ edit ] Kona winds are associated with cyclones with central pressures below 1,000.0 hectopascals (29.53 inHg) which pass within 500 miles/820 km northwest of the Hawaiian Islands.  Strong Kona winds usually last for a day. Considerable damage is caused to boats lying southwest of the islands.  On land, trees are uprooted and roofs can be blown off homes.  When passing through mountain gaps and over mountains, downsloped winds gust over 100 mph/165 km/h, which causes much of the destruction.

[ 9 ] Examples [ edit ] A kona storm on November 4, 1995 The most powerful Kona storm in the last fifty years struck the Hawaiian islands between 8 January and 11 January 1980. The low pressure primarily responsible for the severe conditions had a barometric pressure of 975mb on January 8, while passing north of the state, one of the lowest pressure readings ever recorded in Hawaiian waters as a result of an extratropical storm.

[ 10 ] The storm caused severe weather across the entire state, forcing the closure of all airports. Rainfall from the storm was extremely heavy, surpassing twenty inches in many locations, particularly on the Big Island and Maui. High surf from the storm caused extensive damage, particularly along the Kona coast of the Big Island, where the towns of Kailua-Kona and Puako received extensive damage.

[ 10 ] Winds from the storm averaged around 40-50 mph on the open ocean, but varied tremendously on land due to unique geographic features. Some areas experienced wind gusts well over hurricane force, including a low altitude gust of 106 mph (171 km/h) on Lahaina Roads, Maui. Haiku, on the windward coast of Maui, experienced a wind gust of 75 mph (121 km/h). On the high mountain summits of the Big Island and Maui, winds of over 110 mph (180 km/h) were recorded. Damage from the storm was estimated at between $25 and 35 million (in 1980 dollars).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In December 2008, lightning strikes from a Kona storm caused the entire power grid of the island of Oahu to black out, while then President-elect, Barack Obama was visiting.

[ 12 ] In December 2010, a Kona storm became fully subtropical and eventually became Tropical Storm Omeka .

In popular culture [ edit ] The fourth episode of the sixth season of Magnum, P.I.

is entitled "The Kona Winds." References [ edit ] ^ a b Climate of Hawaii Archived 2008-03-14 at the Wayback Machine on Western Regional Center web site ^ lookup of "Kona" Archived 2012-12-28 at archive.today on Hawaiian Dictionary ^ Pennsylvania State University .

Subtropical cyclones.

Archived 2010-07-01 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2009-05-22.

^ Otkin, J. A., and J. E. Martin. (2004). A synoptic-climatology of the subtropical Kona storm. Mon. Wea. Rev., 132, 1502-1517.

Download PDF ^ Jan TenBruggencate.

Rain-making Kona systems behind persistent downpours Honolulu Advertiser, retrieved on 2009-05-22 ^ Steven Businger and Thomas Birchard, Jr.

A Bow Echo and Severe Weather Associated with a Kona Low in Hawaii.

Retrieved on 2007-05-22.

^ Steven Businger.

Kona Lows in Hawaii.

Archived 2007-06-18 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2007-05-22.

^ Ian Morrison and Steven Businger.

Synoptic Structure and evolution of a Kona low Retrieved on 2009-05-22.

^ Pacific Disaster Center.

High Wind in Hawaii.

Archived 2007-04-24 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2007-05-22.

^ a b c .

Unusual Winter Storm, Hawaii.

Retrieved on 2007-11-23.

^ "Lane could be the largest Maui storm since one in 1980" .

^ "Major Power Outage in Honolulu as Obama Visits" in Time Magazine, December 27, 2008 v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kona_storm&oldid=1267285293 " Categories : Types of cyclone Weather events in Hawaii Storm Extratropical cyclones Subtropical cyclones Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 January 2025, at 12:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kona storm 4 languages Add topic

