Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organisation 3 Tasks 4 New initiatives 5 Further reading 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents India Meteorological Department 20 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা भोजपुरी Català Deutsch Español Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia मैथिली 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Simple English Suomi தமிழ் తెలుగు Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Indian Meteorological Department ) Meteorological agency of the Government of India India Meteorological Department Agency overview Formed 15 January 1875 ; 150 years ago ( 15 January 1875 ) Type Government agency Jurisdiction Government of India Headquarters Mausam Bhavan, Lodi Road , New Delhi Annual budget ₹ 514.03 crore (US$61 million) (2022) [ 1 ] Ministers responsible Dr. Jitendra Singh , Union Minister of Earth Sciences M Ravichandran, Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences Agency executive Mrutyunjay Mohapatra, Director General of Meteorology Parent department Ministry of Earth Sciences Website mausam .imd .gov .in India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) is an Indian agency of the Ministry of Earth Sciences of the Government of India . It is the principal agency responsible for meteorological observations, weather forecasting and seismology . IMD is headquartered in Delhi and operates hundreds of observation stations across India and Antarctica. Regional offices are at Chennai , Mumbai , Kolkata , Nagpur , Guwahati and New Delhi .

IMD is also one of the six Regional Specialised Meteorological Centres of the World Meteorological Organisation . It has the responsibility for forecasting, naming and distribution of warnings for tropical cyclones in the Northern Indian Ocean region, including the Malacca Straits , the Bay of Bengal , the Arabian Sea and the Persian Gulf .

History [ edit ] In 1686, Edmond Halley published his treatise on the Indian summer monsoon , which he attributed to a seasonal reversal of winds due to the differential heating of the Asian landmass and the Indian Ocean.

[ 2 ] The first meteorological observatories were established in India by the British East India Company . These included the Calcutta Observatory in 1785, the Madras Observatory in 1796 and the Colaba Observatory in 1826. Several other observatories were established in India during the first half of the 19th century by various provincial governments.

The Asiatic Society , founded in Calcutta in 1784 and in Bombay in 1804, promoted the study of meteorology in India.

Henry Piddington published almost 40 papers dealing with tropical storms from Calcutta between 1835 and 1855 in The Journal of the Asiatic Society . He also coined the term cyclone , meaning the coil of a snake. In 1842, he published his landmark thesis, Laws of the Storms .

[ 3 ] After a tropical cyclone hit Calcutta in 1864 , and the subsequent famines in 1866 and 1873 due to the failure of the monsoons, it was decided to organise the collection and analysis of meteorological observations under one roof. As a result, the India Meteorology Department was established on 15 January 1875.

[ 4 ] Henry Francis Blanford was appointed the first Meteorological Reporter of the IMD. In May 1889, Sir John Eliot was appointed the first Director General of Observatories in the erstwhile capital, Calcutta. The IMD headquarters were later shifted to Shimla in 1905, then to Pune in 1928 and finally to New Delhi in 1944.

[ 5 ] IMD became a member of the World Meteorological Organisation after independence on 27 April 1949.

[ 6 ] The agency has gained in prominence due to the significance of the monsoon rains on Indian agriculture . It plays a vital role in preparing the annual monsoon forecast, as well as in tracking the progress of the monsoon across India every season.

[ 7 ] Organisation [ edit ] The IMD is headed by the Director General of Meteorology , currently Mrutyunjay Mohapatra.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] IMD has six Regional Meteorological Centre s, each under a Deputy Director General. These are located in Chennai , Guwahati , Kolkata, Mumbai, Nagpur and New Delhi. There is also a Meteorological Centre in each state capital. Other IMD units such as Forecasting Offices, Agrometeorological Advisory Service Centers, Hydro-meteorological Office, Flood Meteorological Offices, Area Cyclone Warning Centers and Cyclone Warning Centers are usually co-located with various observatories or meteorological center.

[ 10 ] IMD operates a network of hundreds of surface and glacial observatories, Upper Air (high altitude) stations, ozone and radiation observatories and meteorological radar stations. Additional data is received from India's constellation of satellites, such as Kalpana-1 , Megha-Tropiques and instruments on board the IRS series and the INSAT series of satellites.

[ 11 ] Data and observations are also reported into the IMD network from meteorological instruments on board Indian merchant navy and Indian Navy ships. IMD was the first organisation in India to deploy a message switching computer for supporting its global data exchange.

IMD collaborates with other agencies such as the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology , National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting and the National Institute of Ocean Technology .

IMD also operates seismic monitoring centres at key locations for earthquake monitoring and measurements.

Tasks [ edit ] IMD undertakes observations, communications, forecasting and weather services. In collaboration with the Indian Space Research Organisation , the IMD also uses the IRS series and the Indian National Satellite System (INSAT) for weather monitoring of the Indian subcontinent . IMD was first weather bureau of a developing country to develop and maintain its own satellite system.

IMD is one of the six worldwide Regional Specialised Meteorological Centres of the Tropical Cyclone Programme of the World Weather Watch of the World Meteorological Organization .

[ 12 ] It is regional nodal agency for forecasting, naming and disseminating warnings about tropical cyclone in the Indian Ocean north of the Equator .

New initiatives [ edit ] The IMD launched System of Aerosol Monitoring and Research (SAMAR) in January 2016 to study the concentration of Black carbon , radiative properties of aerosols , environmental visibility and their climatological impacts. It would contain a network of 16 aethalometers , 12 sky radiometers and 12 nephelometers .

[ 13 ] Further reading [ edit ] Sikka, D. R. (1999).

"The Role of the India Meteorological Department, 1875-1947" . In Debi Prasad Chattopadhyaya (ed.).

History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization: pt. 1. Science, technology, imperialism and war . Pearson Education India. pp.

381– 429.

ISBN 978-81-317-2818-5 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Budget 2022: For the upcoming financial year, the MoES will receive a total of Rs 2,653.51 crore, with a hike in budgets mainly for the India Meteorological Department (IMD) and the multi-crore and ambitious Deep Ocean Mission" .

The Indian Express . 3 February 2022 . Retrieved 22 March 2022 .

^ Halley, Edmond (January 1997).

"An historical account of the trade winds, and monsoons, observable in the seas between and near the Tropicks, with an attempt to assign the physical cause of the said winds" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London .

16 (183): 153– 168.

doi : 10.1098/rstl.1686.0026 .

^ "Modern Meteorology" . Indian Meteorological Department . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "India Meteorological Department celebrates 145th foundation day on 15 January" . 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 30 November 2022 .

^ "Establishment of the IMD" . Indian Meteorological Department . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Members" . World Meteorological Organization. Archived from the original on 10 October 2011 . Retrieved 19 November 2011 .

^ "Indian Meteorological Department (IMD)" (PDF) . Indian Meteorological Department. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 January 2012 . Retrieved 19 November 2011 .

^ "IMD – DGM" .

imd.gov.in . Retrieved 1 August 2019 .

^ "IMD – Secretary MoES" .

imd.gov.in . Retrieved 1 August 2016 .

^ "Organisation" . Indian Meteorological Department. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

^ "Satellite Images & Products" . Indian Meteorological Department. Archived from the original on 31 October 2011 . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

^ "RSMCs and TCWCs" . World Meteorological Organization . Retrieved 19 November 2011 .

^ "Dr. Harsh vardhan dedicates system of aerosol monitoring and research and user-friendly website of India meteorological department" .

Press Information Bureau . 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 16 October 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to India Meteorological Department at Wikimedia Commons v t e National meteorological organizations Africa Algeria Ghana Mozambique South Africa Americas Argentina Bermuda Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Ecuador Guatemala Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan China Hong Kong (PRC) India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan North Korea South Korea Macau (PRC) Malaysia Pakistan Palestine Philippines Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Vietnam Europe Austria Belgium Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Ukraine Oceania Australia Fiji New Zealand Réunion (France) Tonga Tuvalu Regional: Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts European Severe Storms Laboratory Global: World Meteorological Organization Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Australia Norway Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=India_Meteorological_Department&oldid=1305886471 " Categories : India Meteorological Department 1875 establishments in India Government agencies established in 1875 Ministry of Earth Sciences Governmental meteorological agencies in Asia Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Indian English from February 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from June 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents India Meteorological Department 20 languages Add topic

