Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Programs 2 Organization and faculty 3 Notable people 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Division of Continuing Education 2 languages العربية 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic department of Harvard University Harvard Division of Continuing Education Division of Continuing Education Type Private Dean Nancy Coleman [ 1 ] Location Cambridge , Massachusetts , United States Campus Urban Website dce .harvard .edu The Harvard Division of Continuing Education is a division within the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Harvard University . It offers four programs: Extension School , Summer School , Professional & Executive Development, and Harvard Institute for Learning in Retirement.

Programs [ edit ] The Harvard Extension School building Harvard Extension School, founded in 1910, offers online and on-campus education for nontraditional students through open-enrollment for individual courses, part-time day and evening classes, and opportunities for personal enrichment or career advancement, including offering undergraduate certificates and graduate certificates. For students that are accepted through a formal admissions process, the school also offers the degrees of Bachelor of Liberal Arts in Extension Studies (ALB) [ 2 ] and Master of Liberal Arts in Extension Studies (ALM).

[ 3 ] Harvard Professional & Executive Development was established in 2011 to provide working professionals with short, noncredit programs. The offerings were designed for those who wanted to build job skills in just a few days, with the educational content of a conference but the small-group environment of a traditional course. Harvard PDP features more than 120 programs across six topic areas, including leadership, business, innovation, marketing, negotiation, and communication. In the broader lifelong-learning mission of DCE, Harvard PDP serves tactical, skills-based teaching for those looking to complement their education or professional experience in a short timeframe.

Harvard Summer School , founded in 1871, is the first academic summer session established in the United States. Each summer, more than 5,000 students of all ages come to Harvard from across the United States and more than 100 foreign countries to study for seven weeks with faculty from Harvard and other universities. The Summer School offers approximately 300 daytime and evening classes in more than forty disciplines.

Harvard Institute for Learning in Retirement , created in 1977, offers retirees and other older adults an opportunity to explore new areas of knowledge in peer-taught study groups. Each year, approximately 500 people ranging in age from their fifties to their nineties participate in the Institute's programs.

Organization and faculty [ edit ] The Dean of Continuing Education and University Extension leads the Division. He or she is appointed by and reports to the Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. The Dean of the Harvard Summer School reports to the Dean of Continuing Education. The Summer School and the Extension School draw their instructors from Harvard University, other institutions of higher learning, and the private sector.

Notable people [ edit ] Main pages: List of alumni of the Harvard Extension School , Category:Harvard Extension School alumni , Category:Harvard Extension School faculty , Category:Harvard Summer School alumni , and Category:Harvard Summer School instructors References [ edit ] ^ "Nancy Coleman - Dean of the Division of Continuing Education" .

Harvard University . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ "Bachelor of Liberal Arts Degree Program" .

Harvard Extension School .

^ "Academics" .

Further reading [ edit ] Shinagel, Michael (15 March 2010).

The Gates Unbarred: A History of University Extension at Harvard, 1910 - 2009 . Harvard University Press; Illustrated edition.

ISBN 978-0674051355 .

Shinagel, Michael (7 January 2021).

The Third Age at Harvard - A Personal History of the Harvard Institute for Learning in Retirement . Xlibris US.

ISBN 9781664149083 .

Pier, Arthur Stanwood (2012).

The Pedagogues: A Story Of The Harvard Summer School . Nabu Press.

ISBN 9781276697934 .

External links [ edit ] Harvard Division of Continuing Education website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Division_of_Continuing_Education&oldid=1303610121 " Category : Harvard University Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles using infobox university This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 00:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Division of Continuing Education 2 languages Add topic

