Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mottos 2 See also 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Veritas 24 languages Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Gaeilge Italiano עברית Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Goddess of truth in Roman mythology For other uses, see Veritas (disambiguation) .

Veritas Goddess of truth Veritas, depicted by Arnold Böcklin Symbols nudity Gender female Offspring Virtus Equivalents Greek Aletheia (debated) Statue of Veritas outside the Supreme Court of Canada In Roman mythology , Veritas ( Classical Latin : [ˈweː.rɪ.t̪aːs] ), meaning Truth, is the Goddess of Truth , a daughter of Saturn (called Cronus by the Greeks, the Titan of Time, perhaps first by Plutarch ) and the mother of Virtus . She is also sometimes considered the daughter of Jupiter (called Zeus by the Greeks), [ 1 ] or a creation of Prometheus .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The elusive goddess is said to have hidden in the bottom of a holy well .

[ 4 ] She is depicted both as a virgin dressed in white and as the "naked truth" ( nuda veritas ) holding a hand mirror.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The equivalent Greek goddess is Aletheia ( Ancient Greek : Ἀλήθεια ).

Veritas was the Roman virtue of truthfulness , which was considered one of the main virtues any good Roman should possess. The German philosopher Martin Heidegger argues that the truth represented by aletheia (which essentially means "unconcealment") is different from that represented by veritas , which is linked to a Roman understanding of rightness and finally to a Nietzschean sense of justice and a will to power .

[ 8 ] In Western culture , the word may also serve as a motto .

Mottos [ edit ] This Latin word veritas now appears in the mottos of many colleges , universities and other organizations. 
It is typically capitalized in mottoes (as Veritas ) for being an ideal like Truth, Kindness and Beauty.

Veritas is the motto of: Harvard University Hutchesons' Grammar School The University of Western Ontario Drake University Knox College (Illinois) Springfield Convent of the Holy Rosary (South Africa) Bilkent University the University of California - Hastings College of the Law the Dominican Order of the Roman Catholic Church Providence College and Molloy College , run by the Dominicans the Naval Criminal Investigative Service Loyola College, Ibadan Additionally, the word appears in mottoes that are phrases or lists, e.g.: Honor et Veritas : the Buckley School of the City of New York Veritas, Probitas, Iustitia : the University of Indonesia Veritas Nobis Lumen : the University of Cape Coast in Ghana Libertas, Justitia, Veritas ("Liberty, Justice, Truth"): Korea University in Seoul Artes, Scientia, Veritas : the University of Michigan Veritas vos liberabit ( The Truth Will Set You Free ): The Johns Hopkins University ; and St Thomas' College (Autonomous), Thrissur , the first Catholic college in Kerala Veritas Liberabit Vos : Doshisha University in Kyoto , Japan Verbum Tuum Veritas ("Your Word is Truth"): Monkton Combe School .

Lux et Veritas ("Light and Truth"): Indiana University and Yale University .

Vox Veritas Vita ("Speak the Truth as a way of Life"): California State University Veritas Curat ("Truth Cures"): the Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research , a medical school in Puducherry , India .

Veritas Lux Mea ("Truth is my light"): in the logo of Seoul National University , Korea Veritas, Unitas, Caritas ("Truth, Unity, Love"): Villanova University Gratiae veritas naturae : Uppsala University in Sweden Lux et Veritas Floreant ("Let Light and Truth Flourish"): The University of Winnipeg Caldwell College in Caldwell, New Jersey issues a "Veritas Award" each year in honor of the Dominican Sisters who founded and administer the college.

Howard University , in Washington, D.C.

, goes by the motto Veritas et Utilitas , translated to "Truth and Service", which is also a motto "Truth-Service" of Payap University , Thailand .

The American communications company Verizon derives its name from the combination of the words veritas and horizon - chosen from 8,500 candidates with $300 million spent on marketing the new brand.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] In vino veritas Via, Veritas, Vita John 8:32 John 18:38 Truth Coming Out of Her Well Urim and Thummim 490 Veritas Project Veritas Notes [ edit ] ^ Pindar Olympian Ode 10 : But come, Muse, you and the daughter of Zeus, unforgettable Truth: with the hand that puts things right, keep from me the blame for lying, for wronging my friend. Approaching from far away, the future has arrived and made me ashamed of my deep debt. Still, payment with interest has a way of dissolving the bitter reproach of men.

[1] ^ Aesop Fables 530 (from Phaedrus Appendix 5): Prometheus , that potter who gave shape to our new generation, decided one day to sculpt a statue of Truth, using all his skill so that she would be able to regulate people's behaviour. As he was working, an unexpected summons from mighty Jupiter called him away. Prometheus left cunning Trickery in charge of his workshop (Trickery had recently become one of the god's apprentices). Fired by ambition, Trickery used the time at his disposal to fashion with his sly fingers a figure of the same size and appearance as Truth with identical features. When he had almost completed the piece, which was truly remarkable, he ran out of clay to use for her feet. The master returned, so Trickery quickly sat down in his seat, quaking with fear. Prometheus was amazed at the similarity of the two statues and wanted it to seem as if all the credit were due to his own skill. Therefore, he put both statues in the kiln and when they had been thoroughly baked, he infused them both with life: sacred Truth walked with measured steps, while her unfinished twin stood stuck in her tracks. That forgery, that product of subterfuge, thus acquired the name of Falsehood, and I readily agree with people who say that she has no feet: every once in a while something that is false can start off successfully, but with time the Truth is sure to prevail.

[2] ^ Macey, Samuel L. (2010).

Patriarchs of Time: Dualism in Saturn-Cronus, Father Time, the Watchmaker God, and Father Christmas . University of Georgia Press. pp.

34– 36.

ISBN 9780820337975 . Retrieved 4 October 2017 .

^ This aphorism is attributed Democritus : "Of truth we know nothing, for truth is in a well." ( Diogenes Laertius.

Lives of Eminent Philosophers . IX, 72. Perseus Project, Tufts University.

) ^ Mercatante, Anthony S.

The Facts on File Encyclopedia of World Mythology and Legend . Facts on File, 1988, p. 654, ISBN 0-8160-1049-8 .

^ Warner, Marina (1985).

Monuments and Maidens: The Allegory of the Female Form . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 315.

ISBN 0520227336 .

^ Goscilo, Helena (June 1, 2010).

"The Mirror in Art: Vanitas, Veritas, and Vision" .

Studies in 20th & 21st Century Literature .

34 (2): 282– 319.

doi : 10.4148/2334-4415.1733 . Retrieved 2018-09-26 .

^ B. Dallery, Arleen; E. Scott, Charles; Roberts, P. Holley (1992).

Ethics and Danger: Essays on Heidegger and Continental Thought Issue 17 of Selected studies in phenomenology and existential philosophy . SUNY Press. p. 72.

ISBN 9780791409831 . Retrieved 4 October 2017 .

^ "Verizon p;— Investor Relations — Company Profile — Corporate History" .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2011 . Retrieved September 14, 2011 .

^ Culp, Bryan (January 1, 2001).

"Playing the Name Game Again" .

marketingprofs.com .

Archived from the original on March 18, 2014 . Retrieved November 27, 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Veritas .

History of Truth: The Latin "Veritas" Aletheia and Other Terms for Truth in Ancient Greek —Origins and developments of the concept of Truth (From the Greek "Aletheia" to the Latin "Veritas") v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities ( Dii Consentes ) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Aurora Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Lares Familiares Liber Libertas Luna Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Nox Ops Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Summanus Venus Veritas Vesta Vertumnus Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Bonus Eventus Caelus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pax Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Terra Victoria Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Kings of Alba Longa Hersilia Legendary beings She-wolf Barnacle goose Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Fasti Metamorphoses Propertius Varro Res divinae Sibylline Books Apuleius The Golden Ass Concepts and practices Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Charity Palladium Theology of victory Pomerium Temples Capitolium Cella Celtic Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism Events Golden Bough Founding of Rome Natale di Roma Rape of the Sabine Women Battle of Lacus Curtius Objects Gubernaculum Parabiago Plate Pignora imperii Variations Gallo-Roman Mysteries Cybele Isis Mithraism See also Classical mythology Decline Persecution Etruscan religion Glossary Greek mythology Myth and ritual Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Veritas&oldid=1304989000 " Categories : Latin words and phrases Personifications in Roman mythology Roman goddesses Truth Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages with Classical Latin IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 10:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Veritas 24 languages Add topic

