Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 The textile industry 3 Steam engines 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Industrial Age 8 languages العربية Bosanski Deutsch فارسی Gaeilge Монгол Shqip Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Period of human history from the mid 18th to late 20th centuries See also: Industrial Revolution Iron and Coal , 1855–60, by William Bell Scott illustrates the rise of coal and iron working in the Industrial Revolution and the heavy engineering projects they made possible.

The Industrial Age is a period of history that encompasses the changes in economic and social organization that began around 1760 in Great Britain and later in other countries, characterized chiefly by the replacement of hand tools with power-driven machines such as the power loom and the steam engine , and by the concentration of industry in large establishments.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] While it is commonly believed that the Industrial Age was supplanted by the Information Age in the late 20th century, [ 3 ] a view that has become common since the Revolutions of 1989 , much of the Third World economy is still based on manufacturing , although mobile phones are now commonplace even in the poorest of countries, [ 4 ] enabling access to global information networks. Even though many developing countries remain largely industrial, the Information Age is increasingly on the ground.

Origins [ edit ] Huge changes in agricultural methods made the Industrial Revolution possible. This agricultural revolution started with changes in farming in the Netherlands, later developed by the British.

The Industrial Age began in Great Britain in the mid-18th century and was fueled by coal mining from places such as Wales and County Durham .

The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain because it had the factors of production, land (all natural resources), capital, and labour. Britain had plenty of harbors that enabled trade, Britain had access to capital, such as goods and money, for example, tools, machinery, equipment, and inventory. Britain, lastly, had an abundance of labor, or industrial workers in this case. There are many other conditions that help show why the Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain. The British Isles and colonies overseas represented huge markets that created a large demand for British goods. Britain also had one of the largest spheres of influence due to its massive navy and merchant marine . The British government's concern for commercial interests was also important. 
The steam engine allowed for steamboats and the locomotives, which made transportation much faster. By the mid-19th century the Industrial Revolution had spread to Continental Europe and North America , and since then it has spread to most of the world.

The textile industry [ edit ] The cotton industry was the first industry to go through mechanization , the use of automatic machinery to increase production. The domestic system sprouted as a result of when businesses began importing raw cotton, employing spinners and weavers to make it into cloth from their home.

James Hargreaves invented the spinning jenny , which could produce eight times as much thread as a single spinning wheel, and Richard Arkwright made it driven by water. Later Arkwright opened a spinning mill which marked the beginning of the factory system . In 1785, Edmund Cartwright invented a loom which was powered by water.

Steam engines [ edit ] In 1712, Thomas Newcomen produced the first successful steam engine , and in 1769, James Watt patented the modern steam engine. As a result, steam replaced water as industry's major power source.

The steam engine allowed for steamboats and the locomotives, which made transportation much faster. By the mid-19th century the Industrial Revolution had spread to Continental Europe and North America , and since then it has spread to most of the world.

The Industrial Age is defined by mass production , broadcasting , the rise of the nation state , power , modern medicine and running water . The quality of human life has increased dramatically during the Industrial Age. Life expectancy today worldwide is more than twice as high as it was when the Industrial Revolution began.

See also [ edit ] Information Age Imagination Age References [ edit ] ^ Two Views Of The British Industrial Revolution , Peter Temin ^ "Industrial-revolution - Define Industrial-revolution at Dictionary.com" .

Dictionary.com .

^ "5 Myths About the 'Information Age' " .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . 17 April 2011.

^ "In much of sub-Saharan Africa, mobile phones are more common than access to electricity" .

The Economist . 8 November 2017 . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

v t e Types of societies Pre-industrial Hunter-gatherer Montane Circumpolar Subarctic Nomadic Pastoral Horticultural Agricultural/Agrarian Feudal Complex Proto-Industrial Industrial Post-industrial Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Industrial_Age&oldid=1273995865 " Categories : Industrial Revolution Historical eras 18th century 20th century 21st century 18th century in technology 19th century in technology 20th century in technology 21st century in technology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 February 2025, at 23:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Industrial Age 8 languages Add topic

