Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years Toggle Early years subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 Childhood 1.3 Education and lecturing 1.4 Political aspects 2 Early political activity Toggle Early political activity subsection 2.1 Background 2.2 Opposition to the White Revolution 2.3 Opposition to capitulation 3 Life in exile Toggle Life in exile subsection 3.1 Velâyat-e Faqih 3.2 Pre-revolutionary political activity 3.2.1 Khomeini's contact with the United States 4 Supreme Leader of Iran Toggle Supreme Leader of Iran subsection 4.1 Return to Iran 4.2 Revolution 4.2.1 Beginning of the consolidation of power 4.2.2 Islamic constitution and becoming Supreme Leader 4.2.3 Hostage crisis 4.3 Relationship with Islamic and non-aligned countries 4.4 Iran–Iraq War 4.5 Fatwa against chemical weapons 4.6 Rushdie fatwa 4.7 Life under Khomeini 4.7.1 Women and child rights 4.7.2 LGBTQ persecution 4.7.3 Emigration and economy 4.7.4 Suppression of opposition 4.7.5 Minority religions 4.7.6 Ethnic minorities 5 Death and funeral Toggle Death and funeral subsection 5.1 Succession 5.2 Anniversary 6 Reception, political thought and legacy Toggle Reception, political thought and legacy subsection 6.1 Democracy 6.2 Public image 6.3 Clash with liberals and leftists 6.4 Third world solidarity 6.5 Economics 6.6 Transsexuality 7 Appearance and habits 8 Mystique 9 Family and descendants 10 Bibliography 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Sources 15 External links Toggle External links subsection 15.1 Selected bibliography Toggle the table of contents Ruhollah Khomeini 108 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русский سرائیکی Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Tayal తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Yerwa Kanuri Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Supreme Leader of Iran from 1979 to 1989 "Khomeini" redirects here. For other uses, see Khomeini (name) .

Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Imam Ruhollah Khomeini روح‌الله خمینی Official portrait, 1981 1st Supreme Leader of Iran In office 3 December 1979 – 3 June 1989 President See list Abolhassan Banisadr Mohammad-Ali Rajai Ali Khamenei Prime Minister See list Mohammad-Ali Rajai Mohammad-Javad Bahonar Mohammad-Reza Mahdavi Kani Mir-Hossein Mousavi Deputy Hussein-Ali Montazeri (1985‍–‍1989) Preceded by Himself (as de facto Head of State) Succeeded by Ali Khamenei Head of State of Iran [ b ] De facto 5 February 1979 [ a ] – 3 December 1979 Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan Mohammad-Ali Rajai Preceded by Mohammad Reza Pahlavi (as Shah ) Succeeded by Himself (as Supreme Leader) Personal details Born Ruhollah Mostafavi Musavi ( 1900-05-17 ) 17 May 1900 [ c ] Khomeyn , Markazi, Persia Died 3 June 1989 (1989-06-03) (aged 89) Tehran , Iran Resting place Mausoleum of Ruhollah Khomeini Spouse Khadijeh Saqafi ​ ( m.

1929) ​ Children 7, including Mostafa , Zahra , Farideh , and Ahmad Relatives Khomeini family Education Qom Seminary Signature Website imam-khomeini .ir Notable idea(s) New advance of guardianship Notable work(s) Forty Hadith of Khomeini Kashf al-Asrar Tahrir al-Wasilah Islamic Government Religious life Religion Islam Denomination Twelver Shi'a [ 1 ] Jurisprudence Ja'fari Creed Usuli Muslim leader Teacher Seyyed Hossein Borujerdi Ruhollah Khomeini's voice Khomeini speaking on the importance of spirituality Recorded 24 November 1981 This article is part of a series about Ruhollah Khomeini Personal Family Death and state funeral Books Islamic Government Tahrir al-Wasilah Kashf al-Asrar Forty Hadith Islam and Revolution The Greatest Jihad Iranian revolution Life in exile 1963 demonstrations Engagement with Jimmy Carter Return to Iran 1st Supreme Leader of Iran 1979 Islamic Republic referendum Interim Government of Iran (1979) Hostage crisis Iran–Iraq War Satanic Verses controversy Legacy Khomeinism Execution of Imam Khomeini's Order Fajr decade Homafaran Allegiance Imam Khomeini International Airport v t e Styles of Ruhollah Khomeini Reference style Eminent marji' al-taqlid , Ayatullah al-Uzma Imam Khumayni [ 2 ] Spoken style Imam Khomeini [ 3 ] Religious style Ayatullah al-Uzma Ruhollah Khomeini [ 3 ] Ruhollah Musavi Khomeini [ d ] (17 May 1900 [ c ] – 3 June 1989) was an Iranian cleric , politician, political theorist, and revolutionary who founded the Islamic Republic of Iran and served as its first supreme leader from 1979 until his death in 1989. He was the main leader of the Iranian Revolution , which overthrew Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and transformed Iran into a theocratic Islamic republic .

Born in Khomeyn , in what is now Iran's Markazi province , his father was murdered when Khomeini was two years old. He began studying the Quran and Arabic from a young age  assisted by his relatives. Khomeini became a high ranking cleric in Twelver Shi'ism , an ayatollah , a marja' ("source of emulation"), a mujtahid or faqīh (an expert in fiqh ), and author of more than 40 books. His opposition to the White Revolution resulted in his state-sponsored expulsion to Bursa in 1964. Nearly a year later, he moved to Najaf , where speeches he gave outlining his religiopolitical theory of Guardianship of the Jurist were compiled into Islamic Government .

After the success of the Iranian Revolution, Khomeini served as the country's de facto head of state from February 1979 until his appointment as supreme leader in December of that same year. Khomeini was Time magazine's Man of the Year in 1979 for his international influence and in the next decade was described as the "virtual face of Shia Islam in Western popular culture". He was known for his support of the hostage takers during the Iran hostage crisis ; his fatwa calling for the murder of British Indian novelist Salman Rushdie for Rushdie's description of Islamic prophet Muhammad in his novel The Satanic Verses , which Khomeini considered blasphemous; pursuing the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in the Iran–Iraq War ; and for referring to the United States as the " Great Satan " and Israel as the " Little Satan ".

The subject of a pervasive cult of personality , Khomeini held the title Ayatollah and is officially known as Imam Khomeini inside Iran and by his supporters internationally.

[ 4 ] His state funeral was attended by up to 10 million people, one fifth of Iran's population, and is considered the second-largest funeral in history. In Iran, he is legally considered "inviolable"—insulting him is punishable with imprisonment; his gold-domed tomb in Tehran's Behesht-e Zahra cemetery has become a shrine for his adherents. His supporters view him as a champion of Islamic revival , independence , anti-imperialism , and resistance to foreign influence in Iran. Critics have criticized him for anti-Western and anti-Semitic rhetoric, anti-democratic actions, human rights violations including the 1988 execution of thousands of Iranian political prisoners , and for using child soldiers extensively during the Iran–Iraq War for human wave attacks.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Early years Background Khomeini's birthplace at Khomeyn Ruhollah Khomeini came from a lineage of small land owners, clerics, and merchants.

[ 9 ] His ancestors migrated towards the end of the 18th century from their original home in Nishapur , then part of Khorasan province , in northeastern Iran for a short stay to the Kingdom of Awadh , a region in the modern state of Uttar Pradesh , India, whose rulers were Twelver Shi'a Muslims of Persian origin.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] During their rule, they extensively invited and received a steady stream of Persian scholars, poets, jurists, architects, and painters.

[ 13 ] The family eventually settled in the small town of Kintoor , near Lucknow , the capital of Awadh.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Ayatollah Khomeini's paternal grandfather, Ahmad Hindi , was born in Kintoor.

[ 15 ] [ 17 ] He left Lucknow in 1830, on a pilgrimage to the tomb of Ali in Najaf , Ottoman Iraq (now Iraq), and never returned.

[ 14 ] [ 17 ] According to biographer Baqer Moin , this migration was to escape from the spread of British power in India.

[ 18 ] In 1834, Seyyed Ahmad Musavi Hindi visited Iran, and in 1839, he settled in Khomein .

[ 15 ] Although he stayed and settled in Iran, he continued to be known as Hindi , indicating his stay in India, and Ruhollah Khomeini even used Hindi as a pen name in some of his ghazals .

[ 14 ] Khomeini's grandfather, Mirza Ahmad Mojtahed-e Khonsari was the cleric issuing a fatwa to forbid usage of tobacco during the Tobacco Protest .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Childhood According to his birth certificate, Ruhollah Musavi Khomeini, whose first name means "spirit of Allah", was born on 17 May 1900 in Khomeyn , Markazi province , although his brother Mortaza (later known as Ayatollah Pasandideh) gives his birth date of 24 September 1902, the birth anniversary of Muhammad 's daughter, Fatima .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] He was raised by his mother, Agha Khanum, and his aunt, Sahebeth, following the murder of his father, Mustafa Musawi, over two years after his birth in 1903.

[ 23 ] Ruhollah began to study the Qur'an and elementary Persian at the age of six.

[ 24 ] The following year, he began to attend a local school, where he learned religion, noheh khani (lamentation recital), and other traditional subjects.

[ 18 ] Throughout his childhood, he continued his religious education with the assistance of his relatives, including his mother's cousin, Ja'far, [ 18 ] and his elder brother, Morteza Pasandideh.

[ 25 ] Education and lecturing Khomeini as a student with his friends (second from right) Khomeini in 1938 After World War I , arrangements were made for him to study at the Islamic seminary in Isfahan , but he was attracted instead to the seminary in Arak . He was placed under the leadership of Ayatollah Abdolkarim Haeri Yazdi .

[ 26 ] In 1920, Khomeini moved to Arak and commenced his studies.

[ 27 ] The following year, Ayatollah Haeri Yazdi transferred to the Islamic seminary in the holy city of Qom , southwest of Tehran , and invited his students to follow. Khomeini accepted the invitation, moved, [ 25 ] and took up residence at the Dar al-Shafa school in Qom.

[ 28 ] Khomeini's studies included Islamic law ( sharia ) and jurisprudence ( fiqh ), [ 24 ] but by that time, Khomeini had also acquired an interest in poetry and philosophy ( irfan ). So, upon arriving in Qom, Khomeini sought the guidance of Mirza Ali Akbar Yazdi, a scholar of philosophy and mysticism. Yazdi died in 1924, but Khomeini continued to pursue his interest in philosophy with two other teachers, Javad Aqa Maleki Tabrizi and Rafi'i Qazvini.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] However, perhaps Khomeini's biggest influences were another teacher, Mohammad Ali Shah Abadi , [ 31 ] and a variety of historic Sufi mystics , including Mulla Sadra and Ibn Arabi .

[ 30 ] Khomeini studied ancient Greek philosophy and was influenced by both the philosophy of Aristotle , whom he regarded as the founder of logic, [ 32 ] and Plato , whose views "in the field of divinity" he regarded as "grave and solid".

[ 33 ] Among Islamic philosophers, Khomeini was mainly influenced by Avicenna and Mulla Sadra.

[ 32 ] Apart from philosophy, Khomeini was interested in literature and poetry. His poetry collection was released after his death. Beginning in his adolescent years, Khomeini composed mystic, political and social poetry. His poetry works were published in three collections: The Confidant , The Decanter of Love and Turning Point , and Divan .

[ 34 ] His knowledge of poetry is further attested by the modern poet Nader Naderpour (1929–2000), who "had spent many hours exchanging poems with Khomeini in the early 1960s". Naderpour remembered: "For four hours we recited poetry. Every single line I recited from any poet, he recited the next." [ 35 ] Ruhollah Khomeini was a lecturer at Najaf and Qom seminaries for decades before he was known on the political scene. He soon became a leading scholar of Shia Islam.

[ 36 ] He taught political philosophy, [ 37 ] Islamic history and ethics. Several of his students, for example Morteza Motahhari , later became leading Islamic philosophers and also marja' . As a scholar and teacher, Khomeini produced numerous writings on Islamic philosophy, law, and ethics.

[ 38 ] He showed an exceptional interest in subjects like philosophy and mysticism that not only were usually absent from the curriculum of seminaries but were often an object of hostility and suspicion.

[ 39 ] Inaugurating his teaching career at the age of 27 by giving private lessons on irfan and Mulla Sadra to a private circle, around the same time, in 1928, he also released his first publication, Sharh Du'a al-Sahar (Commentary on the Du'a al-Baha ), "a detailed commentary, in Arabic , on the prayer recited before dawn during Ramadan by Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq ", followed, some years later, by Sirr al-Salat (Secret of the Prayer), where "the symbolic dimensions and inner meaning of every part of the prayer, from the ablution that precedes it to the salam that concludes it, are expounded in a rich, complex, and eloquent language that owes much to the concepts and terminology of Ibn 'Arabi . As Sayyid Fihri, the editor and translator of Sirr al-Salat , has remarked, the work is addressed only to the foremost among the spiritual elite (akhass-i khavass) and establishes its author as one of their number." [ 40 ] The second book has been translated by Sayyid Amjad H. Shah Naqavi and released by Brill Publishers in 2015 under the title The Mystery of Prayer: The Ascension of the Wayfarers and the Prayer of the Gnostics .

[ 41 ] Political aspects His seminary teaching often focused on the importance of religion to practical social and political issues of the day, and he worked against secularism in the 1940s. His first political book Kashf al-Asrar ( Uncovering of Secrets ), [ 42 ] [ 43 ] published in 1942, was a point-by-point refutation of Asrar-e Hezar Sale ( Secrets of a Thousand Years ), a tract written by a disciple of Iran's leading anti-clerical historian Ahmad Kasravi , [ 44 ] as well as a condemnation of innovations such as international time zones, [ e ] and the banning of hijab by Reza Shah , whom he always blamed for his father's murder. In addition, he went from Qom to Tehran to listen to Ayatullah Hasan Mudarris, the leader of the opposition majority in Iran's parliament during the 1920s. Khomeini became a marja ' in 1963, following the death of Grand Ayatollah Seyyed Husayn Borujerdi . Khomeini also valued the ideals of Islamists such as Sheikh Fazlollah Noori and Abol-Ghasem Kashani . Khomeini saw Fazlollah Nuri as a "heroic figure", and his own objections to constitutionalism and a secular government derived from Nuri's objections to the 1907 constitution.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Early political activity Background Khomeini's speech against the Shah in Qom , 1964 In the late 19th century, the clergy had shown themselves to be a powerful political force in Iran initiating the Tobacco Protest against a concession to a foreign (British) interest.

[ 48 ] At the age of 61, Khomeini found the arena of leadership open following the deaths of Ayatollah Sayyed Husayn Borujerdi (1961), the leading, although quiescent, Shi'ah religious leader; and Ayatollah Abol-Ghasem Kashani (1962), an activist cleric. The clerical class had been on the defensive ever since the 1920s when the secular, anti-clerical modernizer Reza Shah Pahlavi rose to power. Reza Shah's son Mohammad Reza Shah instituted the White Revolution , which was a further challenge to the Ulama.

[ 49 ] Opposition to the White Revolution Khomeini denouncing the Shah on 'Ashura , 3 June 1963 Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi In January 1963, the Shah announced the White Revolution , a multi-point programme of reform calling for land reform , nationalization of the forests, the sale of state-owned enterprises to private interests, electoral changes to enfranchise women and allow non-Muslims to hold office, profit-sharing in industry, a literacy campaign in the nation's schools, etc. Some of these initiatives were regarded as Westernising trends and a threat by traditionalists. Khomeini viewed them as "an attack on Islam".

[ 50 ] The powerful Shi'a ulama (religious scholars) had much to lose from land redistribution to peasants as they administered and earned much of their revenue huge tracts of land as charitable trusts ( vaqf ). Khomeini also attacked reform measures such as the elimination of the restriction that only male Muslims could be judges, complaining that "henceforth, Jews, Christians, and the enemies of Islam and the Muslims are to decide on affairs concerning the honor and person of the Muslims".

[ 51 ] Khomeini summoned a meeting of the other senior Marja's of Qom and persuaded them to decree a boycott of the referendum on the White Revolution. On 22 January 1963, Khomeini issued a strongly worded declaration denouncing both the Shah and his reform plan. Two days later, the Shah took an armored column to Qom, and delivered a speech harshly attacking the ulama as a class.

Khomeini continued his denunciation of the Shah's programmes, issuing a manifesto that bore the signatures of eight other senior Shia religious scholars. Khomeini's manifesto argued that the Shah had violated the constitution in various ways, he condemned the spread of moral corruption in the country and accused the Shah of submission to the United States and Israel. He also decreed that the Nowruz celebrations for the Iranian year 1342 (which fell on 21 March 1963) be canceled as a sign of protest against government policies.

On the afternoon of 'Ashura (3 June 1963), Khomeini delivered a speech at the Feyziyeh madrasah drawing parallels between the Caliph Yazid I , who is perceived as a "tyrant" by Shias, and the Shah, denouncing the Shah as a "wretched, miserable man", and warning him that if he did not change his ways the day would come when the people would offer up thanks for his departure from the country. On 5 June 1963 (15 of Khordad ) at 3:00 am, two days after this public denunciation of the Shah, Khomeini was detained in Qom and transferred to Tehran.

[ 52 ] Following this action, there were three days of major riots throughout Iran and the deaths of some 400 people. That event is now referred to as the Movement of 15 Khordad .

[ 53 ] Khomeini remained under house arrest until August.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Opposition to capitulation Khomeini in prayer On 26 October 1964, Khomeini denounced both the Shah and the United States. This time it was in response to the "capitulations" or diplomatic immunity granted by the Shah to American military personnel in Iran.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] What Khomeini labeled a capitulation law was in fact a " Status of forces agreement ", stipulating that U.S. servicemen facing criminal charges stemming from a deployment in Iran were to be tried before a U.S. court martial, not an Iranian court. Khomeini was arrested in November 1964 and held for half a year. Upon his release, Khomeini was brought before Prime Minister Hassan Ali Mansur , who tried to convince him to apologize for his harsh rhetoric and going forward, cease his opposition to the Shah and his government. When Khomeini refused, Mansur slapped him in the face in a fit of rage. Two months later, Mansur was assassinated on his way to parliament. Four members of the Fadayan-e Islam , a Shia militia sympathetic to Khomeini, were later executed for the murder.

[ 58 ] Life in exile Main articles: Iranian Revolution § 1970s: Pre-revolutionary conditions and events inside Iran , and Ruhollah Khomeini's life in exile Khomeini in exile at Bursa , Turkey, without clerical dress The entrance of Khomeini's house in Najaf , Iraq Khomeini spent more than 14 years in exile, mostly in the holy Iraqi city of Najaf . Initially, he was sent to Turkey on 4 November 1964 where he stayed in Bursa in the home of Colonel Ali Cetiner of the Turkish Military Intelligence .

[ 59 ] In October 1965, after less than a year, he was allowed to move to Najaf, Iraq, where he stayed until 1978, when he was expelled [ 60 ] by then-Vice President Saddam Hussein . By this time, discontent with the Shah was becoming intense and Khomeini visited Neauphle-le-Château , a suburb of Paris , France, on a tourist visa on 6 October 1978.

[ 38 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] By the late 1960s, Khomeini was a marja -e taqlid (model for imitation) for "hundreds of thousands" of Shia, one of six or so models in the Shia world at the time.

[ 63 ] While in the 1940s Khomeini accepted the idea of a limited monarchy under the Persian Constitution of 1906 – as evidenced by his book Kashf al-Asrar – by the 1970s he had rejected the idea. In early 1970, Khomeini gave a series of lectures in Najaf on Islamic government, later published as a book titled variously Islamic Government or Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist ( Hokumat-e Islami: Velayat-e faqih ). This principle, though not known to the wider public before the revolution, [ 64 ] [ 65 ] was integrated into the new Iranian constitution after the revolution.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Velâyat-e Faqih Khomeini in the 1970s Velâyat-e Faqih was his best known and most influential work, and laid out his ideas on governance (at that time): That the laws of society should be made up only of the laws of God ( Sharia ). Other laws are unnecessary because Sharia laws cover "all human affairs" and "provide instruction and establish norms" for every topic in human life.

[ 68 ] Since Shariah , or Islamic law, is the proper law, those holding government posts should have deep knowledge of Sharia . Since Islamic jurists or faqih have studied and are the most knowledgeable in Sharia , the country's ruler should be a faqih who "surpasses all others in knowledge" of Islamic law and justice, [ 69 ] (known as a marja' ), as well as having intelligence and administrative ability. Rule by monarchs or assemblies of "those claiming to be representatives of the majority of the people" (i.e. elected parliaments and legislatures) has been proclaimed "wrong" by Islam.

[ 70 ] This system of clerical rule is necessary to prevent injustice, corruption, oppression by the powerful over the poor and weak, innovation and deviation of Islam and Sharia law, and also to destroy anti-Islamic influence and conspiracies by non-Muslim foreign powers.

[ 71 ] Pre-revolutionary political activity Khomeini in front of his house at Neauphle-le-Château in a media conference Khomeini in 1978 A modified form of this wilayat al-faqih system was adopted after Khomeini and his followers took power, and Khomeini was the Islamic Republic's first "Guardian" Islamic scholar or " Supreme Leader ". In the meantime, Khomeini talked only about "Islamic Government", never spelling out what exactly that meant.

[ 72 ] Khomenei was careful not to publicize his ideas for clerical rule outside of his Islamic network of opposition to the Shah and so not frighten away the secular middle class from his movement.

[ 73 ] His network may have been learning about the necessity of rule by Jurists, but "in his interview, speeches, messages and fatvas during this period, there is not a single reference to velayat-e faqih." [ 72 ] Publicly his movement emphasized populism, talking about fighting for the mustazafin , (a Quranic term for the oppressed or deprived), that in this context came to mean "just about everyone in Iran except the shah and the imperial court".

[ 73 ] In Iran, a number of missteps by the Shah including his repression of opponents began to build opposition to his regime. Cassette copies of his lectures fiercely denouncing the Shah, for example as "the Jewish agent, the American serpent whose head must be smashed with a stone", [ 74 ] became common items in the markets of Iran, [ 75 ] helping to demythologize the power and dignity of the Shah and his reign. As Iran became more polarized and opposition more radical, Khomeini "was able to mobilize the entire network of mosques in Iran", along with their pious faithful, regular gatherings, hitherto skeptical Mullah leaders, and the support of "over 20,000 properties and buildings throughout Iran"—a political resource the secular middle class and Shiite socialists could not hope to compete with.

[ 73 ] Aware of the importance of broadening his base, Khomeini reached out to Islamic reformists and secular enemies of the Shah, groups that he and his supporters would suppress after taking and consolidating power. After the 1977 death of Ali Shariati , an Islamic reformist and political revolutionary author, academic, and philosopher who greatly accelerated the Islamic revival among young educated Iranians, Khomeini became the most influential leader of the opposition to the Shah. Adding to his mystique was the circulation among Iranians in the 1970s of an old Shia saying attributed to the seventh Imam, Musa al-Kazim . Prior to his death in 799, al-Kazim was said to have prophesied that "[a] man will come out from Qom and he will summon people to the right path".

[ 76 ] In late 1978, a rumour swept the country that Khomeini's face could be seen in the full moon. Millions of people were said to have seen it and the event was celebrated in thousands of mosques.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The phenomenon was thought to demonstrate that by late 1978 he was increasingly regarded as a messianic figure in Iran and perceived by many as the spiritual as well as political leader of the revolt.

[ 79 ] As protests grew, so did his profile and importance. Although several thousand kilometers away from Iran in Paris, Khomeini set the course of the revolution, urging Iranians not to compromise and ordering work stoppages against the regime.

[ 80 ] During the last few months of his exile, Khomeini received a constant stream of reporters, supporters, and notables, eager to hear the spiritual leader of the revolution.

[ 81 ] While in exile, Khomeini developed what historian Ervand Abrahamian described as a "populist clerical version of Shii Islam". Khomeini modified previous Shii interpretations of Islam in a number of ways that included aggressive approaches to espousing the general interests of the mostazafin, forcefully arguing that the clergy's sacred duty was to take over the state so that it could implement shari'a, and exhorting followers to protest.

[ 82 ] Despite their ideological differences, Khomeini also allied with the People's Mujahedin of Iran during the early 1970s and started funding their armed operations against the Shah.

[ 83 ] Khomeini's contact with the United States Main article: Jimmy Carter's engagement with Ruhollah Khomeini In the "official" narrative of the Iranian revolution, Khomeini "bravely defied" the U.S. and "defeated 'the Great Satan'",  "staunchly" resisting any direct contact with the US.

[ 84 ] However U.S. government documents — "diplomatic cables, policy memos, meeting records" declassified in 2016 and published by the BBC — indicate Khomeini did send messages to the US two weeks prior to the revolution, and that these may have been successful in facilitating his return from exile to Iran.  According to the documents, Khomeini told an American in France to convey a message to Washington that "You will see we are not in any particular animosity with the Americans," said that his Islamic Republic will be "a humanitarian one, which will benefit the cause of peace and tranquillity for all mankind".  Khomeini also "pledged not to destroy the military".

[ 85 ] The Carter administration helped Khomeini return to Iran by preventing the Iranian army from launching a military coup.

[ 84 ] A CIA analysis report titled "Islam in Iran", [ 84 ] also indicates that years earlier, in November 1963, Khomeini  (while under house arrest for rallying opposition to the shah's White Revolution reforms as a foreign inspired "attack on Islam"), contacted the administration of U.S. president John F. Kennedy , sending a message through cleric and Tehran University professor Haj Mirza Khalil Kamarah'i . In it, he stated that he "was not opposed to American interests in Iran", and that "on the contrary, he thought the American presence was necessary as a counterbalance to Soviet and possibly British influence".

[ 85 ] According to Kambiz Fattahi of the BBC,  the document show that Carter's gullible attempts to understand Khomeini's plans were a "massive blunder" underestimating Khomeini's mendacious shrewdness, while Khomeini "played his hand masterfully". Within a year large numbers of high level Iranian military were executed, [ 85 ] Khomeini was holding the US Charge d'Affaires and dozens of other Americans hostage in Tehran under the slogan "America can't do a damn thing," and establishing an anti-American legacy that lasted for decades.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei denied the report, and described the documents as "fabricated". Other Iranian politicians including Ebrahim Yazdi , who was Khomeini's spokesman and adviser at the time of the revolution, denounced the documents and the BBC's report.

[ 84 ] Supreme Leader of Iran Return to Iran Main article: Ruhollah Khomeini's return to Iran Arrival of Khomeini on 1 February 1979 escorted by an Air France pilot. When asked about his feelings of returning from exile in the plane, he replied Hich ; "None." Khomeini and the interim prime minister Mehdi Bazargan On 16 January 1979, the Shah left the country for medical treatment (ostensibly "on vacation"), never to return.

[ 87 ] Two weeks later, on Thursday, 1 February 1979, Khomeini returned in triumph to Iran, welcomed by a joyous crowd reported to be of up to five million people.

[ 87 ] On his chartered Air France flight back to Tehran , he was accompanied by 120 journalists, [ 88 ] [ 89 ] including three women.

[ 89 ] One of the journalists, Peter Jennings , asked: "Ayatollah, would you be so kind as to tell us how you feel about being back in Iran?" [ 90 ] Khomeini answered via his aide Sadegh Ghotbzadeh : " Hichi " (Nothing).

[ 90 ] This statement – much discussed at the time [ 91 ] and since [ 92 ] – was considered by some to be reflective of his mystical beliefs and non-attachment to ego, [ 93 ] by others to be a warning to Iranians who hoped he would be a "mainstream nationalist leader" that they were in for disappointment, [ 94 ] or of Khomeini's disinterest in the desires, beliefs, or the needs of the Iranian populace.

[ 92 ] He was Time magazine's Man of the Year in 1979 for his international influence.

[ 95 ] Revolution Khomeini adamantly opposed the provisional government of Shapour Bakhtiar , promising "I shall kick their teeth in. I appoint the government." [ 96 ] [ 97 ] On 11 February (Bahman 22), Khomeini appointed his own competing interim prime minister, Mehdi Bazargan , demanding, "since I have appointed him, he must be obeyed". He warned it was "God's government", and disobedience against him or Bazargan was considered a "revolt against God", [ 98 ] and "revolt against God is Blasphemy".

[ 99 ] As Khomeini's movement gained momentum, soldiers began to defect to his side and Khomeini declared ill fortune on troops who did not surrender.

[ 100 ] On 11 February, as revolt spread and armories were taken over, the military declared neutrality and the Bakhtiar regime collapsed.

[ 101 ] On 30 and 31 March 1979, a referendum to replace the monarchy with an Islamic Republic—with the question: "should the monarchy be abolished in favour of an Islamic Government?"—passed with 98% voting in favour of the replacement.

[ 102 ] Beginning of the consolidation of power While in Paris, Khomeini had "promised a democratic political system" for Iran but once in power advocated for the creation of theocracy, [ 103 ] which was based on the Velayat-e faqih . This began the process of suppression of groups inside his broad coalition but outside his religious network—groups that had placed their hopes in Khomeini but whose support was no longer needed.

[ 104 ] This also led to the purge or replacement of many secular politicians in Iran, with Khomeini and his close associates taking the following steps: establishing Islamic Revolutionary courts; replacing the previous military and police force; placing Iran's top theologians and Islamic intellectuals in charge of writing a theocratic constitutions, with a central role for Velayat-e faqih ; creating the Islamic Republic Party (IRP) through Khomeini's Motjaheds with the aim of establishing a theocratic government and tearing down any secular opposition; replacing all secular laws with Islamic laws; and neutralising or punishing top theologians ("Khomeini's competitors in the religious hierarchy"), whose ideas conflicted with Khomeini's, including Mohammad Kazem Shariatmadari , Hassan Tabatabaei Qomi , and Hossein Ali Montazeri .

[ 105 ] Some newspapers were closed, and those protesting the closings were attacked.

[ 106 ] Opposition groups such as the National Democratic Front and Muslim People's Republican Party were attacked and finally banned.

[ 107 ] Islamic constitution and becoming Supreme Leader Khomeini with people As part of the pivot from being the guide of a broad political movement to a strict clerical ruler, Khomeini first expressed approval of the provisional constitution for the Islamic Republic that included no position of supreme Islamic clerical ruler.

[ 108 ] After his supporters gained an overwhelming majority of the seats in the body making final changes in the draft (the Assembly of Experts), [ 109 ] they rewrote the proposed constitution to include an Islamic jurist Supreme Leader of the country, and a more powerful Council of Guardians to veto un-Islamic legislation and screen candidates for office, disqualifying those found un-Islamic. The Supreme Leader followed closely but not completely Khomeini ideas in his 1970 book Hokumat-e Islami: Velayat-e faqih ( Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist ) that had been distributed to his supporters and kept from the public. In November 1979, the new constitution of the Islamic Republic was adopted by national referendum.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Khomeini himself became instituted as the Supreme Leader of Iran , and officially became known as the "Leader of the Revolution". On 4 February 1980, Abolhassan Banisadr was elected as the first president of Iran. Critics complained that Khomeini had gone back on his word to advise, rather than rule the country.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Hostage crisis Main article: Iran hostage crisis Before the constitution was approved, on 22 October 1979, the United States admitted the exiled and ailing Shah into the country for cancer treatment. In Iran, there was an immediate outcry, with both Khomeini and leftist groups demanding the Shah's return to Iran for trial and execution. On 4 November, a group of Iranian college students calling themselves the Muslim Student Followers of the Imam's Line took control of the American Embassy in Tehran, holding 52 embassy staff hostage for 444 days, an event known as the Iran hostage crisis.

[ 114 ] In the United States, the hostage-taking was seen as a flagrant violation of international law and aroused intense anger and anti-Iranian sentiment .

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] In Iran, the takeover was immensely popular and earned the support of Khomeini under the slogan " America can't do a damn thing against us ".

[ 117 ] The seizure of the embassy of a country he called the " Great Satan " [ 118 ] helped to advance the cause of theocratic government and outflank politicians and groups who emphasized stability and normalized relations with other countries. Khomeini is reported to have told his president: "This action has many benefits ... this has united our people. Our opponents do not dare act against us. We can put the constitution to the people's vote without difficulty, and carry out presidential and parliamentary elections." [ 119 ] The new constitution was successfully passed by referendum a month after the hostage crisis began.

The crisis had the effect of splitting of the opposition into two groups: radicals supporting the hostage taking, and the moderates opposing it.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] On 23 February 1980, Khomeini proclaimed Iran's Majlis would decide the fate of the American embassy hostages, and demanded that the United States hand over the Shah for trial in Iran for crimes against the nation. Although the Shah died a few months later, during the summer, the crisis continued. In Iran, supporters of Khomeini named the embassy a " Den of Espionage ", publicizing details regarding armaments, espionage equipment and many volumes of official and classified documents which they found there.

Relationship with Islamic and non-aligned countries Carpet given to Khotan mosque by Ayatollah Khomeini Khomeini believed in Muslim unity and solidarity, in the export of his revolution throughout the world, and eventually in   "establishing the Islamic state world-wide",   one of "the great goals of the revolution.".

[ 121 ] He believed Shia and the significantly more numerous Sunni Muslims should be "united and stand firmly against Western and arrogant powers".

[ 122 ] He declared the birth week of Muhammad (the week between 12th to 17th of Rabi' al-awwal ) as the Unity Week and the last Friday of Ramadan as Quds Day in 1981.

[ f ] [ 123 ] Iran–Iraq War Main article: Iran–Iraq War Khomeini with Ahmad Khomeini and Mohammad-Ali Rajai Shortly after assuming power, Khomeini began calling for Islamic revolutions across the Muslim world , including Iran's Arab neighbor Iraq, [ 124 ] the one large state besides Iran with a Shia majority population. At the same time Saddam Hussein , Iraq's secular Sunni Arab nationalist Ba'athist leader, was eager to take advantage of Iran's weakened military and (what he assumed was) revolutionary chaos, and in particular to occupy Iran's adjacent oil-rich province of Khuzestan , and to undermine Iranian Islamic revolutionary attempts to incite the Shi'a majority of his country. In September 1980, Iraq launched a full-scale invasion of Iran, beginning the Iran–Iraq War (September 1980 – August 1988). A combination of fierce resistance by Iranians and military incompetence by Iraqi forces soon stalled the Iraqi advance and, despite Saddam's internationally condemned use of poison gas, Iran had by early 1982 regained almost all of the territory lost to the invasion. The invasion rallied Iranians behind the new regime, enhancing Khomeini's stature and allowing him to consolidate and stabilize his leadership. After this reversal, Khomeini refused an Iraqi offer of a truce, instead demanding reparations and the toppling of Saddam Hussein from power.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] In 1982, there was an attempted military coup against Khomeini.

[ 127 ] Although Iran's population and economy were three times the size of Iraq's, the latter was aided by neighboring Persian Gulf Arab states, as well as the Soviet Bloc and Western countries. The Persian Gulf Arabs and the West wanted to be sure the Islamic revolution did not spread across the Persian Gulf, while the Soviet Union was concerned about the potential threat posed to its rule in central Asia to the north; however, Iran had large amounts of ammunition provided by the United States of America during the Shah's era and the United States secretly and illegally smuggled arms to Iran during the 1980s despite Khomeini's anti-Western policy (see Iran–Contra affair ).

During the war, the Iranians used human wave attacks (people walking to certain death included child soldiers), [ 128 ] [ 129 ] with Khomeini promising that they would automatically go to paradise— al Jannah —if they died in battle.

[ 129 ] Khomeini's pursuit of victory ultimately proved futile.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] By March 1984, two million of Iran's most educated citizens had left the country.

[ 132 ] In July 1988, Khomeini, in his words, "drank the cup of poison" and accepted a truce mediated by the United Nations . Despite the high cost of the war, including 450,000 to 950,000 Iranian casualties and US$300 billion, [ 133 ] Khomeini insisted that extending the war into Iraq in an attempt to overthrow Saddam had not been a mistake. In a "Letter to Clergy", he wrote that "we do not repent, nor are we sorry for even a single moment for our performance during the war. Have we forgotten that we fought to fulfill our religious duty and that the result is a marginal issue?" [ 134 ] Fatwa against chemical weapons In an interview with Gareth Porter , Mohsen Rafighdoost , head of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps from 1982 until 1989, insisted Khomeini had opposed his proposal for beginning work on both nuclear and chemical weapons by a fatwa which had never been made public in details of when and how it was issued.

[ 135 ] Rushdie fatwa See also: The Satanic Verses controversy Fatwa issued 14 February 1989 I would like to inform all the intrepid Muslims in the world that the author of the book entitled The Satanic Verses , which has been compiled, printed and published in opposition to Islam, the Prophet and the Qur'an, as well as those publishers who were aware of its contents, have been declared madhur el dam [those whose blood must be shed]. I call on all zealous Muslims to execute them quickly, wherever they find them, so that no-one will dare to insult Islam again. Whoever is killed in this path will be regarded as a martyr.

[ 136 ] In early 1989, Khomeini issued a fatwā (juristic ruling) calling for the assassination of Salman Rushdie , an India-born British author.

[ 95 ] [ 137 ] Rushdie's book, The Satanic Verses , published in 1988, was alleged to commit blasphemy against Islam.

[ 138 ] Khomeini's fatwā required not only Rushdie's execution, but of "all those involved in the publication" of the book.

[ 139 ] Khomeini's fatwā was condemned across the Western world by governments on the grounds that it violated the universal human rights of free speech and freedom of religion . The fatwā has also been attacked for violating the rules of fiqh by not allowing the accused an opportunity to defend himself, and because "even the most rigorous and extreme of the classical jurist only require a Muslim to kill anyone who insults the Prophet in his hearing and in his presence." [ 140 ] Although Rushdie publicly regretted "the distress that publication has occasioned to sincere followers of Islam", [ 141 ] the fatwa was not revoked. The fatwa was followed by a number of killings and attempted killings.

Hitoshi Igarashi , the Japanese translator of the book, was stabbed to death in 1991. Rushdie himself and two other translators of the book survived murder attempts, the last (in Rushdie's case) in August 2022. The fatwa and subsequent unrest also coincided with a surge in sales for Rushdie's work.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Life under Khomeini In a speech on 1 February 1979 delivered to a huge crowd after returning to Iran from exile, Khomeini made a variety of promises to Iranians for his coming Islamic regime: a popularly elected government that would represent the people of Iran and with which the clergy would not interfere. He promised that "no one should remain homeless in this country", and that Iranians would have free telephone, heating, electricity, bus services and free oil at their doorstep.

[ 144 ] Under Khomeini's rule, Iran was Islamicized.

S haria (Islamic law) was introduced, with the Islamic dress code enforced for both men and women by Islamic Revolutionary Guards and other Islamic groups.

[ 145 ] Women were required to cover their hair, and men were forbidden to wear shorts. Alcoholic drinks, most Western movies, and the practice of men and women swimming or sunbathing together were banned.

[ 146 ] The Iranian educational curriculum was Islamized at all levels with the Islamic Cultural Revolution ; this was out thoroughly by the Committee for Islamization of Universities .

[ 147 ] The broadcasting of any music other than martial or religious on Iranian radio and television was banned by Khomeini in July 1979.

[ 146 ] The ban lasted 10 years (approximately the rest of his life).

[ 148 ] According to Janet Afari, "the newly established regime of Ayatollah Khomeini moved quickly to repress feminists, ethnic and religious minorities, liberals, and leftists – all in the name of Islam." [ 149 ] Unfortunately in the economic sphere, promised free services did not materialize, and with rising prices, real wages for Iranians fell below a middle-class standard, pushing people into de facto poverty.

[ 150 ] Women and child rights Khomeini took on extensive and proactive support of the female populace during the ousting of the Shah and his subsequent homecoming, advocating for mainstreaming of women into all spheres of life and even hypothesizing about a woman head of state; [ 151 ] however, once he returned, his stances on women's rights exhibited drastic changes.

[ 151 ] Khomeini revoked Iran's 1967 divorce law , considering any divorce granted under this law to be invalid.

[ 151 ] Nevertheless, Khomeini supported women's right to divorce as allowed by Islamic law.

[ 152 ] Khomeini reaffirmed the traditional position of rape in Islamic law in which rape by a spouse was not equivalent to rape or zina, under certain circumstances. Several fatwas by him on Women's issues include: "Issue 2412 – A woman who has entered into a permanent marriage should not go out of the house without her husband's permission, and she should consent to whatever pleasure he wants and not prevent him from sleeping with her without a legitimate excuse. If she obeys the husband in these matters, it is obligatory on the husband to provide her food, clothes, house and other items mentioned in the books, and if he does not provide, he is indebted to the wife, whether he has the ability or not.

Issue 2413 – If a woman does not obey her husband in the matters mentioned in the previous issue, she is a sinner and has no right to food, clothing, housing, and co-sleeping, but her dowry is not lost.

Issue 2414 – A man has no right to force his wife to serve the house.

Issue 2420 – If they did not specify a period of time for giving the dowry at the time of reading the permanent contract, the woman can prevent the husband from sleeping with him before receiving the dowry, whether the husband has the ability to pay the dowry or not. But if she is satisfied with intercourse before taking the dowry and the husband has intercourse with her, she cannot prevent the husband from intercourse without a legitimate excuse." [ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] A mere three weeks after assuming power, under the pretext of reversing the Shah's affinity for westernization and backed by a vocal conservative section of Iranian society, he revoked the divorce law.

[ 151 ] Under Khomeini the minimum age of marriage was lowered to 15 for boys and 13 for girls; [ 157 ] nevertheless, the average age of women at marriage continued to increase.

[ 157 ] Laws were passed that continued to allow polygamy, [ 158 ] and treated adultery as a high form of criminal offense.

[ 159 ] [ 157 ] Women were compelled to wear veils and the image of Western women was carefully reconstructed as a symbol of impiety.

[ 151 ] Morality and modesty were perceived as fundamental womanly traits that needed state protection, and concepts of individual gender rights were relegated to women's social rights as ordained in Islam.

[ 151 ] Fatima was widely presented as the ideal emulatable woman.

[ 151 ] At the same time, amidst the religious orthodoxy, there was an active effort to rehabilitate women into employment. Female participation in healthcare, education and the workforce increased drastically during his regime.

[ 151 ] Reception among women of his regime has been mixed. Whilst a section were dismayed at the increasing Islamisation and concurrent degradation of women's rights, others did notice more opportunities and mainstreaming of relatively religiously conservative women.

[ 151 ] LGBTQ persecution Shortly after his accession as supreme leader in February 1979, Khomeini imposed capital punishment on homosexuals . Between February and March, sixteen Iranians were executed due to offenses related to sexual violations.

[ 160 ] Khomeini also created the Revolutionary Tribunals. According to historian Ervand Abrahamian , Khomeini encouraged the clerical courts to continue implementing their version of the Shari'a. As part of the campaign to "cleanse" the society, [ 161 ] these courts executed over 100 drug addicts, prostitutes, homosexuals, rapists, and adulterers on the charge of "sowing corruption on earth".

[ 162 ] According to author Arno Schmitt, "Khomeini asserted that 'homosexuals' had to be exterminated because they were parasites and corruptors of the nation by spreading the 'stain of wickedness.'" [ 163 ] In 1979, he had declared that the execution of homosexuals (as well as prostitutes and adulterers) was reasonable in a moral civilization in the same sense as cutting off decayed skin.

[ 164 ] Being transgender , however, was designated by Khomeini as a sickness that was able to be cured through gender-affirming surgery.

[ 165 ] Since the mid-1980s, the Iranian government has legalized the practice of sex reassignment surgery (under medical approval) and the modification of pertinent legal documents to reflect the reassigned gender. In 1983, Khomeini passed a fatwa allowing gender reassignment operations as a cure for "diagnosed transsexuals", allowing for the basis of this practice becoming legal.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] Emigration and economy Khomeini is said to have stressed "the spiritual over the material".

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] Six months after his first speech he expressed exasperation with complaints about the sharp drop in Iran's standard of living, saying that: "I cannot believe that the purpose of all these sacrifices was to have less expensive melons." [ 170 ] On another occasion emphasizing the importance of martyrdom over material prosperity, he said: "Could anyone wish his child to be martyred to obtain a good house? This is not the issue. The issue is another world." [ 171 ] He also reportedly answered a question about his economic policies by declaring that 'economics is for donkeys'.

[ g ] This disinterest in economic policy is said to be "one factor explaining the inchoate performance of the Iranian economy since the revolution." [ 168 ] Other factors include the long war with Iraq, the cost of which led to government debt and inflation, eroding personal incomes, and unprecedented unemployment, [ 173 ] ideological disagreement over the economy, and "international pressure and isolation" such as US sanctions following the hostage crisis.

[ 174 ] Due to the Iran–Iraq War , poverty is said to have risen by nearly 45% during the first 6 years of Khomeini's rule.

[ 175 ] Emigration from Iran also developed, reportedly for the first time in the country's history.

[ 176 ] Since the revolution and war with Iraq, an estimated "two to four million entrepreneurs, professionals, technicians, and skilled craftspeople (and their capital)" have emigrated to other countries.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] Suppression of opposition Khomeini's strategy to  overthrow the shah has been described as assembling a broad coalition of disparate supporters (liberals, moderate Muslims, leftist Muslims, Marxists, poor urban youth, etc.), by never exactly explaining what he was going to do once in power, [ 179 ] (and in fact by making promisings he could not keep).

[ 180 ] But having taken power, he not only liquidated the Shah and his apparatus of power, but began to shed his now unwanted (and incompatible) allies one-by-one (the National Democratic Front, the Provisional Government , then president Abolhassan Banisadr and the MeK guerillas , etc.), using as much force as necessary. Eventually only one faction was left [ 180 ] [ 181 ] —namely merchants of the bazaar, often linked to the political–religious hierarchy, and prospering financially from the new order.

[ 182 ] In the process many people were killed or had their human rights violated.

Mohammad Reza Shah and his family left Iran and escaped harm but hundreds of former members of the overthrown monarchy and military were executed by firing squads, with exiled critics complaining of "secrecy, vagueness of the charges, the absence of defense lawyers or juries", or the opportunity of the accused "to defend themselves".

[ 183 ] In a talk at the Fayzieah School in Qom a few months after his return to Iran (on 30 August 1979), Khomeini threatened his democratic opponents: "Those who are trying to bring corruption and destruction to our country in the name of democracy will be oppressed. They are worse than Bani-Ghorizeh Jews, and they must be hanged. We will oppress them by God's order and God's call to prayer." [ 184 ] The suppression of democrats was followed in  later years by larger numbers of the erstwhile revolutionary allies of Khomeini's movement—Marxists and socialists, mostly university students—who opposed the theocratic regime. From 1980 to 1981, the People's Mojahedin Organization of Iran and other opposition groups (including leftist and moderate groups) rallied against the takeover of the Islamic Republic Party through large demonstrations. On Khomeini's order, forces of the Islamic Republic responded by shooting the demonstrators and arresting them, including their leaders.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] The 1981 Hafte Tir bombing escalated the conflict, leading to increasing arrests, torture, and executions of thousands of Iranians. Targets also included "innocent, non political civilians, such as members of the Baha'i religious minority, and others deemed problematic by the IRP".

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 185 ] The number of those executed between 1981 and 1985's "reign of terror" is reported to be between 8,000 and 10,000.

[ 186 ] [ 189 ] In 1983, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) reportedly provided Khomeini with a list of Soviet KGB agents and collaborators operating in Iran, who then executed up to 200 suspects and closed down the Communist Tudeh Party of Iran .

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] In the 1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners , [ 192 ] [ 193 ] [ 194 ] [ 195 ] [ 196 ] following the People's Mujahedin of Iran's unsuccessful attack, known as Operation Mersad , against Iran from Iraq and their support of Iraq during the Iran-Iraq war, Khomeini issued an order to judicial officials to judge every Iranian political prisoner (mostly but not all Mujahedin), [ 197 ] and kill those judged to be apostates from Islam ( mortad ) or "waging war on God" ( moharebeh ). Almost all of those interrogated were killed, 1,000 to 30,000 of them.

[ 196 ] [ 195 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] [ 201 ] Because of the large number, prisoners were loaded into forklift trucks in groups of six and hanged from cranes in half-hour intervals.

[ 202 ] Minority religions See also: Persecution of Baháʼís Zoroastrians , Jews , and Christians are officially recognized and protected by the government. Shortly after Khomeini's return from exile in 1979, he issued a fatwa ordering that Jews and other minorities (except those of the Baháʼí Faith ) be treated well.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] In power, Khomeini distinguished between Zionism as a secular political movement that employs Jewish symbols and ideals and Judaism as the religion of Moses .

[ 205 ] Senior government posts were reserved for Muslims. Schools set up by Jews, Christians and Zoroastrians had to be run by Muslim principals.

[ 206 ] Conversion to Islam was encouraged by entitling converts to inherit the entire share of their parents or even uncle's estate if their siblings or cousins remain non-Muslim.

[ 207 ] Iran's non-Muslim population has decreased. For example, the Jewish population in Iran dropped from 80,000 to 30,000.

[ 208 ] The Zoroastrian population has also decreased, due to suffering from renewed persecution and the revived legal contrasts between a Muslim and Zoroastrian, which mirrors the laws that Zoroastrians experienced under earlier Islamic regimes.

[ 209 ] The view that Zoroastrians are najis ("unclean") has also been renewed.

[ 209 ] Four of the 270 seats in Parliament were reserved for each three non-Muslim minority religions, under the Islamic constitution that Khomeini oversaw. Khomeini also called for unity between Sunni and Shi'a Muslims. Sunni Muslims make up 9% of the entire Muslim population in Iran.

[ 210 ] One non-Muslim group treated differently were the 300,000 members of the Baháʼí Faith. Starting in late 1979, the new government systematically targeted the leadership of the Baháʼí community by focusing on the Baháʼí National Spiritual Assembly (NSA) and Local Spiritual Assemblies (LSAs); prominent members of NSAs and LSAs were often detained and even executed, [ 211 ] and "[s]ome 200 of whom have been executed and the rest forced to convert or subjected to the most horrendous disabilities".

[ 212 ] Like most conservative Muslims, Khomeini believed Baháʼí to be apostates.

[ h ] He argued that they were a political rather than a religious movement, [ 213 ] [ 214 ] declaring that "the Baháʼís are not a sect but a party, which was previously supported by Britain and now the United States. The Baháʼís are also spies just like the Tudeh [Communist Party]." [ 215 ] Ethnic minorities Main article: Ethnic minorities in Iran In a 1979 speech Khomeini hinted that the new government's attitude towards ethnicity in Iran were to curb differences instead of accepting them. 
Khomeini has been quoted as saying: "Sometimes the word minorities is used to refer to people such as Kurds, Lurs , Turks , Persians , Baluchis , and such. These people should not be called minorities because this term assumes there is a difference between these brothers." [ 216 ] In 1979, before Khommeini had consolidated power,  a Kurdish delegation traveled to Qom to present the Kurds' demands to Khomeini. Their demands included language rights and the provision for a degree of political autonomy. Khomeini responded that such demands were unacceptable since it involved the division of the Iranian nation.

[ 217 ] The following months saw numerous clashes between Kurdish militia groups and the Revolutionary Guards.

[ 217 ] The referendum on the Islamic Republic was massively boycotted in Kurdistan, where it was thought 85 to 90% of voters abstained. Khomeini ordered additional attacks later on in the year, and by September most of Iranian Kurdistan was under direct martial law.

Death and funeral Main articles: Death and state funeral of Ruhollah Khomeini and Mausoleum of Ruhollah Khomeini Mourning men in residence of Khomeini around his seat area, Jamaran , 4 June 1989 Khomeini's health declined several years prior to his death. After spending eleven days in Jamaran hospital, he died on 3 June 1989 after suffering five heart attacks in ten days.

[ 218 ] Large numbers of Iranians took to the streets to publicly mourn his death and in the scorching summer heat, fire trucks sprayed water on the crowds to cool them.

[ 219 ] At least 10 mourners were trampled to death, more than 400 were badly hurt and several thousand more were treated for injuries sustained in the ensuing pandemonium.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] On 5 June, the coffin with Khomeini's body was put on display in north Tehran allowing hundreds of thousands of mourners to see the body.

[ 222 ] The next day it was determined that the planned funeral procession to the cemetery would be impossible because  several million mourners had gathered and blocked the streets.  Eventually after the Salat al-Janazah (funeral prayer) lead by  Grand Ayatollah Mohammad-Reza Golpaygani ,  the body was flown by helicopter to the cemetery.

[ 222 ] At the cemetery, the crowd surged past the makeshift barriers and the authorities lost control of the events.

[ 223 ] According to journalist John Kifner of The New York Times : Mourning men pull the coffin with Khomeini's body from the helicopter.

The crowd, much of it made up of Revolutionary Guards detailed to maintain order, pulled the coffin from the helicopter and began parading it around the makeshift compound surrounding the gravesite. As the excitement grew, the body of the Ayatollah, wrapped in a white burial shroud, fell out of the flimsy wooden coffin, and in a mad scene people in the crowd reached to touch the shroud. The soldiers pushed and wrestled, finally firing warning shots, to get the body back. Ayatollah Khomeini's son, Ahmad , was knocked from his feet. But even as the soldiers pushed the body back into the helicopter, the crowd swarmed over the craft, dragging it back down as it tried to take off. Others jumped into the hole dug for the Ayatollah's body. The troops drove the crowd back, finally clearing the compound enough to allow the helicopter to take off, its rotors scattering more mourners.

[ 224 ] The second funeral was held under much tighter security five hours later. This time, Khomeini's casket was made of steel, and in accordance with Islamic tradition, the casket was only to carry the body to the burial site. In 1995, his son Ahmad was buried next to him.

Khomeini's grave is now housed within a larger mausoleum complex.

Succession Main article: 1989 Iranian Supreme Leader election Khomeini and his successor, Ali Khamenei Grand Ayatollah Hussein-Ali Montazeri , a former student of Khomeini and a major figure of the Revolution, was chosen by Khomeini to be his successor as Supreme Leader and approved as such by the Assembly of Experts in November 1985.

[ 225 ] The principle of velayat-e faqih and the Islamic constitution called for the Supreme Leader to be a marja (a grand ayatollah), [ 226 ] and of the dozen or so grand ayatollahs living in 1981 only Montazeri qualified as a potential Leader (this was either because only he accepted totally Khomeini's concept of rule by Islamic jurists, [ 227 ] [ 228 ] or, as at least one other source stated, because only Montazeri had the "political credentials" Khomeini found suitable for his successor).

[ 229 ] The execution of Mehdi Hashemi in September 1987 on charges of counterrevolutionary activities was a blow to Ayatollah Montazeri, who knew Hashemi since their childhood.

[ 230 ] In 1989 Montazeri began to call for liberalization, freedom for political parties. Following the execution of thousands of political prisoners by the Islamic government, Montazeri told Khomeini: "Your prisons are far worse than those of the Shah and his SAVAK." [ 231 ] After a letter of his complaints was leaked to Europe and broadcast on the BBC , a furious Khomeini ousted him in March 1989 from his position as official successor.

[ 232 ] His portraits were removed from offices and mosques.

[ 233 ] To deal with the disqualification of the only suitable marja , Khomeini called for an "Assembly for Revising the Constitution" to be convened. An amendment was made to Iran's constitution removing the requirement that the Supreme Leader be a Marja [ 227 ] and this allowed Ali Khamenei , the new favoured jurist who had suitable revolutionary credentials but lacked scholarly ones and who was not a Grand Ayatollah, to be designated as successor.

[ 229 ] [ 234 ] Ayatollah Khamenei was elected Supreme Leader by the Assembly of Experts on 4 June 1989. Montazeri continued his criticism of the regime and in 1997 was put under house arrest for questioning what he regarded to be an unaccountable rule exercised by the supreme leader.

[ 235 ] [ 236 ] Anniversary The anniversary of Khomeini's death is a public holiday.

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] [ 239 ] To commemorate Khomeini, people visit his mausoleum placed on Behesht-e Zahra to hear sermons and practice prayers on his death day.

[ 240 ] [ 131 ] [ 241 ] [ 242 ] Reception, political thought and legacy Main articles: Khomeinism and Islamic fundamentalism in Iran Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Murals of Khomeini and Ali Khamenei , Shah Mosque in Isfahan English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Crimes of the Shah According to at least one scholar (Ali Reza Eshraghi), politics in the Islamic Republic of Iran "are largely defined by attempts to claim Khomeini's legacy" and that "staying faithful to his ideology has been the litmus test for all political activity" there.

[ 243 ] Throughout his many writings and speeches, Khomeini's views on governance evolved. Originally declaring rule by monarchs or others permissible so long as sharia law was followed, [ 244 ] Khomeini later opposed Shah adamantly opposed monarchy, arguing that only rule by a leading Islamic jurist (a marja' ) would ensure Sharia was properly followed ( velâyat-e faqih ), [ 245 ] before finally insisting the ruling jurist need not be a leading one and Sharia rule could be overruled by that jurist if necessary to serve the interests of Islam and the "divine government" of the Islamic state.

[ 246 ] Khomeini's concept of Guardianship of the Islamic Jurist (ولایت فقیه, velayat-e faqih ) as Islamic government did not win the support of the leading Iranian Shi'i clergy of the time.

[ 247 ] Towards the 1979 Revolution, many clerics gradually became disillusioned with the rule of the Shah, although none came around to supporting Khomeini's vision of a theocratic Islamic Republic.

[ 247 ] Democracy There is much debate to as whether Khomeini's ideas are or are not compatible with democracy and whether he intended the Islamic Republic to be a democratic republic. According to the state-run Aftab News , [ 248 ] both ultraconservative supporters ( Mohammad Taghi Mesbah Yazdi ) and reformist opponents of the regime ( Akbar Ganji and Abdolkarim Soroush ) believe he did not while regime officials and supporters, such as Ali Khamenei , [ 249 ] Mohammad Khatami , and Mortaza Motahhari , [ 250 ] maintain the Islamic republic is democratic as Khomeini intended it to be.

[ 251 ] Khomeini himself also made statements at different times indicating both support and opposition to democracy.

[ 252 ] One scholar, Shaul Bakhash , explains this contradiction as coming from Khomeini's belief that the huge turnout of Iranians in anti-Shah demonstrations during the revolution constituted a "referendum" in favor of an Islamic republic, more important than any elections.

[ 253 ] Khomeini also wrote that since Muslims must support a government based on Islamic law, Sharia-based government will always have more popular support in Muslim countries than any government based on elected representatives.

[ 254 ] Khomeini's policies aimed to position Iran as the "champion of all Muslims, regardless of sect", by making Iran to be the main "hardline opponent of the Jewish state".

[ 255 ] Khomeini offered himself as a "champion of Islamic revival" and unity, emphasizing issues Muslims agreed upon—the fight against Zionism and imperialism—and downplaying Shia issues that would divide Shia from Sunni .

[ 256 ] The Egyptian Jihadist ideologue Sayyid Qutb was an important source of influence to Khomeini and the 1979 Iranian Revolution. The Islamic Republic of Iran under Khomeini honoured Qutb's "martyrdom" by issuing an iconic postage stamp in 1984, and before the revolution prominent figures in the Khomeini network translated Qutb's works into Persian.

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] While he publicly spoke of Islamic unity and minimized differences with Sunni Muslims, he is accused by some of privately rebuking Sunni Islam as heretical and covertly promoted an anti-Sunni foreign policy in the region.

[ 259 ] [ 260 ] Public image Khomeini has been lauded as politically astute, a "charismatic leader of immense popularity", [ 261 ] a "champion of Islamic revival " by Shia scholars, [ 262 ] and a major innovator in political theory and religious-oriented populist political strategy.

[ 263 ] [ 264 ] [ 265 ] [ 266 ] [ 267 ] Khomeini strongly opposed close relations with either Eastern or Western Bloc nations, believing the Islamic world should be its own bloc or rather converge into a single unified power.

[ 268 ] He viewed Western culture as being inherently decadent and a corrupting influence upon the youth. The Islamic Republic banned or discouraged popular Western fashions, music, cinema, and literature.

[ 269 ] In the Western world it is said "his glowering visage became the virtual face of Islam in Western popular culture" and "inculcated fear and distrust towards Islam", [ 270 ] making the word "Ayatollah" "a synonym for a dangerous madman ... in popular parlance".

[ 271 ] This has particularly been the case in the United States where some Iranians complained that even at universities, they felt the need to hide their Iranian identity for fear of physical attack. There Khomeini and the Islamic Republic are remembered for the American embassy hostage taking and are accused of sponsoring hostage-taking and terrorist attacks, [ 272 ] [ 273 ] leading to the American government levying economic sanctions against Iran .

Clash with liberals and leftists Before taking power, Khomeini expressed support for the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , saying: "We would like to act according to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We would like to be free. We would like independence." [ 274 ] Once in power, Khomeini took a firm line against dissent, threatening opponents of theocracy for example: "I repeat for the last time: abstain from holding meetings, from blathering, from publishing protests. Otherwise I will break your teeth." [ 275 ] Prior to the revolution, many of Khomeini's political and religious ideas were considered to be progressive and reformist by leftist intellectuals and activists. Once in power, his ideas often clashed with those of modernist or secular Iranian intellectuals. This conflict came to a head during the writing of the Islamic constitution when many newspapers were closed by the government. Khomeini angrily told the intellectuals: "Yes, we are reactionaries , and you are enlightened intellectuals: You intellectuals do not want us to go back 1400 years. You, who want freedom , freedom for everything, the freedom of parties, you who want all the freedoms, you intellectuals: freedom that will corrupt our youth, freedom that will pave the way for the oppressor, freedom that will drag our nation to the bottom." [ 276 ] Third world solidarity In contrast to his alienation from Iranian intellectuals, and "in an utter departure from all other Islamist movements", Khomeini embraced international revolution and Third World solidarity, giving it "precedence over Muslim fraternity". From the time Khomeini's supporters gained control of the media until his death, the Iranian media "devoted extensive coverage to non-Muslim revolutionary movements (from the Sandinistas to the African National Congress and the Irish Republican Army ) and downplayed the role of the Islamic movements considered conservative, such as the Afghan mujahidin ." [ 277 ] Khomeini's supporters and pro-government media in Iran also argue that he was a fighter against racism, [ 278 ] as Khomeini was a staunch critic of the Apartheid regime in South Africa.

[ 279 ] After the 1979 Iranian Revolution , anti-Apartheid activist and African National Congress president Oliver Tambo sent a letter to congratulate Khomeini for the success of the revolution.

[ 280 ] Former South African President Nelson Mandela stated several times that Khomeini served as an inspiration for the anti-apartheid movement .

[ 281 ] [ 282 ] During the 1979 Iran hostage crisis , Khomeini ordered the release of all female and African-American staff working there.

[ 283 ] Economics Khomeini's legacy to the economy of the Islamic Republic has been expressions of concern for the mustazafin (a Quranic term for the oppressed or deprived), but not always results that aided them. During the 1990s, the mustazafin and disabled war veterans rioted on several occasions, protesting the demolition of their shantytowns and rising food prices , among others.

[ 284 ] Khomeini's disdain for the science of economics is said to have been "mirrored" by the populist redistribution policies of former president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , who allegedly wears "his contempt for economic orthodoxy as a badge of honour", and has overseen sluggish growth and rising inflation and unemployment.

[ 285 ] Transsexuality In 1963, Khomeini wrote a book in which he stated that there is no religious restriction on corrective surgery for transgender individuals . At the time Khomeini was an anti-Shah revolutionary and his fatwas did not carry any weight with the imperial government, which did not have any specific policies regarding transsexual individuals.

[ 286 ] After 1979, his fatwa "formed the basis for a national policy" and perhaps in part because of a penal code that "allows for the execution of homosexuals". As of 2005, Iran "permits and partly finances seven times as many gender reassignment operations as the entire European Union ".

[ 287 ] [ 288 ] Appearance and habits Khomeini in the 1980s Khomeini was described as "slim", but athletic and "heavily boned".

[ 289 ] He was also known for his punctuality: He's so punctual that if he doesn't turn up for lunch at exactly ten past everyone will get worried, because his work is regulated in such a way that he turned up for lunch at exactly that time every day. He goes to bed exactly on time. He eats exactly on time. And he wakes up exactly on time. He changes his cloak every time he comes back from the mosque.

[ 290 ] Khomeini was known for his aloofness and austere demeanor. He is said to have had "variously inspired admiration, awe, and fear from those around him." [ 291 ] His practice of moving "through the halls of the madresehs never smiling at anybody or anything; his practice of ignoring his audience while he taught, contributed to his charisma." [ 292 ] Khomeini adhered to traditional beliefs of Islamic hygienical jurisprudence holding that things like urine, excrement, blood, wine, and also non-Muslims were some of the eleven ritualistically "impure" things that physical contact with which while wet required ritual washing or Ghusl before prayer or salat .

[ 293 ] [ 294 ] He is reported to have refused to eat or drink in a restaurant unless he knew for sure the waiter was a Muslim.

[ 295 ] Mystique Khomeini and a child According to Baqer Moin , with the success of the revolution, not only had a personality cult developed around Khomeini, but he "had been transformed into a semi-divine figure. He was no longer a grand ayatollah and deputy of the Imam, one who represents the Hidden Imam , but simply "The Imam".

[ 296 ] Khomeini's cult of personality fills a central position in foreign- and domestically targeted Iranian publications.

[ 297 ] [ 298 ] [ 299 ] [ 300 ] The methods used to create his personality cult have been compared to those used by such figures as Joseph Stalin , Mao Zedong and Fidel Castro .

[ 301 ] [ 302 ] [ 303 ] An 8th-century Hadith attributed to the Imam Musa al-Kazim that said "A man will come out from Qom and he will summon people to the right path. There will rally to him people resembling pieces of iron, not to be shaken by violent winds, unsparing and relying on God" was repeated in Iran as a tribute to Khomeini. (In Lebanon, however, this saying was also attributed to Musa al-Sadr .) [ 304 ] Khomeini was the first and only Iranian cleric to be addressed as "Imam", [ 3 ] [ 305 ] [ 306 ] a title hitherto reserved in Iran for the twelve infallible leaders of the early Shi'a.

[ 307 ] He was also associated with the Mahdi or 12th Imam of Shia belief in a number of ways. One of his titles was Na'eb-e Imam (Deputy to the Twelfth Imam ). His enemies were often attacked as taghut and Mofsed-e-filarz , religious terms used for enemies of the Twelfth Imam. Many of the officials of the overthrown Shah's government executed by Revolutionary Courts were convicted of "fighting against the Twelfth Imam". When a deputy in the majlis asked Khomeini directly if he was the "promised Mahdi", Khomeini did not answer, "astutely" neither confirming nor denying the title.

[ 308 ] As the revolution gained momentum, even some non-supporters exhibited awe towards Khomeini, called him "magnificently clear-minded, single-minded and unswerving".

[ 309 ] His image was as "absolute, wise, and indispensable leader of the nation": [ 310 ] The Imam, it was generally believed, had shown by his uncanny sweep to power that he knew how to act in ways which others could not begin to understand. His timing was extraordinary, and his insight into the motivation of others, those around him as well as his enemies, could not be explained as ordinary knowledge. This emergent belief in Khomeini as a divinely guided figure was carefully fostered by the clerics who supported him and spoke up for him in front of the people.

[ 311 ] Even many secularists who firmly disapproved of his policies were said to feel the power of his "messianic" appeal.

[ 312 ] Comparing him to a father figure who retains the enduring loyalty even of children he disapproves of, journalist Afshin Molavi writes that defenses of Khomeini are "heard in the most unlikely settings": A whiskey-drinking professor told an American journalist that Khomeini brought pride back to Iranians. A women's rights activist told me that Khomeini was not the problem; it was his conservative allies who had directed him wrongly. A nationalist war veteran, who held Iran's ruling clerics in contempt, carried with him a picture of 'the Imam'.

[ 313 ] Another journalist tells the story of listening to bitter criticism of the regime by an Iranian who tells her of his wish for his son to leave the country and who "repeatedly" makes the point "that life had been better" under the Shah. When his complaint is interrupted by news that "the Imam" – over 85 years old at the time and known to be ailing – might be dying, the critic becomes "ashen faced" and speechless, pronouncing the news to be "terrible for my country".

[ 314 ] Non-Iranians were not immune from the effect. In 1982, after listening to a half-hour-long speech on the Quran by him, a Muslim scholar from South Africa, Sheikh Ahmad Deedat gushed: ... the electric effect he had on everybody, his charisma, was amazing. You just look at the man and tears come down your cheek. You just look at him and you get tears. I never saw a more handsome old man in my life, no picture, no video, no TV could do justice to this man, the handsomest old man I ever saw in my life was this man.

[ 315 ] Family and descendants Main article: Khomeini family Khomeini with son ( Ahmad ) and grandsons ( Hassan and left side Ali Eshraghi) In 1929, [ 316 ] [ 317 ] or possibly 1931, [ 318 ] Khomeini married Khadijeh Saqafi , [ 319 ] the daughter of a cleric in Tehran . Some sources report that Khomeini married Saqafi when she was ten years old, [ 320 ] [ 321 ] [ 322 ] while others state that she was fifteen years old.

[ 323 ] By all accounts, their marriage was harmonious and happy.

[ 319 ] She died on 21 March 2009 at the age of 93.

[ 318 ] [ 324 ] They had seven children, though only five survived infancy. His daughters all married into either merchant or clerical families, and both his sons entered into religious life.

Mostafa , the elder son, died in 1977 while in exile in Najaf , Iraq with his father and was rumored by supporters of his father to have been murdered by SAVAK .

[ 325 ] Ahmad Khomeini , who died in 1995 at the age of 50, was also rumoured to be a victim of foul play but this time at the hands of Ali Khamenei 's regime.

[ 326 ] Zahra Mostafavi , a professor at the University of Tehran and still alive, is perhaps his "most prominent daughter".

[ 327 ] Khomeini's fifteen grandchildren include: Zahra Eshraghi , granddaughter, married to Mohammad-Reza Khatami , head of the Islamic Iran Participation Front , the main reformist party in the country, and is considered a pro-reform character herself.

Hassan Khomeini , Khomeini's elder grandson Sayid Hasan Khomeini, son of the Seyyed Ahmad Khomeini , is a cleric and the trustee of the Mausoleum of Khomeini and also has shown support for the reform movement in Iran, [ 328 ] and Mir-Hossein Mousavi 's call to cancel the 2009 election results.

[ 327 ] Husain Khomeini (Sayid Husain Khomeini), Khomeini's other grandson, son of Sayid Mustafa Khomeini, is a mid-level cleric who is strongly against the system of the Islamic republic . In 2003, he was quoted as saying: "Iranians need freedom now, and if they can only achieve it with American interference, I think they would welcome it. As an Iranian, I would welcome it." [ 329 ] In that same year Husain Khomeini visited the United States, where he met figures such as Reza Pahlavi , the son of the last Shah and the pretender to the Sun Throne . Later that year, Husain returned to Iran after receiving an urgent message from his grandmother. According to Michael Ledeen , quoting "family sources", he was blackmailed into returning.

[ 330 ] In 2006, he called for an American invasion and overthrow of the Islamic Republic, telling Al-Arabiyah television station viewers: "If you were a prisoner, what would you do? I want someone to break the prison [doors open]." [ 331 ] Another of Khomeini's grandchildren, Ali Eshraghi, was disqualified from the 2008 parliamentary elections on grounds of being insufficiently loyal to the principles of the Islamic revolution but later reinstated.

[ 332 ] Bibliography Khomeini was a writer and speaker (200 of his books are online) [ 333 ] who authored commentaries on the Qur'an , on Islamic jurisprudence , the roots of Islamic law , and Islamic traditions . He also released books about philosophy , gnosticism , poetry, literature, government, and politics.

[ 334 ] [ better source needed ] His books include: Hokumat-e Islami: Velayat-e faqih ( Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist ) Forty Hadith [ 335 ] ( Forty Traditions ) Adab as Salat [ 336 ] ( The Disciplines of Prayers ) Jihade Akbar [ 337 ] ( The Greater Struggle ) Tahrir al-Wasilah (Exegesis of the Means of Salvation or Commentaries on the Liberation of the Intercession) Kashf al-Asrar See also Portals : Biography Iran Politics Shia Islam Part of a series on Conservatism in Iran Ideologies Authoritarian Monarchism National Deviant current Religious Qutbism Shia Islamism Fundamentalism Khomeinism Principlist Ultra Principles Anti-communism Anti-MEK Anti-Arabism Anti-Kurdism Authority Duty Elitism Familialism Hierarchy Law and order Militarism Pan-Iranism Patriotism Social order Sovereignty Tradition Principlist groups Anti-imperialism American Zionist Anti-LGBTQ sentiment Antisemitism Anti-Sunnism Clericalism Opposition to women's rights Palestinianism Republicanism Sharia Theocracy Twelver Shi'ism Vilayat Faqih Monarchist groups (pre-1979) Anti-clericalism Iranian nationalism Pro-Americanism Royalism Pahlavi Secular state Westernization History 1953 coup d'état Iranian Revolution Pahlavi dynasty Persecution of Baháʼís Safavid conversion to Shia Islam Sex segregation White Revolution Intellectuals Abbasi Alamolhoda Amoli Fardid Khalkhali Khomeini Larijani (Ali) Larijani (Sadiq) Modarres Motahhari Safavi Tabataba'i Velayati Yazdi Politicians Principlists Ahmadinejad Asgaroladi Ghalibaf Ghazizadeh Jalili Jannati Khamenei Khomeini Larijani Mojtahedzadeh Pourmohammadi Raisi Rezaee Soleimani Zakani Monarchists (pre-1979) Hoveyda Mansur Palevi I Palevi II Commentators Marandi Shariatmadari Talebzadeh Literature Islamic Government (1970) Parties Active Executives of Construction Party Front of Islamic Revolution Stability Islamic Coalition Party Society of Devotees of the Islamic Revolution Society of Seminary Teachers of Qom Voice of the Nation YEKTA Front Defunct Iran Novin Party Iran-e-No Party Islamic Republican Party Learned Council National Will Party Nationalists' Party Progress Party Rastakhiz Party Reformers' Party Organisations Combatant Clergy Association Hojjatie Society Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Restart SAVAK Media Abrar Islamic Republican Kayhan Partow-e Sokhan Rajanews Resalat Vatan-e-Emrooz Yalasarat Related topics Death to America Great Civilization Greater Iran Holocaust denial Islam in Iran Judicial system Nuclear program of Iran Politics of Iran Liberalism Socialism Shia crescent Conservatism portal Iran portal v t e 1979 Iranian Revolution conspiracy theory Abdallah Mazandarani Execution of Imam Khomeini's Order Exiles of Imam Khomeini Fazlullah Nouri Ideocracy Islamic fundamentalism in Iran Islamic Government (book by Khomeini) Khomeinism List of cults of personality Mirza Ali Aqa Tabrizi Mirza Husayn Tehrani Mirza Sayyed Mohammad Tabatabai Mohammad Baqir al-Hakim Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr Muhammad Kazim Khurasani Political thought and legacy of Ruhollah Khomeini Ruhollah Khomeini's letter to Mikhail Gorbachev Ruhollah Khomeini's residency (Jamaran) Seyyed Abdollah Behbahani Notes ^ The head of state was disputed between Khomeini and Mohammad Reza Pahlavi from 5 to 11 February 1979.

^ Khomeini's title as de facto head of state was Leader of the Revolution until 3 December 1979, when he appointed himself Supreme Leader.

^ a b The date of birth recorded on his birth certificate was 17 May 1900, although his brother Ayatollah Mortaza Pasandideh gives his birth date of 24 September 1902, the birth anniversary of Prophet Muhammad's daughter, Fatima.

^ UK : / x ɒ ˈ m eɪ n i / khom- AY -nee , US : / x oʊ -/ khohm- Persian : روح‌الله خمینی , romanized : Ruhollâh Khomeyni , pronounced [ɾuːholˈlɒːhe xomejˈniː] ⓘ ^ In "A Warning to the Nation" published in 1941, Khomeini wrote, "We have nothing to say to those ... [who] have forfeited them faculties so completely to the foreigners that they even imitate them in matters of time; what is left for us to say to them? As you all know, noon is now officially reckoned in Tehran twenty minutes before the sun has reached the meridian, in imitation of Europe. So far no one has stood up to ask, "what nightmare is this into which we are being plunged?"

Prior to the International Time Zone system, every locality had its own time with 12 noon set to match the moment in that city when the sun was at its highest point in the sky. This was natural for an era when travel was relatively slow and infrequent but would have played havoc with railway timetables and general modern long-distance communications. In the decades after 1880 governments around the world replaced local time with 24 international time zones, each covering 15 degrees of the earth's longitude (with some exceptions for political boundaries).

Khomeini, Ruhollah (1981).

Islam and Revolution: Writing and Declarations of Imam Khomeini . Translated and Annotated by Hamid Algar. Mizan Press. p. 172.

[ non-primary source needed ] ^ Sunni Muslims believe the birthday of Muhammad was  12th of Rabi' al-awwal, in the Islamic calendar , but many Shia Muslims celebrate the 17th of the month as the date of  his birth.

^ Sourced from: [ 172 ] The original quote which is part of a speech made in 1979 can be found here : I cannot imagine and no wise person can presume the claim that we spared our bloods so watermelon becomes cheaper. No wise person would sacrifice his young offspring for [say] affordable housing. People [on the contrary] want everything for their young offspring. Human being wants economy for his own self; it would therefore be unwise for him to spare his life in order to improve economy ... Those who keep bringing up economy and find economy the infrastructure of everything –– not knowing what human[ity] means – think of human being as an animal who is defined by means of food and clothes ... Those who find economy the infrastructure of everything, find human beings animals. Animal too sacrifices everything for its economy and economy is its sole infrastructure.

A donkey too considers economy as its only infrastructure . These people did not realize what human being [truly] is.

^ For example, he issued a fatwa stating: It is not acceptable that a tributary [non-Muslim who pays tribute] changes his religion to another religion not recognized by the followers of the previous religion. For example, from the Jews who become Baháʼís nothing is accepted except Islam or execution.

From Poll Tax, 8. Tributary conditions, (13), Tahrir al-Vasileh , volume 2, pp. 497–507, Quoted in A Clarification of Questions: An Unabridged Translation of Resaleh Towzih al-Masael by Ayatollah Syed Ruhollah Moosavi Khomeini, Westview Press/ Boulder and London, c1984, p.432 References ^ Bowering, Gerhard; Crone, Patricia; Kadi, Wadad; Stewart, Devin J.; Zaman, Muhammad Qasim; Mirza, Mahan, eds. (2012).

The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought .

Princeton University Press . p. 518.

ISBN 978-1-4008-3855-4 .

Malise Ruthven (2004).

Fundamentalism: The Search for Meaning (Reprint ed.).

Oxford University Press . p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-19-151738-9 .

Jebnoun, Noureddine; Kia, Mehrdad; Kirk, Mimi, eds. (2013).

Modern Middle East Authoritarianism: Roots, Ramifications, and Crisis .

Routledge . p. 168.

ISBN 978-1-135-00731-7 .

^ "Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Chapter 1, Article 1" .

Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran .

^ a b c Moin, Khomeini , (2001), p. 201 ^ "Ayatollah Khomeini (1900–1989)" .

BBC – History . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ Overton, Iain (13 April 2019).

"How a 13-year-old boy became the first modern suicide bomber" .

gq-magazine.co.uk . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Fard, Erfan (16 April 2021).

"Antisemitism Is Inseparable from Khomeinism" .

besacenter.org . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ "Iran and the "Great Satan" " .

theweek.com . 17 February 2024 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ "Iranian Revolution | Summary, Causes, Effects, & Facts" .

britannica.com . 26 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Abrahamian, Ervand (1989).

Radical Islam: The Iranian Mojahedin .

I.B. Tauris . p. 20.

ISBN 1-85043-077-2 .

^ Algar, Hamid (2010). "A short biography". In Koya, Abdar Rahman (ed.).

Imam Khomeini: Life, Thought and Legacy . Islamic Book Trust. p. 19.

ISBN 978-9675062254 .

^ Sacred space and holy war: the politics, culture and history of Shi'ite Islam by Juan Ricardo Cole ^ Art and culture: endeavours in interpretation by Ahsan Jan Qaisar, Som Prakash Verma, Mohammad Habib ^ Encyclopædia Iranica , "Avadh" Archived 17 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine , E. Yarshater ^ a b c Ruhollah Khomeini's brief biography by Hamid Algar ^ a b c From Khomein, A biography of the Ayatollah , 14 June 1999, The Iranian ^ The Columbia world dictionary of Islamism by Olivier Roy, Antoine Sfeir ^ a b c Khomeini: life of the Ayatollah, Volume 1999 by Baqer Moin ^ a b c Moin 2000 , p. 18 ^ "Imam Khomeini's Biography" . 21 February 2015. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ Moin, Baqer (2009) [1999].

Khomeini: Life of the Ayatollah .

I.B. Tauris .

ISBN 978-1-84511-790-0 .

^ "Ruhollah Khomeini's birth date" .

britannica.com . Archived from the original on 12 April 2023.

^ "Ayatollah Khomeini (1900–1989)" .

bbc.co.uk .

BBC . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ Reich 1990 , p. 310 ^ a b Reich 1990 , p. 311 ^ a b Milani 1994 , p. 85 ^ Moin 2000 , p. 22 ^ Brumberg 2001 , p. 45. "By 1920, the year Khomeini moved to Arak..." ^ Moin 2000 , p. 28. "Khomeini's madraseh in Qom was known as the Dar al-Shafa..." ^ Moin 2000 , p. 42 ^ a b Brumberg 2001 , p. 46 ^ Rāhnamā 1994 , pp. 70–71 ^ a b "Philosophy as Viewed by Ruhollah Khomeini" .

imamreza.net . Archived from the original on 14 June 2011 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Kashful-Asrar, p. 33 by Ruhollah Khomeini ^ "Introduction of Iman's works" .

irib.ir . Archived from the original on 15 October 2007 . Retrieved 29 June 2007 .

.

^ Farhang Rajaee, Islamism and Modernism: The Changing Discourse in Iran , University of Texas Press , (2010), p. 116.

^ "BBC – History – Ayatollah Khomeini (1900–1989)" .

bbc.co.uk .

BBC . 4 June 1989 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ "Imam Khomeini to Kuwait" .

irib.ir . Archived from the original on 27 March 2008 . Retrieved 29 June 2007 .

.

^ a b Encyclopædia Britannica.

"Ruhollah Khomeini" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ "پایگاه اطلاع رسانی روابط عمومی سازمان صدا و سیما" .

irib.ir . Archived from the original on 15 October 2007 . Retrieved 29 June 2007 .

.

^ Ervand Abrahamian, Islam, Politics, and Social Movements , University of California Press , (1988), p. 269.

^ Khomeini, Ruhollah (2015). Naqavi, Sayyid Amjad Hussain Shah (ed.).

The Mystery of Prayer: The Ascension of the Wayfarers and the Prayer of the Gnostics .

Brill Publishers .

ISBN 978-90-04-29831-6 . Archived from the original on 6 July 2017.

^ "Kashf al-Asrar" .

gemsofislamism.tripod.com . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Moin, Baqer, Khomeini: Life of the Ayatollah (2001), p.

60) ^ Encyclopedia of World Biography on Ruhollah Musavi Khomeini, Ayatullah .

BookRags . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Con Coughlin (2009).

Khomeini's Ghost: Iran since 1979 .

Pan MacMillan .

ISBN 978-0-230-74310-6 .

^ Globalisation, Religion & Development . International Journal of Politics & Economics. 2011. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-9568256-0-5 .

^ Hamid Naficy (2011).

A Social History of Iranian Cinema, Volume 3: The Islamicate Period, 1978–1984 .

Duke University Press . p. 159.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4877-1 .

^ Fischer, Michael M.J., Iran, From Religious Dispute to Revolution , Harvard University Press, 1980, p.

31 ^ Encyclopedia of World Biography on Ruhollah Musavi Khomeini, Ayatollah . BookRags . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Thornton, Ted.

"History of the Middle East Database. The Arab-Israeli Wars 1948 - 1973" .

nmhschool.org . Archived from the original on 24 December 2007 . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ Islam and Revolution, p.175 ^ Vakili Zad, Cyrus (Spring 1990).

"Organization, Leadership and Revolution: Religiously-Oriented Opposition in the Iranian Revolution of 1978–1979" .

Conflict Quarterly : 5– 25 . Retrieved 13 February 2013 .

^ Moin, Khomeini , (2000), p. 112.

^ "A History of Iran" by Michael Axworthy ^ Hiro, Dilip (2013).

Iran Under the Ayatollahs .

Routledge . p. 48.

ISBN 978-0-415-66969-6 .

^ Khomeini's speech against capitalism , IRIB World Service.

^ Shirley, Know Thine Enemy , (1997), p. 207.

^ "IRAN: The Unknown Ayatullah Khomeini" .

Time . 16 July 1979.

ISSN 0040-781X . Retrieved 16 December 2019 .

^ Sciolino, Elaine (27 August 2000).

"The People's Shah" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Fisk, Robert (2005).

The great war for civilisation: the conquest of the Middle East . New York: Vintage Books . p. 162.

ISBN 1-4000-7517-3 .

^ According to Alexandre de Marenches , chief of External Documentation and Counter-Espionage Service (now known as the DGSE ), the Shah did not ask France to expel Khomeini for fear that the cleric should move to Syria or Libya. (source: Christine Ockrent et Alexandre de Marenches, Dans le secret des princes , Stock, 1986, ISBN 2-234-01879-X , p. 254) [Donate book to Archive.org] ^ Some sources report that president Valéry Giscard d'Estaing sent Michel Poniatowski to Tehran to propose to the Shah the elimination of Khomeini. (source: Christine Ockrent et Alexandre de Marenches, Dans le secret des princes , Stock, 1986, ISBN 2-234-01879-X , p. 156, Ms Ockrent to Mr de Marenches: "[...] for instance, the mission of Mr Poniatowski to Tehran to propose to the Shah to eliminate Khomeini, then a refugee in France".) [Donate book to Archive.org] ^ Mottahedeh, Roy; The Mantle of the Prophet: Religion and Politics in Iran , One World, Oxford, 1985, 2000, p. 246 ^ Abrahamian, Iran , (1982), pp. 478–479 ^ Hamid Algar, "Development of the Concept of velayat-i faqih since the Islamic Revolution in Iran", paper presented at London Conference on vilayat al-faqih, in June 1988, quoted in "The Rule of the Religious Jurist in Iran" by Abdulaziz Sachedina, p. 133 in Iran at the Crossroads , edited by John Esposito and R. K. Ramazani ^ "NYU Law: A Guide to the Legal System of the Islamic Republic of Iran" .

nyulawglobal.org . Archived from the original on 7 January 2012 . Retrieved 16 December 2011 .

^ Moin, Khomeini , (2000), p. 218 ^ Islam and Revolution (1981), pp. 29–30.

^ Islam and Revolution , (1981), p. 59.

^ Islam and Revolution , (1981), pp. 31, 56.

^ Islam and Revolution , (1981), p. 54.

^ a b Schirazi, Asghar (1997).

"The Constitution of Iran" .

Digest of Middle East Studies .

I.B. Tauris : 24.

^ a b c Kepel, Jihad, 2092, p. 111 ^ Khomeini on a cassette tape [source: Gozideh Payam-ha Imam Khomeini (Selections of Imam Khomeini's Messages), Tehran, 1979, (Taheri, The Spirit of Allah , (1985), p. 193) ^ Parviz Sabeti, head of SAVAK's "anti-subversion unit", believed the number of cassettes "exceeded 100,000". (Taheri, The Spirit of Allah , (1985), p. 193) ^ Mackay, Iranians (1996), p. 277; source: Quoted in Fouad Ajami, The Vanished Imam: Musa al Sadr and the Shia of Lebanon (Ithaca, Cornell University Press , 1986), p. 25 ^ Taheri, The Spirit of Allah , p. 238 ^ See also Gölz, "Khomeini's Face is in the Moon: Limitations of Sacredness and the Origins of Sovereignty." , In Sakralität und Heldentum. Edited by Felix Heinzer, Jörn Leonhard and von den Hoff, Ralf, 229–244. Helden – Heroisierungen – Heroismen 6, Würzburg: Ergon, 2017, p. 229-244.

^ Gölz, "Khomeini's Face is in the Moon: Limitations of Sacredness and the Origins of Sovereignty." , In Sakralität und Heldentum. Edited by Felix Heinzer, Jörn Leonhard and von den Hoff, Ralf, 229–244. Helden – Heroisierungen – Heroismen 6, Würzburg: Ergon, 2017, p. 229.

^ Harney, The Priest (1998), p. ?

^ Moin, Khomeini , (2000), p. 203 ^ Abrahamian, Ervand (1989).

Radical Islam: The Iranian Mojahedin .

I.B. Tauris . p. 22.

ISBN 1-85043-077-2 .

^ Steven O'Hern (2012).

Iran's Revolutionary Guard: The Threat That Grows While America Sleeps .

Potomac Books . pp.

27– 28.

ISBN 978-1-59797-701-2 .

^ a b c d "US had extensive contact with Ayatollah Khomeini before Iran revolution" .

The Guardian .

^ a b c d Fattahi, Kambiz (3 June 2016).

"Two Weeks in January: America's secret engagement with Khomeini" .

BBC News .

^ "Khomeini's secret dialogue with "The Great Satan" " .

BBC .

^ a b "On This Day, 1 February 1979: Exiled Ayatollah Khomeini returns to Iran" .

BBC News .

^ My century BBC ^ a b Jerome, Carole (1 September 1980).

"Back to the Veil" .

New Internationalist (91) . Retrieved 3 August 2013 .

^ a b "12 Bahman: Khomeini Returns" .

Frontline .

PBS . 1 February 2009 . Retrieved 4 August 2013 .

^ Niki Baraha (2011).

Unpaved Road: An Iranian Girl's Real Life Story of Struggle, Deception and Breaking the Rules .

iUniverse .

ISBN 978-1-4502-9182-8 .

^ a b Sciolino, Elaine (2001).

Persian Mirrors: The Elusive Face of Iran . Simon and Schuster. p. 55.

ISBN 978-0-7432-1779-8 . Retrieved 30 July 2013 .

^ Axworthy, Michael (2007).

Iran: Empire of the Mind: A History from Zoroaster to the Present Day . London: Penguin Books . pp.

265– 266.

ISBN 978-0-14-103629-8 .

^ Moin, Khomeini , (2001), p. 199 ^ a b "TIME Person of the Year 1979: Ayatullah Khomeini" .

Time . 7 January 1980. Archived from the original on 8 December 2006 . Retrieved 22 November 2008 .

^ Taheri, The Spirit of Allah , (1985), p. 241 ^ "امروز در آینه تاریخ" .

Aviny . Archived from the original on 18 February 2006 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Moin Khomeini , (2000), p. 204 ^ Con Coughlin (2009).

Khomeini's Ghost: Iran since 1979 . Pan MacMillan.

ISBN 978-0-230-74310-6 .

With Khomeini's return, both Iran's liberal intelligentsia and the public at large looked forward to a new era where freedom of expression was enshrined in law, and the nation's vast oil wealth was used for the benefit of the entire nation, not only an unelected elite. Khomeini himself had promised as much when, writing from exile, he had vowed to set the people free from the cruel despotism that blighted their lives", "Khomeini had developed his unorthodox personal philosophy during his time as a student and teacher at the ancient holy cities of Qom and Najaf, where he was drawn to an obscure interpretation of Shia Islam, which held that all power should ultimately derive from the will of a divinely appointed religious leader.", "Now that he was safely back in Tehran as the undisputed figurehead of the Iranian revolution, Khomeini was determined to implement the radical agenda he had championed for more than twenty years. It was of no concern to him that his programme bore little relation to the wishes of the majority of the Iranian people, and was firmly at odds with the desire of most Iranians for the establishment of a constitutional democracy to replace the Sha's highly dictatorial system of government." "He worried that the brave new world of Islamic rule that he intended for Iran might become compromised by the participation of Leftists, Nationalists and the various other anti-Shah groups who, for the moment at least, blindly supported Khomeini's leadership without fully comprehending what he stood for. The enthusiasm among the Iranian masses for opposing the Shah and his supporters was so infectious that few people bothered to consider the implications of Khomeini's controversial agenda, which the ayatollah, it should be said, had taken great care to conceal from the ordinary populace.""'This is not going to be an ordinary government,' Khomeini told Revolutionary Council members. 'This will be a government based on the Sharia. Opposing this government means opposing the Sharia of Islam ... Revolt against God's government is a revolt against God, and revolt against God is Blasphemy'. The formation of the Revolutionary Guards would mark the start of one of the bloodiest periods in the recent history of the Middle East as Islamic zealots launched a bloody purge to rid the country of its middle-class professionals who, whilst welcoming the overthrow of the monarchy, had little enthusiasm for religious bigotry.

^ Moin, Khomeini , (2000), pp. 205–206 ^ Moin, Khomeini , (2000), p. 206 ^ Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ "World: Middle East Analysis: The forces for change" . BBC News. 2 February 1999 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Gilles Kepel (2002).

Jihad : the Trail of Political Islam . Belknap Harvard University Press. pp.

111– 118.

^ Susan C. Cloninger. (2017).

Understanding Angry Groups: Multidisciplinary Perspectives on Their Motivations and Effects on Society . Praeger. pp.

342– 353.

ISBN 978-1-4408-3350-2 .

^ Moin Khomeini , (2000), p.219 ^ Bakhash, Shaul, The Reign of the Ayatollahs , p.68–69 ^ Schirazi, Asghar, The Constitution of Iran , (Tauris, 1997) pp. 22–23.

^ Schirazi, Constitution of Iran Tauris, 1997 p.22–23 ^ "Omar Sial: A Guide to the Legal System of the Islamic Republic of Iran" . Nyulawglobal.org. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ "A Detailed Analysis of Iran's Constitution, by Richard Horowitz, World Policy Institute Blog, 12 October 2010" . World Policy. Archived from the original on 30 December 2010 . Retrieved 12 October 2010 .

^ Swenson Elmer.

"Khomeini's Reversals of Promises (although not an academic research, this article contains a handful of reliable references)" .

tripod.com .

^ "The Iranian: Khomeini before & after revolution" .

iranian.com . 16 October 2008.

^ "The Mystic Who Lit The Fires of Hatred. 7 January 1980" .

Time . 7 January 1980. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ " "Inside Iran", Maziar Bahari, Published 11 September 2008" . Newstatesman.com . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Bowden, Mark, Guests of the Ayatollah , Atlantic Monthly Press, (2006) ^ Reading Lolita in Tehran: a Memoir in Books by Azar Nafisi, p.105 ^ Katz, Mark N. (2010).

"Iran and Russia" . In Wright, Robin B. (ed.).

The Iran Primer: Power, Politics, and U.S. Policy . United States Institute of Peace. p. 186.

ISBN 978-1-60127-084-9 .

^ a b Moin, Khomeini , (2000), p.228 ^ Example of anti-theocratic support for the hostage crisis in Nafisi, Azar, Reading Lolita in Tehran: A Memoir in Books , Random House, 2003, p.105–106, 112 ^ ( Resalat , 25 March 1988) (quoted on p.69, The Constitution of Iran by Asghar Schirazi, Tauris, 1997 ^ "Imam Emphasized Unity Between Shia and Sunni: Ayatollah Mousawi Jazayeri" .

Imam Khomeini . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ "Iran's unfinished crisis Nazenin Ansari, 16–09–2009" . Opendemocracy.net. 18 September 2009. Archived from the original on 10 November 2014 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ 1980 April 8 – Broadcast call by Khomeini for the pious of Iraq to overthrow Saddam Hussein and his regime. Al-Dawa al-Islamiya party in Iraqi is the hoped for catalyst to start rebellion. From: Mackey, The Iranians , (1996), p.317 ^ Wright, In the Name of God (1989), p.126 ^ Smith, William E. (14 June 1982).

"The $150 Billion Question" .

Time . Archived from the original on 15 October 2007 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ "Iran Says an Attempted Coup by Army Group Was Foiled" .

The New York Times . 28 June 1982.

^ Mohammadi, Kamin (2012).

The Cypress Tree . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4088-3429-9 – via Google Books.

^ a b Carol, Steven (2015).

Understanding the Volatile and Dangerous Middle East: A Comprehensive Analysis . iUniverse.

ISBN 978-1-4917-6658-3 – via Google Books.

^ Shane Harris, Matthew M. AID.

"Exclusive: CIA Files Prove America Helped Saddam as He Gassed Iran" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 27 August 2013 .

^ a b "Ruhollah Khomeini" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . 30 May 2023.

^ "Iranians Turn Away from the Islamic Republic" .

^ Moin, Khomeini (2000), (estimate by Iranian officials) p. 252 ^ Moin, Khomeini (2000), p. 285 ^ Porter, Gareth (16 October 2014).

"When the Ayatollah Said No to Nukes" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 21 August 2015 .

^ Knowles, Elizabeth, ed. (2008). "Ruhollah Khomeini".

Oxford Dictionary of Modern Quotations (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780199208951.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-920895-1 . Retrieved 9 August 2020 .

^ Marzorati, Gerald, "Salman Rushdie: Fiction's Embattled Infidel". Named Man of the Year in 1979 by American newsmagazine Time ^ "Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini calls on Muslims to kill Salman Rushdie, author of 'The Satanic Verse' " .

History.com . 30 October 2019 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ Woo, Richard (2011).

God Or Allah, Truth Or Bull?

. Strategic Book Publishing. p.

10 .

ISBN 978-1-60976-813-3 .

^ Bernard Lewis's comment on Rushdie fatwa in The Crisis of Islam (2003), Bernard Lewis, pp. 141–142 ^ "Rushdie regrets" .

The New York Times . 19 February 1989 . Retrieved 5 January 2013 .

^ "Japanese Translator of Rushdie Book Found Slain" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2002 . Retrieved 16 October 2010 .

, WEISMAN, Steven R.

The New York Times , 13 July 1991.

^ "UK sales of the Satanic Verses surge after Rushdie stabbing" .

TheGuardian.com . 23 August 2022.

^ Moin, Baqer, Khomeini , (2000), p.258) ^ "Iranian women – before and after the Islamic Revolution" . BBC News. 8 February 2019 . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ a b "Khomeini bans broadcast music", The New York Times , 24 July 1979 ^ "Secretariat of the Supreme Council of the Cultural Revolution. Brief history of the SCCR" . Iranculture.org. Archived from the original on 30 December 2007 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ The ban started with the revolution and lasted 10 years.

Hossein Shahidi. 'BBC Persian Service 60 years on.' The Iranian. 24 September 2001 ^ Afari, Janet (2010).

Foucault and the Iranian Revolution: Gender and the Seductions of Islamism . University of Chicago Press. p. 163.

ISBN 978-0-226-00786-1 .

^ Rahmani, Tara (9 June 2021).

"Life on the Ground in Iran: From the View of the People" .

Wilson Center. MENA360 . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Osanloo, Arzoo (2014). Adib-Moghaddam, Arshin (ed.).

Khomeini's Legacy on Women's Rights and Roles in the Islamic Republic of Iran . A Critical Introduction to Khomeini. Cambridge University Press. pp.

239– 255.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511998485.013 .

ISBN 978-0-511-99848-5 . Retrieved 26 October 2019 .

^ Arshin Adib-Moghaddam, ed. (2014).

A Critical Introduction to Khomeini .

Cambridge University Press . p. 186.

His [Khomeini's] position on divorce was much more in favor of women. Contrary to the majority of the clergy, Khomeini did not stigmatize divorce initiated by women. According to him: Although it is correct to say that Islam has granted men the right to divorce, but it has also given this right to women...

^ Khomeini, Ruhollah (2024).

رساله توضیح المسائل حضرت آیةالله العظمی امام خمینی قدس سره [ A treatise explaining the verdicts of Grand Ayatollah Imam Khomeini (Quds Sera) ] (in Persian) (2nd ed.). Iran-Tehran: Imam Khomeini (PBUH) Editing and Publishing Institute (published 2013–2014). pp.

430– 431.

ISBN 978-964-335-025-3 .

^ Mousavi Khomeini, Sayed Rohullah.

"the resale of Ayatollah Khomeini" .

2412 Sentence .

^ Aghtaie, Nadia (2011). "Breaking the silence". In Westmarland, Nicole; Gangoli, Geetanjali (eds.).

Breaking the silence: rape law in Iran and controlling women's sexuality . International Approaches to Rape (1st ed.). Bristol University Press. pp.

121– 146.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt9qgkd6.10 .

JSTOR j.ctt9qgkd6.10 .

^ Khomeini, Ruhollah (2019) [1984]. "Resaleh Towzih al-Masael".

A Clarification of Questions: An Unabridged Translation of Resaleh Towzih al-Masael . Translated by Borujerdi, J. foreword by Michael M. J. Fischer and Mehdi Abedi. Routledge.

1– 393.

doi : 10.4324/9780429047114-1 .

ISBN 978-0-429-04711-4 .

S2CID 197985749 .

^ a b c Ruthven, Malise (2012).

Encounters with Islam: On Religion, Politics and Modernity (Library of Modern Religion) . I.B. Tauris. p. 166.

ISBN 978-1-78076-024-7 .

^ "Iran Divorce & Family Law" .

Mansouri & Son Solicitors . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Goodwin, Jan (2002).

Price of Honor: Muslim Women Lift the Veil of Silence on the Islamic World . PLUME.

ISBN 978-0-452-28377-0 .

^ Whitaker, Brian (2011).

Unspeakable Love: Gay and Lesbian Life in the Middle East . Saqi Books.

ISBN 978-0-86356-483-3 .

^ Seliktar, Ofira (2000).

Failing the Crystal Ball Test . Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-275-96872-4 – via Google Books .

^ Abrahamian, Ervand (1989).

Radical Islam: The Iranian Mojahedin . I.B. Tauris. p. 53.

ISBN 978-1-85043-077-3 .

^ Schmid, Arno (1992).

Sexuality and Eroticism Among Males in Moslem Societies . Routledge. pp.

185– 186.

ISBN 978-0-918393-91-3 .

^ Dabhoiwala, Faramerz (2013).

The Origins of Sex: A History of the First Sexual Revolution . Oxford University Press. p. 364.

ISBN 978-0-19-989241-9 .

^ Mittelstaedt, Juliane von; Steinvorth, Daniel (17 September 2009).

"The Gay Sons of Allah: Wave of Homophobia Sweeps the Muslim World" .

Spiegel Online .

^ Barford, Vanessa (25 February 2008).

"Iran's 'diagnosed transsexuals' " . BBC.

Archived from the original on 29 February 2008 . Retrieved 1 March 2008 .

^ Hays, Matthew (26 August 2008).

"Film – Iran's gay plan" . CBC News.

Archived from the original on 22 February 2010 . Retrieved 22 October 2010 .

^ a b Sorenson, David S. (2007).

An Introduction to the Modern Middle East, By David S. Sorenson . Avalon.

ISBN 978-0-8133-4399-0 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ (Brumberg, Reinventing Khomeini (2001), p. 125) ^ (Khomeini July 1979) [quoted in The Government of God p. 111. see the FBIS for typical broadcasts, especially GBIS-MEA-79-L30, 5 July 1979 v.5 n.130, reporting broadcasts of the National Voice of Iran.] ^ (Brumberg, Reinventing Khomeini (2001), p. 125)(pp. 124–5 source: 'Khomeini to the Craftsmen' broadcast on Teheran Domestic Service 13 December 1979, FBIS-MEA-79-242) ^ Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival , (2006), p. 134 ^ Moin, Baqer, Khomeini , (2000), p. 267 ^ Maloney, Suzanne (2010).

"The Iran Primer. The Revolutionary Economy" .

United States Institute of Peace . Archived from the original on 28 October 2010 . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ Based on the government's own Planning and Budget Organization statistics, from: Jahangir Amuzegar, 'The Iranian Economy before and after the Revolution,' Middle East Journal 46, n.3 (summer 1992): 421) ^ Ebadi, Shirin, Iran Awakening: A Memoir of Revolution and Hope by Shirin Ebadi with Azadeh Moaveni, Random House, 2006, pp. 78–9 ^ However, a significant degree of this can be attributed to Iranians fleeing during the war.

Iran's Economic Morass: Mismanagement and Decline under the Islamic Republic Archived 17 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 0-944029-67-1 [Donate book to Archive.org] ^ Harrison, Frances (8 January 2007).

"Huge cost of Iranian brain drain By Frances Harrison" . BBC News . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Kepel, Jihad , 2002, pp.111-118 ^ a b Abbas Djavadi (25 February 2010).

"The Difference Between A Marja And A Supreme Leader" . RLRFE . Retrieved 5 May 2023 .

^ Kepel, Jihad , 2002, pp.117-118, 364 ^ Kepel, Jihad , 2002, p364 ^ Bakhash, The Reign of the Ayatollahs (1984), p.61 ^ "Democracy? I meant theocracy By Dr. Jalal Matini" . Iranian.com. 5 August 2003 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ a b University of Massachusetts Boston , "Wavelength – Vol. 03, No. 04 – Spring 1982" (1982). Wavelength (1979–1984). Paper 12.

^ a b Cronin, Stephanie (2013).

Reformers and Revolutionaries in Modern Iran: New Perspectives on the Iranian Left . Routledge/BIPS Persian Studies Series. Routledge. p. 48.

ISBN 978-1-134-32890-1 .

^ Ostovar, Afshon (2016).

Vanguard of the Imam: Religion, Politics, and Iran's Revolutionary Guards . Oxford University Press. p. 73.

ISBN 978-0-19-049170-3 .

^ Moin (2000) , p.

https://archive.org/details/khomeinilifeofay00moin/page/241/mode/2up?q=bombing 241.

^ Cohen, Ronen (2009).

The Rise and Fall of the Mojahedin Khalq, 1987-1997: Their Survival After the Islamic Revolution and Resistance to the Islamic Republic of Iran . Sussex Academic Press. p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-84519-270-9 .

^ Woodward, Bob (19 November 1986).

"CIA Support for Exiles, Other Covert Iran Activity Reported" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Tower, John ; Muskie, Edmund ; Scowcroft, Brent (1987).

Report of the President's Special Review Board .

Bantam Books . p.

104 .

ISBN 978-0-553-26968-0 .

In 1983, the U.S. helped bring to the attention of Tehran the threat inherent in the extensive infiltration of the government by the communist Tudeh Party and Soviet or pro-Soviet cadres in the country. Using this information, the Khomeini government took measures, including mass executions, that virtually eliminated the pro-Soviet infrastructure in Iran.

Available online here.

^ Karsh, Efraim (2002).

The Iran–Iraq War: 1980–1988 . Osprey Publishing. pp.

1– 8, 12– 16, 19– 82.

ISBN 978-1-84176-371-2 .

^ Mistiaen, Veronique (5 September 2004).

"A survivor tells of 1988 massacre in Islamic Republic Thousands of men, women, children secretly executed" . Iran Focus. Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008 . Retrieved 1 February 2020 .

^ "A Faith Denied: The Persecution of the Baháʼís of Iran" . Iran Human Rights Documentation Center . Retrieved 9 March 2012 .

^ a b Ehteshami, Anoushiravan (2017).

Iran: Stuck in Transition (The Contemporary Middle East) .

Routledge . p. 108.

ISBN 9781351985451 .

It is estimated that as many as 30,000 individuals may have been executed at that time, in response to a religious edict issued by Ayatollah Khomeini ^ a b "Blood-soaked secrets: Why Iran's 1998 Prison Massacres are ongoing crimes against humanity" (PDF) .

Amnesty International . 4 December 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 December 2018 . Retrieved 14 December 2018 .

^ "Raisi: Role in 1988 Massacre" .

The Iran Primer . 21 July 2021. Archived from the original on 22 July 2021 . Retrieved 24 May 2023 .

^ "What is the real number of executions in 1988?" . 24 July 2020.

^ Lamb, Christina (4 February 2001).

"Khomeini fatwa 'led to killing of 30,000 in Iran' " .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 June 2017 .

^ "Memories of a slaughter in Iran" . Iranfocus.com. 5 September 2004. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ The Millimeter Revolution By Elizabeth Rubin Archived 18 May 2003 at the Wayback Machine .

^ The World's Most Notorious Dictators . Athlon Special Issue. 2017. p. 80 ^ Wright, Last Revolution (2000), p.207 ^ "Iran: Life of Jews Living in Iran" . Sephardicstudies.org . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ R. Khomeini 'The Report Card on Jews Differs from That on the Zionists,' Ettelaat , 11 May 1979] ^ Wright, The Last Great Revolution , (2000), p.210 ^ Wright, The Last Great Revolution , (2000), p.216 ^ Wright, The Last Great Revolution , (2000), p.207 ^ a b Choksy (2015) .

^ "CIA – The World Factbook" . Cia.gov . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ "A Faith Denied: The Persecution of the Baháʼís of Iran" (PDF) . Iran Human Rights Documentation Center. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2007 . Retrieved 6 October 2007 .

^ Turban for the Crown: The Islamic Revolution in Iran , by Said Amir Arjomand, Oxford University Press, 1988, p.169 ^ Cockroft, James (23 February 1979). "Iran's Khomeini".

Seven Days .

^ "U.S. Jews Hold Talks With Khomeini Aide on Outlook for Rights".

The New York Times . 13 February 1979.

^ Kayhan International , 30 May 1983; see also Firuz Kazemzadeh , 'The Terror Facing the Baháʼís' New York Review of Books , 1982, 29 (8): 43–44.

^ Castellino, Joshua; Cavanaugh, Kathleen A. (25 April 2013). "Identities in the Middle East: Ethno-national and Other Minorities".

Minority Rights in the Middle East .

Oxford University Press . p. 163.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199679492.003.0003 .

ISBN 978-0-19-967949-2 .

^ a b Gérard Chaliand, A People Without a Country: The Kurds and Kurdistan , Interlink Books, 1993. (p. 212–213) ^ "Sarasota Herald-Tribune" .

^ Pink/Gölz, "Die Drohung der ungewissen Zukunft: Der Tod Nassers und Khomeinis als Epochenbruch." , In: Helden müssen sterben: Von Sinn und Fragwürdigkeit des heroischen Todes, Hg. von Cornelia Brink, Nicole Falkenhayner and Ralf von den Hoff, 231–245; Baden-Baden: Ergon, 2019, p. 239f.

^ Moin, Khomeini (2000), p. 312 ^ In the Name of God: The Khomeini Decade by Robin Wright, (1989), p. 204 ^ a b Buchan, James (12 March 2009).

"Ayatollah Khomeini's funeral: The funeral of Ayatollah Khomeini was not a tragedy but a gruesome farce" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ Gölz, Olmo (2019). "Die Drohung der ungewissen Zukunft: Der Tod Nassers und Khomeinis als Epochenbruch.". In Cornelia Brink; Nicole Falkenhayner; Ralf von den Hoff (eds.).

Helden müssen sterben: Von Sinn und Fragwürdigkeit des heroischen Todes [ "The Threat of an Uncertain Future: The Deaths of Nasser and Khomeini as an Epoch Break." In: Heroes must die: Of the meaning and dubiousness of heroic death ] (in German). Baden-Baden: Ergon. pp.

240– 41.

doi : 10.5771/9783956504075 .

ISBN 978-3-95650-407-5 . Retrieved 20 May 2024 .

^ Kifner, John (7 June 1989).

"Amid Frenzy, Iranians Bury The Ayatollah" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ Mackey, Iranians , (1998), p. 353 ^ "Ayatollah Khomeini (1900–1989)" .

bbc.co.uk/history .

BBC . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ a b Roy, Olivier, The Failure of Political Islam , translated by Carol Volk, Harvard University Press , 1994, pp. 173–174. Quoted in The Islamic Republic Will Be Run By the Most Learned Jurist ^ Mackay, Iranians, (1998), p.353 ^ a b Moin, Khomeini , (2000), p. 293 ^ Keddie, Nikki R.

; Yann Richard (2003).

Modern Iran: Roots and Results of Revolution . New Haven, CN: Yale University Press . p. 260.

ISBN 978-0-300-09856-3 .

^ Ahmad Khomeini's letter, in Resalat, cited in The Reign of the Ayatollahs: Iran and the Islamic Revolution , rev. ed. by Shaul Bakhash, p.282 ^ "Translation of Ayatollah Khomeini's Letter Dismissing Montazeri" .

printed in Abrar . Iran Virtual Library. Archived from the original on 13 March 2007 . Retrieved 7 June 2007 .

^ Behnegarsoft.com.

"الف – بخشنامه موسوي درباره عكس‌ منتظري/تصویر" .

alef.ir . Archived from the original on 26 December 2009.

^ Mackey, Sandra; The Iranians , (1996), p. 353 ^ Profile: Iran's dissident ayatollah BBC News ^ Leader Khamenei [ dead link ] PBS ^ "Calendar center of Geophysics institute of Tehran University, 1395 Calendar (in Persian)" (PDF) .

calendar.ut.ac.ir . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2019 . Retrieved 19 May 2019 .

^ Chase's Calendar of Events 2019: The Ultimate Go-to Guide for Special Days ...

Bernan Press . 30 September 2018. p. 307.

ISBN 978-1-64143-263-4 .

^ Trawicky, Bernard (30 April 2009).

Anniversaries and Holidays .

American Library Association . p. 95.

ISBN 978-0-8389-1004-7 .

^ Cavendish, Marshall (September 2006).

World and Its Peoples, Volume 1 .

Marshall Cavendish . p. 529.

ISBN 978-0-7614-7571-2 .

^ "Iran arrests 11 over SMS Khomeini insults" .

globalpost.com . 22 September 2014. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016.

^ "Iran arrests 11 over SMS Khomeini insults" .

dailystar.com.lb . 22 September 2017. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2017 .

^ The New Republic "Khamenei vs. Khomeini" by Ali Reza Eshraghi, 20 August 2009, retrieved 20 August 2009.

^ 1942 book/pamphlet Kashf al-Asrar quoted in Islam and Revolution ^ 1970 book Hukumat Islamiyyah or Islamic Government, quoted in Islam and Revolution ^ Hamid Algar, "Development of the Concept of velayat-i faqih since the Islamic Revolution in Iran", paper presented at London Conference on wilayat al-faqih , in June 1988, pp. 135–138, also Ressalat , Tehran, 7 January 1988. Quoted in "The Rule of the Religious Jurist in Iran" by Abdulaziz Sachedina, from pp. 135–136 of Iran at the Crossroads , Edited by John Esposito and R.K. Ramazani, Palgrave, 2001. Quoted in Khomeini on how Laws in Iran will strictly adhere to God's perfect and unchanging divine law ^ a b The Failure of Political Islam by Olivier Roy, translated by Carol Volk Harvard University Press, 1994, pp. 173–174 quoted in "the vilayat-i faqih thesis was rejected by almost the entire dozen grand ayatollahs living in 1981" ^ Ganji, Sorush and Mesbah Yazdi Archived 29 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine (Persian) ^ The principles of Islamic Republic from viewpoint of Imam Khomeini in the speeches of the leader Archived 28 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine (Persian) ^ About Islamic republic [ permanent dead link ] (Persian) ^ Siavoshi, S. (21 July 2006). "Ayatollah Khomeini and the Contemporary Debate on Freedom".

Journal of Islamic Studies .

18 (1). Jis.oxfordjournals.org: 14– 42.

doi : 10.1093/jis/etl042 .

ISSN 0955-2340 .

^ Dr. Jalal Matini, Translation & Introduction by Farhad Mafie (5 August 2003).

"Democracy? I meant theocracy" .

iranian.com .

^ Bakhash, The Reign of the Ayatollahs (1984), p. 73 ^ Khomeini, Islam and Revolution , (1982), p. 56 ^ Sherrill, Clifton W. (2018).

Losing Legitimacy: The End of Khomeini's Charismatic Shadow and Regional Security .

Lexington Books . p. xi.

^ Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival , Norton, (2006), p. 137 ^ Calvert, John (2018).

Sayyid Qutb and the Origins of Radical Islamism . London: C. Hurst & Co.

p. 3.

ISBN 978-1849049498 .

^ Unal, Yusuf (November 2016).

"Sayyid Quṭb in Iran: Translating the Islamist Ideologue in the Islamic Republic" .

Journal of Islamic and Muslim Studies .

1 (2).

Indiana University Press : 35– 60.

doi : 10.2979/jims.1.2.04 .

JSTOR 10.2979/jims.1.2.04 .

S2CID 157443230 .

^ Kazemzadeh, Masoud (2020). "5: The sources of the Middle East's crises and American grand strategy".

Iran's Foreign Policy: Elite Factionalism, Ideology, the Nuclear Weapons Program, and the United States . New York: Routledge . pp.

75– 77.

ISBN 978-0-367-49545-9 .

^ Paul Vallely (19 February 2014).

"The vicious schism between Sunni and Shia has been poisoning Islam for 1,400 years – and it's getting worse" .

The Independent . London . Retrieved 2 March 2014 .

^ Arjomand, Said Amir (2012). Mark Juergensmeyer; Wade Clark Roof (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Global Religion . Vol. 1. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. p. 663.

ISBN 978-0-7619-2729-7 .

OCLC 1029087338 .

He was a charismatic leader of immmense popularity. Millions of Iranians massed to welcome him when he returned as the Imam from exile in 1979, and a million or more joined his funeral procession after he died 10 years later.

^ Nasr, Vali; The Shia Revival , Norton (2006), p. 138 ^ Ervand Abrahamian, Iran Between Two Revolutions (1982), p. 479 ^ Persian Mirrors: The Elusive Face of Iran , Elaine Sciolino |quote=Those intellectuals who say that the clergy should leave politics and go back to the mosque speak on behalf of Satan." ^ "Article 514 of the Islamic Penal Code" .

^ "The ten largest gatherings in human history" .

The Telegraph . 19 January 2015 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ "Which Famous Figure Had the Biggest Public Funeral?" .

history.com . 29 August 2018 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Bayan , No. 4, (1990), p.8) ^ "Iran president bans Western music" .

BBC News . 19 December 2005 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Nasr, Vali; The Shia Revival , Norton, 2006, p. 138 ^ "A Revolution Misunderstood. Charlotte Wiedemann" .

qantara.de . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Wright, Sacred Rage , (2001), pp. 28, 33, ^ for example the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing see: Hizb'allah in Lebanon: The Politics of the Western Hostage Crisis Magnus Ranstorp, Department of International Relations University of St. Andrews St. Martins Press, New York, 1997, pp. 54, 117 ^ Sahifeh Nour , (Vol. 2, p. 242) ^ in Qom, Iran, 22 October 1979, quoted in, The Shah and the Ayatollah: Iranian Mythology and Islamic Revolution by Fereydoun Hoveyda, Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2003, p. 88 ^ p. 47, Wright, source: Speech at Feyziyeh Theological School, 24 August 1979; reproduced in Rubin, Barry and Judith Colp Rubin, Anti-American Terrorism and the Middle East: A Documentary Reader , Oxford University Press , 2002, p. 34 ^ Roy, The Failure of Political Islam , 1994, p. 175 ^ "When did Imam Khomeini let out the cry of "Black Lives Matter"?" .

Khamenei.ir . 13 July 2020.

^ "Ramin Jahanbegloo on Mandela's Lessons for Iran" .

^ "Letter from Oliver Tambo to Ayatollah Khomeini, 13 February 1979, Iran, Maputo, People's Republic of Mozambique | South African History Online" .

^ "How did Iran's Islamic revolution inspire Nelson Mandela?" . 17 July 2023.

^ "Imam Khomeini gave us impetus to topple apartheid gov" . 2 August 2022.

^ "A letter by black American Muslim to Imam reflected centuries-old racism in US" .

^ In March 1992, disabled war veterans protested against the mismanagement of the Foundation of the Disinherited. In January 1992, a Tehran mob attacked grocery stores in a protest against the rise in subsidized milk prices. In May 1992, there were protests by squatters against the demolition of shantytowns in Mashhad. Government buildings were set alight. Mackey, Sandra, The Iranians: Persia, Islam and the soul of a nation , Dutton, 1996, pp. 361–362, 366). Quoted in Class Division and Poverty Will Not Be Tolerated ^ " "Economics is for donkeys", Robert Tait, 11 September 2008" .

newstatesman.com . 11 September 2008 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Robert Tait, A fatwa for transsexuals Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine , and a similar article on The Guardian . Gives details on Molkara's plea.

^ Kadri, Sadakat (2012).

Heaven on Earth: A Journey Through Shari'a Law from the Deserts of Ancient Arabia ...

Macmillan . p. 251.

ISBN 978-0-09-952327-7 .

^ Tait, Robert (27 July 2005).

"A fatwa for freedom" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ Taheri, Amir (1986).

The spirit of Allah - Khomeini and the Islamic revolution (1st U.S ed.). Bethesda, Md.: Adler & Adler.

ISBN 978-0-917561-04-7 .

^ According to a daughter quoted in In the Name of God by Robin Wright, 1989, p.45 ^ Brumberg, Reinventing Khomeini , (2001), p. 53 ^ Mackey, Sandra (1998).

The Iranians - Persia, Islam and the soul of a nation (1 - Plume print ed.). New York: Plume. p. 224.

ISBN 0452275636 .

^ Fatwa No. 83 from A Clarification of Questions: An Unabridged Translation of Resaleh Towzih al-Masael , by Ayatollah Syed Ruhollah Moosavi Khomeini, translated by J. Borujerdi, with a Foreword by Michael M. J. Fischer and Mehdi Abedi, Westview Press , Boulder and London, 1984, p. 48.

^ Mottahedeh, Roy; The Mantle of the Prophet - Religion and Politics in Iran , One World, Oxford, 1985, 2000, p. 383 ^ Personal communications from Dr. Mansur Farhang, a biographer and supporter of Khomeini who was the former Iranian representative at the United Nations, with Ervand Abrahamian. Quoted in Abrahamian, Ervand, Khomeinism: Essays on the Islamic Republic , University of California Press , (1993) ^ Baqer Moin (1999).

Khomeini - Life of the Ayatollah .

I.B. Tauris . p. 200.

ISBN 978-1-85043-128-2 .

^ Ervand Abrahamian (1992).

The Iranian Mojahedin .

Yale University Press . p. 255.

ISBN 978-0-300-05267-1 .

^ Michael Chertoff (2011).

Homeland Security - Assessing the First Five Years .

University of Pennsylvania Press . p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-8122-0588-6 .

^ Chetan Bhatt (1997).

Liberation and Purity - Race, New Religious Movements and the Ethics of Postmodernity .

Taylor & Francis . p. 141.

ISBN 978-1-85728-423-2 .

^ Sivan, Emmanuel; Friedman, Menachem, eds. (1990).

Religious Radicalism and Politics in the Middle East .

State University of New York Press . p. 68.

ISBN 978-0-7914-0158-3 .

^ Barry Rubin (2015).

The Middle East - A Guide to Politics, Economics, Society and Culture .

Routledge . p. 427.

ISBN 978-1-317-45578-3 .

^ Mikaberidze, Alexander, ed. (2011).

Conflict and Conquest in the Islamic World - A Historical Encyclopedia [2 volumes] .

ABC-Clio . p. 483.

ISBN 978-1-59884-337-8 .

^ Arshin Adib-Moghaddam (2014).

A Critical Introduction to Khomeini .

Cambridge University Press . p. 305.

ISBN 978-1-107-01267-7 .

^ (Mackay Iranians , p. 277. Source: Quoted in Fouad Ajami, The Vanished Imam: Musa al Sadr and the Shia of Lebanon , (Ithaca: Cornell University Press , 1986), p. 25 ^ "Historic Figures - Ayatollah Khomeini (1900–1989)" .

BBC . 4 June 1989 . Retrieved 19 March 2011 .

^ Gölz, "Khomeini's Face is in the Moon: Limitations of Sacredness and the Origins of Sovereignty" , in Sakralität und Heldentum. Edited by Felix Heinzer, Jörn Leonhard and von den Hoff, Ralf, 229–244. Helden – Heroisierungen – Heroismen 6, Würzburg: Ergon, 2017, p. 230.

^ Moin, Khomeini , (2000), p. 201 ^ Nasr, Vali; The Shia Revival , Norton, (2006), p. 131 ^ Harney, The Priest and the King , (1998), pp. 173–174 ^ Benard/Khalilzad, The Government of God , 1984, p. 121 ^ Moin, Khomeini , (2000), p. 297 ^ Wright, In the Name of God , (1989), (pp. 21–22) ^ Molavi, The Soul of Iran , (2005), p. 256 ^ In the Name of God: The Khomeini Decade by Robin Wright, 1989, pp. 21–22 ^ "Sunni-Shia Unity, A lecture by Sheikh Ahmad Deedat" .

inminds.com . Retrieved 6 April 2012 .

^ Dabashi, Hamid (1993).

Theology of Discontent - The Ideological Foundations of the Islamic Revolution in Iran (PDF) . New York: New York University Press . p. 410. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015.

^ "Marital life" .

en.imam-khomeini.ir .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2012.

^ a b "Khadijeh Saqafi, Khomeini's Wife, Is Dead at 93" .

The New York Times . 23 March 2009.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2023.

^ a b Taheri, The Spirit of Allah , (1985), pp. 90–91 ^ Thomas M. Leonard (2005).

Encyclopedia of the Developing World .

Routledge . p. 909.

ISBN 978-1-57958-388-0 .

^ Diane Morgan (2005).

Essential Islam - A Comprehensive Guide to Belief and Practice . Praeger. p. 165.

ISBN 978-0-313-36025-1 .

^ Ervand Abrahamian (2005).

Khomeinism - Essays on the Islamic Republic .

University of California . p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-520-08503-9 .

^ "Despite Outrage, No End in Sight For Child Marriage in Iran" .

en.radiofarda.com . 28 January 2019.

^ "Iranians mourn Khomeini's widow" .

BBC News . 22 March 2009.

Archived from the original on 24 March 2009.

^ Moin, Khomeini , (2001), 184–185 ^ Fisk, Robert (5 June 1995).

"Love the revolution, shame about reality" .

The Independent . London . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ a b Eshraghi, Ali Reza (20 August 2009).

"Khamenei vs. Khomeini" .

The New Republic .

ISSN 0028-6583 . Retrieved 5 October 2024 .

^ Grandchildren of the revolution. By von Najmeh Bozorgmehr and Roula Khalaf 4 March 2009 Archived 5 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 23 August 2009.

^ "Make Iran Next, Says Ayatollah's Grandson", Jamie Wilson, 10 August 2003, The Observer ^ Ledeen, Michael A. (6 January 2004).

"Veiled Threats Lure Ayatollah's Grandson Home By Michael A. Ledeen, 6 January 2004" . Aei.org. Archived from the original on 24 April 2009 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Philip Sherwell (19 June 2006).

"Ayatollah's grandson calls for US overthrow of Iran" . London: The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 June 2006 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ "Khomeini grandson returns to poll, 13 February 2008" .

BBC News . 13 February 2008 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ "World: Middle East Ayatollah Khomeini on the Web" . BBC News. 1 June 1998 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ "The Works and Declarations of Imam Khomeini" .

imamreza.net . Archived from the original on 12 June 2010 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ "Forty Hadith, An Exposition, Second Revised Edition" .

al-islam.org . 25 February 2016. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013 . Retrieved 14 December 2005 .

^ "Adab as-Salat: The Disciplines of the Prayer Second Revised Edition" .

al-islam.org . 12 October 2013.

^ "Journal Articles" .

al-islam.org .

Sources Ansari, Hamid.

The Narrative of Awakening . The Institute for Compilation and publication of the work of Imam Khomeini. Archived from the original on 14 May 2015.

Bakhash, Shaul (1984).

The Reign of the Ayatollahs: Iran and the Islamic Revolution . Basic Books.

Brumberg, Daniel (2001).

Reinventing Khomeini: The Struggle for Reform in Iran .

University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 0-226-07758-6 .

Choksy, Jamsheed K.

(2015).

"Zoroastrianism ii. Historical Review: from the Arab Conquest to Modern Times" .

Encyclopædia Iranica .

Dabashi, Hamid (2006).

Theology of Discontent: The Ideological Foundation of the Islamic Revolution in Iran .

Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 1-4128-0516-3 .

Daniel, Elton L. (2001).

The History of Iran .

Greenwood Publishing Group .

ISBN 0-313-30731-8 .

DeFronzo, James (2007).

Revolutions And Revolutionary Movements .

Westview Press .

ISBN 978-0-8133-4354-9 .

Harney, Desmond (1998).

The priest and the king: an eyewitness account of the Iranian revolution .

I.B. Tauris .

Hoveyda, Fereydoun (2003).

The Shah and the Ayatollah: Iranian Mythology and Islamic Revolution . Praeger/Greenwood.

ISBN 0-275-97858-3 .

Karsh, Efraim (2007).

Islamic Imperialism: A History .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-12263-3 .

Keddie, Nikkie R. (2003).

Modern Iran: Roots and Results of Revolution .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 0-300-09856-1 .

Khomeini, Ruhollah; Algar, Hamid (2002).

Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist . Alhoda UK.

ISBN 964-335-499-7 .

Khomeini, Ruhollah (1981).

Islam and Revolution: Writing and Declarations of Imam Khomeini . Hamid Algar (translator and annotator). Mizan Press.

Khomeini, Ruhollah (1980).

Sayings of the Ayatollah Khomeini: political, philosophical, social, and religious . Bantam.

Lee, James (1984).

The Final Word!: An American Refutes the Sayings of Ayatollah Khomeini .

Philosophical Library .

ISBN 0-8022-2465-2 .

Mackey, Sandra (1996).

The Iranians: Persia, Islam and the Soul of a Nation . Dutton.

ISBN 0-525-94005-7 .

Milani, Mohsen M. (1994).

The Making of Iran's Islamic Revolution: From Monarchy to Islamic Republic .

Westview Press .

ISBN 0-8133-8476-1 .

Moin, Baqer (2000).

Khomeini: Life of the Ayatollah .

St. Martin's Press .

ISBN 0-312-26490-9 .

Molavi, Afshin (2005).

The Soul of Iran: a Nation's Journey to Freedom . New York: Norton paperbacks.

Rāhnamā, 'Ali (1994).

Pioneers of Islamic Revival .

Macmillan .

ISBN 1-85649-254-0 .

Reich, Bernard (1990).

Political Leaders of the Contemporary Middle East and North Africa: A Biographical Dictionary .

Greenwood Publishing Group .

ISBN 0-313-26213-6 .

Schirazi, Asghar (1997).

The Constitution of Iran .

I.B. Tauris .

Taheri, Amir (1985).

The Spirit of Allah . Adler & Adler.

Willett, Edward C. (2004).

Ayatollah Khomeini .

Rosen Publishing .

ISBN 0-8239-4465-4 .

Wright, Robin (1989).

In the Name of God: The Khomeini Decade .

Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 978-0-671-67235-5 .

Wright, Robin (2000).

The Last Revolution . Knopf.

External links Ruhollah Khomeini at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Imam Khomeini's Official Website Documentary: Imam Khomeini P1 (Free Press TV documentary) Imam Khomeini – Reformer of the Century (English Subtitles – Press TV Documentary) The New York Times article on Khomeini's poetry Documentary about the life of Ruhollah Khomeini on YouTube Documentary: The man who changed the world on YouTube Documentary: I knew Khomeini on YouTube Rouhollah Khomeini's Website Who Is Imam Khomeini?

Selected bibliography Syed Ruhollah Moosavi Khomeini – Islamic Government (Hukumat-i Islami) Syed Ruhollah Moosavi Khomeini – The Last Will...

Books by and or about Rouhollah Khomeini Archived 17 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine Letter by Ayatollah Khomeini to Mikhail Gorbachev , dated 1 January 1989, Kayhan Khomeinism: Essays on the Islamic Republic , 1993 by the Regents of the University of California Political offices Preceded by New title Supreme Leader of Iran 1979–1989 Succeeded by Ali Khamenei Military offices Preceded by Abolhassan Banisadr Commander-in-Chief of the Iranian Armed Forces 1981–1989 Succeeded by Ali Khamenei v t e Ruhollah Khomeini Politics 1963 demonstrations in Iran Life in exile 1978 Qom protest 1978 Tabriz protests Neauphle-le-Château Return to Iran Iranian revolution Aftermath of the Iranian revolution Cultural Revolution Supreme Council Council of the Islamic Revolution Islamic Revolutionary Court Interim Government 1979 Referendum Engagement with Jimmy Carter Iranian revolution conspiracy theory America can't do a damn thing against us Supreme Leader of Iran Iran–Iraq War Israeli support Satanic Verses controversy Positions American Islam Anti-Zionism Shiite clericalism Death to America Great Satan Little Satan Sex segregation compulsory hijab Islamic democracy Imam's Line Letter to Gorbachev Khomeini's 8-article command Books Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist (Velayat-e faqih) Tahrir al-Wasilah Kashf al-Asrar Forty Hadith of Ruhullah Khomeini Islam and Revolution The Greatest Jihad Family Khadijeh Saqafi (wife) Mostafa Khomeini (son) Zahra Mostafavi Khomeini (daughter) Farideh Mostafavi Khomeini (daughter) Ahmad Khomeini (son) Hussein Khomeini (grandson) Hassan Khomeini (grandson) Zahra Eshraghi (granddaughter) Seyyed Ahmad Musavi Hindi (grandfather) Related Jamaran Hussainiya Mausoleum Death and state funeral Alef-Laam Khomeini Fajr decade Refah School Homafaran Allegiance Imam Khomeini International Airport Execution of Imam Khomeini's Order Category v t e Commanders-in-Chief of the Iranian Armed Forces Qajar Iran Mozaffar ad-Din Shah (1906–07) Mohammad Ali Shah (1907–09) Ali Reza Khan (1909–10) Abolqasem Khan (1910–14) Ahmad Shah (1914–25) Reza Khan (1925) Pahlavi Iran Reza Shah (1925–41) Mohammad Reza Shah (1941–52) Mosaddegh (1952–53) Mohammad Reza Shah (1953–79) Islamic Republic Banisadr (1980–81) Khomeini (1981–89) Khamenei (1989–present) Italics indicate interim officeholder v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e Time Persons of the Year 1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mohandas Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh S. Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) 1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) 1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wałęsa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeff Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Barack Obama (2012) Pope Francis (2013) Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr.

Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014) Angela Merkel (2015) Donald Trump (2016) The Silence Breakers (2017) The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital (2018) Greta Thunberg (2019) Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020) Elon Musk (2021) Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022) Taylor Swift (2023) Donald Trump (2024) v t e 1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners Order Ruhollah Khomeini Perpetrators Ebrahim Raisi Mostafa Pourmohammadi Mohammad Mohammadi Gilani Majid Ansari Asadollah Lajevardi Alireza Avayi Influential sponsors Ahmad Khomeini Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani Abdul-Karim Mousavi Ardebili Ali Khamenei Mohammad Reyshahri Mohsen Rezaee Opponents Hussein-Ali Montazeri Sadiq al-Shirazi Related parties and organizations People's Mojahedin Organization of Iran Organization of Iranian People's Fedaian Fedaian Organisation Tudeh Party of Iran Worker's Way Komalah Communist Party of Iran Organization of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class Buried Khavaran cemetery Related Mothers of Khavaran Raheleh Rahemipour Political repression in the Islamic Republic of Iran Category:1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners v t e People executed by the Islamic Republic of Iran Timeline Story Politicians and noblemen of the Pahlavi period Amir-Abbas Hoveyda Parviz Nikkhah Javad Saeed Abbas Ali Khalatbari Abdollah Riazi Gholamreza Kianpour Gholamreza Nikpey Habib Elghanian Farrokhroo Parsa Mohammad Reza Ameli Tehrani Mahmoud Jafarian Mansour Rouhani Manouchehr Azmoun Manutchehr Salimi Military officers and Soldiers of the Pahlavi period Amir Hossein Rabii Ayat Mohaqeqi Pervez Amini Afshar Hassan Pakravan Hossein-Ali Bayat Seyyed Javad Zabihi Reza Naji Saeed Mehdiyoun Ali Hojjat Kashani Ali Neshat Mohammad Taghi Majidi Manouchehr Khosrodad Mehdi Rahimi Nader Jahanbani Nasser Moghaddam Nematollah Nassiri Left-wing politics Bahram Afzali Hassan Azarfar Other political opponents Khosrow Qashqai Sadegh Ghotbzadeh Mona Mahmudnizhad Kamran Samimi Sirous Rowshani Perpetrators Ruhollah Khomeini Sadegh Khalkhali Mohammad Mohammadi Gilani Mohammad Reyshahri Hossein Mousavi Tabrizi Asadollah Lajevardi Ali Qoddusi Category:People executed by Iran Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Russia 2 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece 2 3 Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 3 İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ruhollah_Khomeini&oldid=1305716306 " Categories : Ruhollah Khomeini 1900s births 1989 deaths Deaths from stomach cancer in Iran 20th-century imams Musawis Anti-American sentiment in Iran Anti-imperialism in Asia Anti-monarchists Asian anti-imperialists Biographical evaluation scholars Burials at Behesht-e Zahra Commanders-in-chief of Iran Iran hostage crisis Iranian anti-communists Iranian emigrants to France Iranian emigrants to Iraq Iranian emigrants to Turkey Iranian dissidents Iranian exiles Iranian grand ayatollahs Iranian anti-Zionists Iranian people of the Iran–Iraq War Iranian political philosophers Iranian Qutbists 20th-century Iranian poets Iranian revolutionaries Islamic philosophers Male critics of feminism Pan-Islamism People from Markazi province People of the Iranian Revolution Persecution of Bahá'ís Politicide perpetrators Iranian Islamists Shia Islamists Religious policy in Iran Simple living advocates Supreme leaders of Iran Time Person of the Year Critics of Wahhabism 1988 executions of Iranian political prisoners Iranian republicans Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing Persian-language text Pages with Persian IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2021 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with dead external links from June 2025 Articles with dead external links from September 2017 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use dmy dates from June 2025 No local image but image on Wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2023 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch S-bef: 'before' parameter begins with the word 'new' This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 17:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ruhollah Khomeini 108 languages Add topic

