Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Awards 3 Current projects and services Toggle Current projects and services subsection 3.1 SHERPA/RoMEO 3.2 SHERPA/Juliet 4 Completed projects 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents SHERPA (organisation) 3 languages বাংলা Español 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sherpa Romeo ) British organization For the French law association, see Sherpa (association) . For other uses, see Sherpa (disambiguation) .

SHERPA ( Securing a Hybrid Environment for Research Preservation and Access ) is an organisation originally set up in 2002 to run and manage the SHERPA Project.

[ definition needed ] History [ edit ] SHERPA began as an endeavour to support the establishment of a number of open access institutional repositories based in UK universities.

[ 1 ] SHERPA, the organisation, is sometimes erroneously referred to as the SHERPA Project. SHERPA was founded in 2002 by Stephen Pinfield, who continued as its director until 2012. Throughout its life, SHERPA has been managed by Bill Hubbard, first as its manager then as director from 2012 onwards.

As well as a staff team based at Jisc [ 2 ] (formerly the University of Nottingham [ 3 ] ), 33 research institutions and organisations comprise the SHERPA Partnership.

[ 4 ] The makeup of this partnership includes many, if not all, of the most research active institutions in the UK and provides practitioner-led experience to the project team.

Awards [ edit ] SHERPA's work in supporting open access and repositories on a national and international level was recognised in 2007 with the award of the SPARC Europe Award for Outstanding Achievements in Scholarly Communication.

[ 5 ] Current projects and services [ edit ] SHERPA is involved as a full or advisory partner in a number of projects and services, which include: [ 6 ] FACT — Funders & Authors Compliance Tool — helps authors comply with research funders' policies on open access to publications SHERPA/RoMEO|RoMEO – definitive listing of publishers' copyright agreements and retained author rights SHERPA/Juliet|Juliet – Research funders' archiving mandates and guidelines OpenDOAR - a directory of worldwide open access repositories SHERPA/RoMEO [ edit ] SHERPA/RoMEO is a service run by SHERPA to show the copyright and open access self-archiving policies of academic journals.

RoMEO is an acronym for Rights MEtadata for Open archiving .

The database used a colour-coding scheme to classify publishers according to their self-archiving policy.

[ 7 ] This shows authors whether the journal allows preprint or postprint archiving in their copyright transfer agreements.

[ 8 ] It currently holds records for over 22,000 journals.

[ 9 ] The colour codes were retired in 2020, with the launch of a new site.

[ 10 ] SHERPA/Juliet [ edit ] SHERPA/Juliet is an online database of open access mandates adopted by academic funding bodies.
It is part of the SHERPA suite of services around open access and is run by Jisc (formerly the University of Nottingham ).

The database contains information about more than 100 funders, mostly from the United Kingdom.

[ 11 ] For each of them, Juliet indicates their policy regarding self-archiving , open access journals and archival of research data.

[ 12 ] Users can suggest updates to the records or the addition of a new funder via a form.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] This service is mainly useful to researchers who have received project-based funding and want a clear summary of their funder.

[ 12 ] Links to the original policies are also provided.

Completed projects [ edit ] Repositories Support Project (RSP) - support service for UK repository growth EThOS - developing a national eTheses service SHERPA Project - which helped develop archives in research-led institutions SHERPA Plus - expanding the repository network in the UK SHERPA DP - looking at preservation models PROSPERO - scoping an interim repository for UK academics the Depot – UK based interim repository (stemming from the PROSPERO project) DRIVER ( Digital Repository Infrastructure Vision for European Research ) - is developing a cross-European repository network infrastructure UKCoRR - United Kingdom Council of Research Repositories, professional organisation for UK Open Access repository administrators and managers. An output from SHERPA Plus.

References [ edit ] ^ Hubbard, Bill (2003).

"SHERPA and Institutional Repositories" .

Serials .

16 (3): 243– 247.

doi : 10.1629/16243 . Retrieved 19 October 2015 .

^ "SHERPA Services has joined Jisc" .

SHERPA Services Blog . Archived from the original on 20 October 2015 . Retrieved 19 October 2015 .

^ MacColl, John; Pinfield, Stephen (October 2002).

"Climbing the scholarly publishing mountain with SHERPA" .

Ariadne (33). Archived from the original on 9 November 2015 . Retrieved 19 October 2015 .

^ SHERPA Partnership ^ SPARC Europe Award for Outstanding Achievements in Scholarly Communication ^ "Portfolio" .

Centre for Research Communications . Retrieved 19 October 2015 .

^ Jenkins, Celia; Probets, Steve; Oppenheim, Charles; Hubbard, Bill (2007).

"RoMEO Studies 8: self-archiving: The logic behind the colour-coding used in the Copyright Knowledge Bank" (PDF) .

Program .

41 (2): 124– 133.

doi : 10.1108/00330330710742908 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 July 2019 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 .

^ Kristick, Laurel (2008). "Using Journal Citation Reports and SHERPA RoMEO to Facilitate Conversations on Institutional Repositories".

Collection Management .

34 (1): 49– 52.

doi : 10.1080/01462670802527860 .

S2CID 62692357 .

^ "FAQ - Publisher copyright policies & self-archiving" .

SHERPA/RoMEO . Retrieved 22 October 2015 .

^ "About Sherpa Romeo version 2" .

v2.sherpa.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 27 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 January 2021 .

^ "Juliet Statistics - SHERPA Services" .

v2.sherpa.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 21 November 2018 . Retrieved 9 December 2017 .

^ a b c Elizabeth Price (2016).

"Review of Sherpa RoMEO and Sherpa Juliet" .

^ "Suggest a new funder" . Archived from the original on 10 December 2017 . Retrieved 9 December 2017 .

External links [ edit ] SHERPA web site RSP web site Archived 23 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine OpenDOAR site Archived 26 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine RoMEO service JULIET service UKCoRR web site v t e Open access History Timeline Concepts Gratis versus libre Subscription business model Subscribe to Open Paywall Copyright transfer agreement Academic journal Scientific journal Manuscript Preprint Postprint Article processing charge Predatory publishing Statements Budapest Open Access Initiative Berlin Declaration Bethesda Statement DORA Durham Statement Geneva Declaration NIH Public Access Policy Research Works Act Strategies Self-archiving Open-access mandate Open-access repository Hybrid open-access journal Delayed open-access journal Projects and organizations The Cost of Knowledge Creative Commons Directory of Open Access Books [ ca ; es ] Directory of Open Access Journals Initiative for Open Citations Open Access Scholarly Publishing Association OpenAIRE Open Archives Initiative Open Knowledge Foundation Open Society Foundations Plan S Public Library of Science Public Knowledge Project Registry of Open Access Repositories Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition SciELO Sci-Hub By country Australia Austria Belgium Canada Denmark France Germany Greece Hungary India Republic of Ireland Italy Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Spain Sweden Ukraine Other Access to Knowledge movement Access2Research List of open-access journals Open content Open data Open education Open government Open hardware Open knowledge Open science Open source Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SHERPA_(organisation)&oldid=1301258284 " Categories : Information technology organisations based in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Nottinghamshire Organizations established in 2002 Archives in the United Kingdom Science and technology in Nottinghamshire University of Nottingham 2002 establishments in the United Kingdom Open access projects Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2022 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 22:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents SHERPA (organisation) 3 languages Add topic

