Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Symptoms Toggle Symptoms subsection 1.1 Complications 2 Causes and mechanism 3 Diagnosis 4 Prevention 5 Treatment and outcomes 6 Epidemiology Toggle Epidemiology subsection 6.1 History 7 Etymology 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Ebullism 5 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Formation of vapour bubbles in bodily fluids due to reduced environmental pressure Not to be confused with Embolism .

Ebullism is the formation of water vapour bubbles in bodily fluids due to reduced environmental pressure, usually at extreme high altitude .  It occurs because a system of liquid and gas at equilibrium will see a net conversion of liquid to gas as pressure lowers; for example, liquids reach their boiling points at lower temperatures when the pressure on them is lowered.

[ 1 ] The injuries and disorder caused by ebullism is also known as ebullism syndrome .

[ 2 ] Ebullism will expand the volume of the tissues, but the vapour pressure of water at temperatures in which a human can survive is not sufficient to rupture skin or most other tissues encased in skin.

[ 3 ] Ebullism produces predictable injuries, which may be survivable if treated soon enough, and is often accompanied by complications caused by rapid decompression, such as decompression sickness and a variety of barotrauma injuries. Persons at risk are astronauts and high altitude aviators, for whom it is an occupational hazard .

[ 1 ] Symptoms [ edit ] Symptoms of ebullism include bubbles in the membranes of the mouth and eyes, swelling of the soft tissues with possible bruising, and bubbles in the blood. Blood circulation and breathing may be impaired or stopped by cardiac vapourlock. The brain tissue may be starved of oxygen because of blockage of arteries resulting in rapid loss of consciousness, and the lungs may swell and hemorrhage . Death results unless recompression is rapid enough to restore oxygenation and reduce the bubbles before excessive tissue damage occurs.

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] Head exposure may result in freezing of the corneal surface of the eye, impairing vision.

[ 5 ] Other signs and symptoms of rapid decompression injury may also be present.

[ 1 ] Complications [ edit ] A decompression event leading to ebullism will cause acute anoxemia and is likely to cause other decompression injuries such as decompression sickness and possibly one or more forms of decompression barotrauma.

[ 6 ] Causes and mechanism [ edit ] In the atmospheric pressure present at sea level , water boils at 100 °C (212 °F). At an altitude of 63,000 feet (19,000 m), it boils at only 37 °C (99 °F), the normal body temperature of humans.  This altitude is known as Armstrong's Line .

[ 7 ] Ebullism occurs when  unprotected humans are exposed to altitudes above the Armstrong limit where the vapor pressure of tissues is less than the ambient pressure.

[ 5 ] In practice bodily fluids do not boil off continuously at this altitude because the skin and outer organs have enough strength to withstand the internal pressure, [ 8 ] so the pressure inside the tissues would increase to match vapour pressure. Nitrogen dissolved in the tissues may also accumulate in the vapour bubbles causing altitude decompression sickness .

[ 5 ] Pathophysiology of ebullism has mostly been studied in animals, including large primates, but no reasons have been found to suggest that the results should not be reasonably extrapolated to predict effects on humans. The experiments show that ebullism occurs non-uniformly at sites where conditions are most conducive to vapourisation of water and outgassing of nitrogen. Factors include temperature, hydrostatic pressure, tissue elasticity, solute concentration, and the presence of gas bubble nuclei, and which can cause vapour bubbles to form at pressures slightly above the theoretical ambient pressure of 47 millimetres of mercury (63 mbar) in some places such as the pleural cavity, where the pressure can drop below ambient, and large central veins where hydrostatic pressure is minimum and blood temperature is at a maximum.

[ 6 ] Diagnosis [ edit ] Ebullism occurs as a consequence of exposure to ambient pressures below about 47 millimetres of mercury (63 mbar). At higher pressures similar symptoms are likely to be caused by decompression sickness and some forms of barotrauma.

[ 1 ] Prevention [ edit ] To prevent ebullism, the tissues must be kept under sufficient pressure that vaporisation of the aqueous constituents is not possible in the range of temperature those tissues may experience.

[ 1 ] An effective strategy for preventing ebullism would include multiple redundant levels of protection against decompression, and systems allowing non-catastrophic failure with sufficient time of useful consciousness to take effective countermeasures. Several mitigating strategies have associated hazards of their own. A high concentration of oxygen in the breathing gas reduces the severity of decompression sickness complications and may increase the duration of useful consciousness, but at the same time increases fire hazard. A low initial pressure reduces decompression rate and severity in a catastrophic decompression, which reduces the risk of barotrauma but gives a lower margin of safety in a slow decompression, and can increase the risk of decompression sickness. Outside of a pressurised cabin environment, a pressure suit is the usual protective measure, and is the definitive protection in decompression to vacuum, but they are expensive, heavy, bulky, restrict mobility, cause thermal regulatory problems, and reduce comfort.

[ 1 ] Treatment and outcomes [ edit ] Ebullism produces secondary tissue damage which, when extensive, has generally been considered fatal due to limited availability of treatment options on site. Immediate recompression to a pressure at minimum  pressure for effective oxygenation is necessary for survival in whole-body exposure, along with re-oxygenation. Continued or additional pressurisation where necessary to prevent or treat decompression sickness is also indicated.

[ 1 ] High-frequency percussive ventilation is recommended by Murray et al (2013) for respiratory support as atelectasis is likely.

[ 1 ] Initial field evaluation would be
similar to trauma assessment. It may be necessary to remove a pressure suit to give access for primary and secondary surveys. Airway, breathing, and circulation are immediate priorities, followed by assessment of level of consciousness. Intubation is indicated if unconscious and deteriorating.
If a pulse cannot be distinguished, and the person is unresponsive, cardiopulmonary resuscitation should be started immediately, with advanced cardiac life support and cardiovascular monitoring as soon as possible.

[ 1 ] Little information is available on the effectiveness of conventional treatment, such as hyperbaric oxygen , or adjunctive therapies , for injuries due to ebullism.

[ 5 ] Spontaneous recovery has occurred in cases where recompression was applied with minimal delay, or the damage was restricted to parts of the limbs. Other examples were fatal.

[ 9 ] The time needed for recovery will depend on the severity of injury, which is largely dependent on severity and duration of exposure. The main predictor of survival is the establishment of sufficient circulation and breathing.

[ 1 ] Epidemiology [ edit ] Ebullism risk is associated with spaceflight, particularly EVA accidents, rapid decompression of aircraft at very high altitudes, and pressure suit failure during flight and training exercises.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] In 1960, Joseph Kittinger experienced localised ebullism during a 31 kilometres (19 mi) ascent in a helium -supported gondola.

[ 10 ] His right-hand glove failed to pressurise and his hand expanded to roughly twice its normal volume [ 11 ] [ 12 ] accompanied by disabling pain. His hand took about three hours to recover after his return to the ground.

Tissue samples from the remains of the crew of Space Shuttle STS-107 Columbia revealed evidence of ebullism. Given the level of tissue damage, the crew could not have regained consciousness even with re-pressurization.

[ 9 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term "space ebullism" was introduced by Captain Julian E. Ward in his paper "The True Nature of the Boiling of Body Fluids in Space", published in Aviation Medicine in October 1956.  It was suggested "because the word ebullism does not connote the addition of heat to produce vapor." It comes from the Latin ebullire , meaning "to bubble out, or to boil up." [ 13 ] [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Decompression sickness – Disorder caused by dissolved gases forming bubbles in tissues Effect of spaceflight on the human body – Medical issues associated with spaceflight High altitude breathing apparatus – Equipment which allows the user to breathe at hypoxic altitudes Pressure suit – Type of protective suit worn in low pressure environments Space suit – Garment worn to protect a human in space Uncontrolled decompression – Unplanned drop in the pressure of a sealed system Armstrong limit – Altitude where water boils at body temperature References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Murray, Daniel H.; Pilmanis, Andrew A.; Blue, Rebecca S.; Pattarini, James M; Law, Jennifer; Bayne, C Gresham; Turney, Matthew W.; Clark, Jonathan B (2013). "Pathophysiology, prevention, and treatment of ebullism".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

84 (2): 89– 96.

doi : 10.3357/ASEM.3468.2013 .

PMID 23447845 .

^ Norfleet, W.T. (2008). "Decompression-Related Disorders: Decompression Sickness, Arterial Gas Embolism, and Ebullism Syndrome". In Barratt, M.R.; Pool, S.L. (eds.).

Principles of Clinical Medicine for Space Flight . Springer, New York, NY. pp.

223– 246.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-68164-1_11 .

ISBN 978-0-387-98842-9 .

^ a b Springel, Mark (30 July 2013).

"The human body in space: Distinguishing fact from fiction" . Harvard University Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 .

^ Czarnik, Tam.

"Ebullism at 1 Million Feet" .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2018 . Retrieved 16 February 2010 .

^ a b c d e Stegmann, Barbara J.; Pilmanis, Andrew A.; Derion, Toniann (1 February 1992).

Improving survival after tissue vaporization (Ebullism) . 5th Annual Workshop on Space Operations Applications and Research (SOAR 1991), Volume 2. NASA. Johnson Space Center. 19920013110.

^ a b Busby, Douglas E. (1968). "Ebullism Syndrome".

Space Clinical Medicine . Dordrecht: Springer. pp.

20– 30.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-010-3464-7_2 .

ISBN 978-94-010-3466-1 .

^ Davis, Jeffrey R.; Johnson, Robert; Stepanek, Jan (2008).

Fundamentals of Aerospace Medicine (4th ed.). p. 252.

^ Landis, Geoffrey A.

"Human Exposure to Vacuum" . Archived from the original on 21 July 2009 . Retrieved 16 February 2010 .

^ a b National Aeronautics and Space Administration (2008).

"Columbia Crew Survival Investigation Report NASA/SP-2008-565" (PDF) . Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. pp.

3– 83.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 March 2021 .

^ Pilmanis, Andrew; Sears, William (December 2003).

"Physiological hazards of flight at high altitude" .

The Lancet .

362 : s16 – s17 .

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)15059-3 .

PMID 14698113 .

S2CID 8210206 .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2021 . Retrieved 10 September 2019 .

^ Higgins, Matt (May 24, 2008).

"20-Year Journey for 15-Minute Fall" .

The New York Times (online) . p. 2.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2012 .

^ "Skydive from the Stratosphere" . NOVA Online, Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). November 2000. Archived from the original on 29 August 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2012 .

^ Mohler, Stanley R.; Day, Pamela C. (September 2006).

"The Annual Awards of the Aerospace Medical Association" .

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

77 (9): 979.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2014 . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ Ward, Julian E. (1956). "The True Nature of the Boiling of Body Fluids in Space".

The Journal of Aviation Medicine .

27 (5). Aviation Medicine: 429– 39.

PMID 13366883 .

S2CID 6765165 .

Classification D ICD - 11 : NF04.Y ICD - 10 : T70.2 v t e Space medicine Main areas Artificial gravity Astronautical hygiene Bioastronautics Neuroscience in space Space exposure Space food Space nursing Space weather Weightlessness Illness and injuries Asthenization Ebullism Illness and injuries during spaceflight Medical treatment during spaceflight Space adaptation syndrome Space and survival Spaceflight osteopenia Organizations Aerospace Medical Association National Space Biomedical Research Institute Rubicon Foundation Space Nursing Society Other topics Adverse health effects from lunar dust exposure Alcohol Cardiac rhythm problems during space flight Central nervous system effects from radiation exposure during spaceflight Effect of spaceflight on the human body Effects of sleep deprivation in space Epidemiology data for low-linear energy transfer radiation Sleep in space Health threat from cosmic rays Intervertebral disc damage and spaceflight List of microorganisms tested in outer space Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight Radiobiology evidence for protons and HZE nuclei Reduced muscle mass, strength and performance in space Renal stone formation in space Spaceflight radiation carcinogenesis Team composition and cohesion in spaceflight missions Visual impairment due to intracranial pressure Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ebullism&oldid=1243949251 " Categories : Medical terminology Space medicine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 September 2024, at 07:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ebullism 5 languages Add topic

