Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Fries's trilemma 3 Albert's formulation 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Münchhausen trilemma 21 languages العربية বাংলা Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gĩkũyũ Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Thought experiment used to demonstrate the impossibility of proving any truth Baron Munchausen pulls himself out of a mire by his own hair.

In epistemology , the Münchhausen trilemma is a thought experiment intended to demonstrate the theoretical impossibility of proving any truth , even in the fields of logic and mathematics , without appealing to accepted assumptions . If it is asked how any given proposition is known to be true, proof in support of that proposition may be provided. Yet that same question can be asked of that supporting proof and any subsequent supporting proof. The Münchhausen trilemma is that there are only three ways of completing a proof: The circular argument , in which the proof of some proposition presupposes the truth of that very proposition The regressive argument , in which each proof requires a further proof, ad infinitum The dogmatic argument , which rests on accepted precepts which are merely asserted rather than defended The trilemma , then, is having to choose one of three equally unsatisfying options.

Name [ edit ] The name Münchhausen-Trilemma was coined by the German philosopher Hans Albert in 1968 in reference to a trilemma of " dogmatism versus infinite regress versus psychologism " used by Karl Popper .

[ 1 ] It is a  reference to the problem of " bootstrapping ", based on the story of Baron Munchausen (in German, "Münchhausen") pulling himself and the horse on which he was sitting out of a mire by his own hair. Like Munchausen, who cannot make progress because he has no solid ground to stand on, any purported justification of all knowledge must fail, because it must start from a position of no knowledge, and therefore cannot make progress. It must either start with some knowledge, as with dogmatism , not start at all, as with infinite regress , or be a circular argument , justified only by itself and have no solid foundation, much like the absurdity of Münchhausen pulling himself out of the mire without any independent support. In contemporary epistemology , advocates of coherentism are supposed to accept the "circular" horn of the trilemma; foundationalists rely on the axiomatic argument. The view that accepts infinite regress is called infinitism .

It is also known as Agrippa's trilemma or the Agrippan trilemma [ 2 ] after a similar argument reported by Sextus Empiricus , which was attributed to Agrippa the Skeptic by Diogenes Laërtius . Sextus' argument, however, consists of five (not three) " modes ".

Fries's trilemma [ edit ] Popper, in Logic of Scientific Discovery , mentions neither Sextus nor Agrippa but instead attributes his trilemma to German philosopher Jakob Friedrich Fries , leading some to call it Fries's trilemma as a result.

[ 3 ] Jakob Friedrich Fries formulated a similar trilemma in which statements can be accepted either: [ 4 ] dogmatically supported by infinite regress based on perceptual experience ( psychologism ) The first two possibilities are rejected by Fries as unsatisfactory, requiring his adopting the third option.

Karl Popper argued that a way to avoid the trilemma was to use an intermediate approach incorporating some dogmatism, some infinite regress, and some perceptual experience.

[ 5 ] Albert's formulation [ edit ] The argument proposed by Hans Albert runs as follows: All of the only three  possible attempts to get a certain justification must fail: All justifications in pursuit of "certain" knowledge must also justify the means of their justification, and doing so will require them to justify anew, the means of their justification. Therefore, there can be no end, only the hopeless situation of infinite regression.

A circular argument can be used to justify its mock impression of validity and soundness, but this sacrifices its usefulness (as the conclusion and premise are one and the same, no advancement in knowledge has taken place).

One can stop at self-evidence or common sense or fundamental principles or speaking ex cathedra or at any other evidence, but in doing so, the intention to install 'certain' justification is abandoned.

An English translation of a quote from the original German text by Albert is as follows: [ 6 ] Here, one has a mere choice between: An infinite regression, which appears because of the necessity to go ever further back, but is not practically feasible and does not, therefore, provide a certain foundation.

A logical circle in the deduction, which is caused by the fact that one, in the need to found, falls back on statements which had already appeared before as requiring a foundation, and which circle does not lead to any certain foundation either.

A break of searching at a certain point, which indeed appears principally feasible, but would mean a random suspension of the principle of sufficient reason .

Albert stressed repeatedly that there is no limitation of the Münchhausen trilemma to deductive conclusions. The verdict concerns also inductive, causal, transcendental, and all otherwise structured justifications. They all will be in vain.

Therefore, certain justification is impossible to attain. Once having given up the classical idea of certain knowledge, one can stop the process of justification where one wants to stop, presupposed one is ready to start critical thinking at this point, always anew if necessary.

This trilemma rounds off the classical problem of justification in the theory of knowledge .

The failure to prove exactly any truth, as expressed by the Münchhausen trilemma, does not have to lead to the dismissal of objectivity, as with relativism . One example of an alternative is the fallibilism of Karl Popper and Hans Albert, accepting that certainty is impossible but that it is best to get as close as possible to truth while remembering our uncertainty.

In Albert's view, the impossibility of proving any certain truth is not in itself a certain truth. After all, one needs to assume some basic rules of logical inference to derive his result, and in doing so, must either abandon the pursuit of "certain" justification, as above, or attempt to justify these rules, etc. He suggests that it has to be taken as true as long as nobody has come forward with a truth that is scrupulously justified as a certain truth. Several philosophers defied Albert's challenge; his responses to such criticisms can be found in his long addendum to his Treatise on Critical Reason and later articles.

See also [ edit ] Anti-foundationalism – Epistemology without sure premises Foundherentism – Theory of justification in epistemology Cognitive closure (philosophy) – Proposition in philosophy of mind Critical rationalism – Epistemological philosophy advanced by Karl Popper Duhem–Quine thesis – Principle in the philosophy of science Gödel's incompleteness theorems – Limitative results in mathematical logic Problem of the criterion – Philosophical problem about the starting point of knowledge Rational fideism Regress argument – Philosophical problem Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Theory of justification – Concept in epistemology Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets "What the Tortoise Said to Achilles" – 1895 allegorical dialogue by Lewis Carroll References [ edit ] ^ Dogmatismus – unendlicher Regreß – Psychologismus Albert, Traktat über kritische Vernunft , 1968, p. 11, cited after
Westermann, Argumentationen und Begründungen in der Ethik und Rechtslehre , 1977, p. 15.

^ Franks, Paul W.; Franks, Assistant Professor of Philosophy Paul W. (30 October 2005).

All Or Nothing: Systematicity, Transcendental Arguments, and Skepticism in German Idealism . Harvard University Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-674-01888-4 .

^ Robert Nola, "Conceptual and Non-Conceptual Content", in : Karl Popper: A Centenary Assessment vol 2, 2006, p. 15 ^ J. F. Fries, Neue oder anthropologische Kritik der Vernunft (1828 to 1831).

^ Karl Popper, "The Logic of Scientific Discovery", p. 87 ^ Albert, H., Traktat über kritische Vernunft , p. 15 (Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1991).

Further reading [ edit ] Hans Albert, Treatise on Critical Reason , Princeton University Press , 1985, chap. I, sect. 2.

For Hans Albert's scientific articles see List of Publications in Hans Albert at opensociety.de External links [ edit ] Epistemic regress at PhilPapers v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism v t e Baron Munchausen Novel Baron Munchausen's Narrative of His Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia by Rudolf Erich Raspe , translated and expanded by Gottfried August Bürger Films Baron Munchausen's Dream (1911) Meet the Baron (1933) Baron Prášil (1940) Münchhausen (1943) Munchhausen in Africa (1958) The Fabulous Baron Munchausen (1962) The Very Same Munchhausen (1979) The Secret of the Selenites (1984) The Adventures of Baron Munchausen (1988) Related The Extraordinary Adventures of Baron Munchausen (game) Munchausen syndrome Munchausen syndrome by proxy Munchausen by Internet Münchhausen trilemma Munchausen number 14014 Münchhausen Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Münchhausen_trilemma&oldid=1293188346 " Categories : 1968 neologisms Baron Munchausen Dilemmas Epistemological theories Foundationalism History of logic Justification (epistemology) Philosophical arguments Philosophical skepticism Thought experiments in philosophy Concepts in epistemology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 07:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Münchhausen trilemma 21 languages Add topic

