Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Definitions 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Monophyly 48 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Кыргызча Limburgs Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Seeltersk Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Monophyletic ) Taxonomic concept See also: Crown group A phylogenetic tree : both blue and red groups are monophyletic . The green group is paraphyletic : it is missing a monophyletic subgroup – the blue group – that shares a common ancestor with itself. In this form, monophyletic means "no sideways stems leaving the group".

A cladogram of the primates , showing a monophyletic taxon: the simians (in yellow); a paraphyletic taxon: the prosimians (in cyan, including the red patch); and a polyphyletic group: the night-active primates, i.e., the lorises and the tarsiers (in red).

A cladogram of the vertebrates showing phylogenetic groups. A monophyletic taxon (in yellow): the group of "reptiles and birds" , contains its most recent common ancestor and all descendants of that ancestor. A paraphyletic taxon (in cyan): the group of reptiles , contains its most recent common ancestor, but does not contain all the descendants (namely Aves) of that ancestor. A polyphyletic "group" (in red): the group of all warm-blooded amniotes (Aves and Mammalia), does not contain the most recent common ancestor of all its members; this group is not seen as a taxonomic unit and is not considered a taxon by modern systematists .

In biological cladistics for the classification of organisms , monophyly is the condition of a taxonomic grouping being a clade – that is, a grouping of organisms which meets these criteria: the grouping contains its own most recent common ancestor (or more precisely an ancestral population ), i.e. excludes non-descendants of that common ancestor the grouping contains all the descendants of that common ancestor, without exception Monophyly is contrasted with paraphyly and polyphyly as shown in the second diagram. A paraphyletic grouping meets 1. but not 2., thus consisting of the descendants of a common ancestor, excepting one or more monophyletic subgroups. A polyphyletic grouping meets neither criterion, and instead serves to characterize convergent relationships of biological features rather than genetic relationships – for example, night-active primates, fruit trees, or aquatic insects. As such, these characteristic features of a polyphyletic grouping are not inherited from a common ancestor, but evolved independently.

Monophyletic groups are typically characterised by shared derived characteristics ( synapomorphies ), which distinguish organisms in the clade from other organisms. An equivalent term is holophyly .

[ 1 ] The word "mono-phyly" means "one-tribe" in Greek.

These definitions have taken some time to be accepted. When the cladistics school of thought became mainstream in the 1960s, several alternative definitions were in use.  Indeed, taxonomists sometimes used terms without defining them, leading to confusion in the early literature, [ 2 ] a confusion which persists.

[ 3 ] The first diagram shows a phylogenetic tree with two monophyletic groups. The several groups and subgroups are particularly situated as branches of the tree to indicate ordered lineal relationships between all the organisms shown. Further, any group may (or may not) be considered a taxon by modern systematics , depending upon the selection of its members in relation to their common ancestor(s); see second and third diagrams.

Etymology [ edit ] The term monophyly , or monophyletic , derives from the two Ancient Greek words μόνος ( mónos ), meaning "alone, only, unique", and φῦλον ( phûlon ), meaning "genus, species", [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and refers to the fact that a monophyletic group includes organisms (e.g., genera, species) consisting of all the descendants of a unique common ancestor.

Conversely, the term polyphyly , or polyphyletic , builds on the ancient Greek prefix πολύς ( polús ), meaning "many, a lot of", [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and refers to the fact that a polyphyletic group includes organisms arising from multiple ancestral sources.

By comparison, the term paraphyly , or paraphyletic , uses the ancient Greek prefix παρά ( pará ), meaning "beside, near", [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and refers to the situation in which one or several monophyletic subgroups are left apart from all other descendants of a unique common ancestor. That is, a paraphyletic group is nearly monophyletic, hence the prefix pará .

Definitions [ edit ] On the broadest scale, definitions fall into two groups.

Willi Hennig (1966:148) defined monophyly as groups based on synapomorphy (in contrast to paraphyletic groups, based on symplesiomorphy , and polyphyletic groups, based on convergence ).  Some authors have sought to define monophyly to include paraphyly as any two or more groups sharing a common ancestor.

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] However, this broader definition encompasses both monophyletic and paraphyletic groups as defined above. Therefore, most scientists today restrict the term "monophyletic" to refer to groups consisting of all the descendants of one (hypothetical) common ancestor.

[ 2 ] However, when considering taxonomic groups such as genera and species, the most appropriate nature of their common ancestor is rather a population.  Assuming that it would be one individual or mating pair is unrealistic for sexually reproducing species, which are by definition interbreeding populations.

[ 9 ] Monophyly (or holophyly) and associated terms are restricted to discussions of taxa, and are not necessarily accurate when used to describe what Hennig called tokogenetic relationships – now referred to as genealogies.  Some argue that using a broader definition, such as a species and all its descendants, does not really work to define a genus.

[ 9 ] The loose definition also fails to recognize the relations of all organisms.

[ 10 ] According to D. M. Stamos, a satisfactory cladistic definition of a species or genus is impossible because many species (and even genera) may form by "budding" from an existing species, leaving the parent species paraphyletic; or the species or genera may be the result of hybrid speciation .

[ 11 ] The concepts of monophyly, paraphyly , and polyphyly have been used in deducing key genes for barcoding of diverse group of species.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Clade Crown group Glossary of scientific naming Monotypic taxon Paraphyly Polyphyly References [ edit ] ^ Allaby, Michael (2015).

A Dictionary of Ecology (5 ed.) . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780191793158 .

^ a b Hennig, Willi (1999) [1966].

Phylogenetic Systematics . Translated by Davis, D.; Zangerl, R. (Illinois Reissue ed.). Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois. pp.

72– 77.

ISBN 978-0-252-06814-0 .

^ a b Damien, Aubert (2015).

"A formal analysis of phylogenetic terminology: Towards a reconsideration of the current paradigm in systematics" (PDF) .

Phytoneuron ( 2015– 66): 1– 54.

^ a b c Bailly, Anatole (1 January 1981).

Abrégé du dictionnaire grec français . Paris: Hachette.

ISBN 978-2010035289 .

OCLC 461974285 .

^ a b c Bailly, Anatole.

"Greek-french dictionary online" .

www.tabularium.be . Retrieved 7 March 2018 .

^ Colless, Donald H. (March 1972). "Monophyly".

Systematic Zoology .

21 (1): 126– 128.

doi : 10.2307/2412266 .

JSTOR 2412266 .

^ Envall, Mats (2008).

"On the difference between mono-, holo-, and paraphyletic groups: a consistent distinction of process and pattern" .

Biological Journal of the Linnean Society .

94 : 217– 220.

doi : 10.1111/j.1095-8312.2008.00984.x .

^ Ashlock, Peter D. (March 1971). "Monophyly and Associated Terms".

Systematic Zoology .

20 (1): 63– 69.

doi : 10.2307/2412223 .

JSTOR 2412223 .

^ a b Simpson, George (1990).

Principles of Animal Taxonomy . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-09650-8 .

^ Carr, Steven M.

"Monophyletic, Polyphyletic, & Paraphyletc Taxa" .

www.mun.ca . Retrieved 23 February 2018 .

^ Stamos, D.N. (2003).

The species problem : biological species, ontology, and the metaphysics of biology . Lanham, Md. [u.a.]: Lexington Books. pp.

261– 268.

ISBN 978-0739105030 .

^ Parhi J., Tripathy P.S., Priyadarshi, H., Mandal S.C., Pandey P.K. (2019). "Diagnosis of mitogenome for robust phylogeny: A case of Cypriniformes fish group".

Gene .

713 : 143967.

doi : 10.1016/j.gene.2019.143967 .

PMID 31279710 .

S2CID 195828782 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) External links [ edit ] Abbey, Darren (1994–2006).

"Graphical explanation of basic phylogenetic terms" . University of California, Berkeley . Retrieved 15 January 2010 .

Carr, Steven M. (2002).

"Concepts of monophyly, polyphyly & paraphyly" . Memorial University . Retrieved 15 January 2010 .

Hyvönen, Jaako (2005).

"Monophyly, consensus, compromise" (PDF) . University of Helsinki . Retrieved 15 January 2010 .

"Phylogenetic Trees and Classification" .

Digital Atlas of Ancient Life . Paleontological Research Institution.

v t e Phylogenetics Relevant fields Computational phylogenetics Molecular phylogenetics Cladistics Taxonomy Evolutionary taxonomy Systematics Evolutionary biology portal Basic concepts Phylogenesis Cladogenesis Phylogenetic tree Cladogram Phylogenetic network Long branch attraction Clade vs Grade Lineage Ghost lineage Ghost population Inference methods Maximum parsimony Phylogenetic reconciliation Probabilistic methods Maximum likelihood Bayesian inference Distance-matrix methods Neighbor-joining UPGMA Least squares Three-taxon analysis Current topics PhyloCode DNA barcoding Molecular phylogenetics Phylogenetic comparative methods Phylogenetic niche conservatism Phylogenetic signal Phylogenetics software Phylogenomics Phylogeography Group traits Primitive Plesiomorphy Symplesiomorphy Derived Apomorphy Synapomorphy Autapomorphy Group types Monophyly Paraphyly Polyphyly Nomenclature Phylogenetic nomenclature Crown group Sister group Basal Supertree Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monophyly&oldid=1303529061 " Category : Phylogenetics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 14:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monophyly 48 languages Add topic

