Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation Toggle Formation subsection 1.1 Varieties of formation 2 Economic importance 3 References Toggle the table of contents Inversion (geology) 8 languages Español Euskara فارسی Հայերեն ქართული Norsk nynorsk Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Relative uplift of a sedimentary basin or similar structure as a result of crustal shortening Not to be confused with inverted relief .

Section across southern England showing the inverted nature of the Channel and Weald basins The Quantocks Head Fault, west of Kilve , Somerset , showing the effects of inversion on the earlier normal fault, with folding and thrusting in the hanging wall In structural geology , inversion or basin inversion relates to the relative uplift of a sedimentary basin or similar structure [ example needed ] as a result of crustal shortening. This normally excludes uplift developed in the footwalls of later extensional faults , or uplift caused by mantle plumes . "Inversion" can also refer to individual faults , where an extensional fault is reactivated in the opposite direction to its original movement.

The term negative inversion is also occasionally used to describe the reactivation of reverse faults and thrusts during extension.

The term "inversion" simply refers to the fact that a relatively low-lying area is uplifted – the rock sequence itself is not normally inverted.

Formation [ edit ] Many inversion structures are caused by the direct reactivation of pre-existing extensional faults. In some cases only the deeper parts of the fault are reactivated and the shortening is accommodated over a much broader area in the shallow part of the section. The existing fault block still generally acts as a boundary to the uplift and the process is sometimes known as buttressing .

The likelihood of fault reactivation depends on the dip of the existing fault plane. Lower angle faults are more favourable as the resolved shear stress on the plane is higher. When a listric fault , which increases in dip upwards, reactivates the uppermost part of the fault may be too steep and new reverse faults typically develop in the footwall of the existing fault. These are known as footwall shortcuts .

Varieties of formation [ edit ] Inversion tectonics is recognised to form as a result of: Regional temporal variations in stress patterns within plates, resulting from forces caused by changes in plate boundary configuration, the blocking of subduction zones by buoyant crust (collision) and changes in relative motion at nearby plate boundaries.

Global, episodic, intraplate, stress changes from deviatoric compression during the collisional assembly of Pangaea-type continental configurations to deviatoric tension in assembled  configurations to deviatoric compression in dispersed configurations. Inversions are commonly associated with rifted margin breakup unconformities caused by the transition from rift-phase tension to ridge push compression.

Local inversion in strike-slip rhombohedral pull-aparts as a natural consequence of alternating phases of transtension with negative flower structure and transpression with positive flower structure.

Complex alternating phases of extension and shortening at the margins of upper crustal rotational flakes in strike-slip zones.

Progressive diminution of the ratio of crustal to lithospheric thickness during slow extension causing whole basin uplift.

Uplift on lithospheric flexural arches and hotspots.

Body force mechanisms including salt mud diapirism, salt/mud decollement tectonics, gravity spreading , sliding and consequent relaying of heel extension to toe thrusting.

Inversion of strong negative isostatic gravity anomalies in confined deep basins caused by upper crustal stretching. Critical to whether a basin becomes inverted are, also, the timing of a compression phase relative to the initial basin-forming extensional event and the extensional strain rate. Short extension-compression intervals and high extensional strain rates facilitate basin inversion. Inversion may be prevented by long intervals and low strain rates.

[ 1 ] Economic importance [ edit ] Anticlinal structures formed by inversion provide traps in many of the world's hydrocarbon provinces. The nature of inversion means that reservoir units often thicken and may increase in quality within the basin that is later inverted (e.g. the Ormen Lange gas field offshore mid-Norway).

References [ edit ] ^ Dewey, J.F. (1989).

"Kinematics and dynamics of basin inversion" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

44 (1): 352.

Bibcode : 1989GSLSP..44..352D .

doi : 10.1144/gsl.sp.1989.044.01.20 . Retrieved 27 September 2010 .

Inversion Tectonics. Edited by Cooper, M.A. and Williams, G.D. 1989. Special publication of the Geological Society of London, 44.

Basin Inversion. Edited by Buchanan, J.G. and Buchanan, P.G. 1995. Special publication of the Geological Society of London, 88.

v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inversion_(geology)&oldid=1292278077 " Categories : Structural geology Tectonics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from July 2024 This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 04:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inversion (geology) 8 languages Add topic

