Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Configuration 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Logging truck 12 languages Français Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Русский Slovenščina کوردی Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vehicle used for carrying logs Oshkosh M911 tractor hauling logs A logging truck or timber lorry is a large truck used to carry logs .

[ 1 ] Some have integrated flatbeds , some are discrete tractor units , and some are configured to spread a load between the tractor unit and a dollied trailer pulled behind it.  Often more than one trailer is attached.

History [ edit ] Moreland trucks with solid tires on Moses Mountain in the 1920s The most convenient trees to cut down were those near waterways for easy transportation.

[ 2 ] As the supply dwindled and loggers had to go farther from water, they used teams of oxen or horses for hauling.

[ 2 ] These were superseded by steam-powered donkeys and locomotives .

[ 2 ] The final development was the logging truck.

[ 2 ] A truck was used for logging in Covington, Washington , in 1913.

[ 3 ] The coming of World War I and the resulting demand for the Pacific Northwest 's Sitka spruce for airplanes "established log trucking in Washington ".

[ 3 ] The United States Army assigned thousands of men to the Spruce Production Division to build roads into western Washington to harvest the dispersed stands of the best trees.

[ 3 ] After the war ended, a plenitude of surplus military trucks made their adoption attractive to logging companies, particularly smaller outfits that could not afford expensive locomotives.

[ 4 ] The primitive trucks were improved in the 1920s and 1930s, with more powerful engines and better braking systems.

[ 4 ] The old "narrow, solid rubber—sometimes steel—treadless tires" were replaced by wider pneumatic ones with treads.

[ 4 ] Plank roads gave way to graded dirt ones.

[ 4 ] By the mid-1930s, trucks were hauling as much timber out of the Pacific Northwest as the railroads.

[ 4 ] World War II saw improved truck designs, and once again these were passed along to logging companies through the sale of surplus military vehicles after the war was over.

[ 4 ] Configuration [ edit ] B double logging truck in Australia There are two main types of modern logging trucks—those used on rough ground and trails in the forest where they are felled and those used for transport on normal highways and roads.

[ 5 ] Because the roads in forests are rough and often temporary, the suspension and tires of an offroad truck are especially significant.  Solid, low pressure and high pressure tires have been used.  As many as nine axles may be used to provide low ground pressure and good traction.

[ 6 ] Timber is commonly grown in hilly country unsuitable for farming and so the ability of a log truck to climb a gradient is significant.  The steepness depends on the quality of the surface - mud and snow are harder to climb than gravel and soil.  For a manageable gradient, the speed will then depend upon the power of the truck.

[ 7 ] The legal weight limits will vary by jurisdiction but, for example, in the southern states of the US, they range from 80,000 to 88,000 pounds (36,300 to 39,900 kg)—about 40 short tons (35.7 long tons; 36.3 t).

[ 8 ] To load the logs, the truck may be fitted with one or more winches or cranes .  The logs are commonly unloaded by letting them roll off sideways.

[ 9 ] Gallery [ edit ] Different logging trucks Logging truck on Shaw Island ferry dock Logging trucks move through park from cutting near park boundary Logging truck and bush taxi accident Three axle KrAZ-255B logging truck Sisu with a hydraulic crane A 60 ton Volvo FH16 with bullbar Mitsubishi 8x4 unloaded in Port Chalmers , New Zealand Truckload of ponderosa pine , Malheur National Forest , 1942 Straight truck with log loader and pup trailer, Montana, 2011 French logging truck See also [ edit ] Transport portal Flatbed truck Hayes Truck Forwarder Logging road Pacific Trucks Side stake References [ edit ] ^ Arthur Sutton; Timothy Robin Sawyer (1971), Loading and unloading timber lorries , H.M.S.O.

^ a b c d "A History of Timber: Logging Trucks and Early Timber Transportation" . TimberPlus.

^ a b c "The Washington Log Trucking Industry: Costs and Safety Analysis" .

University of Washington Department of Natural Resource Sciences . Retrieved December 18, 2011 .

^ a b c d e f "Log Truck Stirs Dust through Clearcut" . Oregon Historical Society . Retrieved December 18, 2011 .

^ Jeff C. Young (2009), Trucks , Capstone Press, p.

14 , ISBN 978-1-4296-3432-8 ^ John A. Sturos; Douglas B. Brumm; Andrew Lehto (1995), Performance of a logging truck with a central tire inflation system , U.S. Dept. of Agriculture ^ Karl F. Wenger (1984), Forestry handbook , Wiley-IEEE, pp.

550– 553, ISBN 978-0-471-06227-1 ^ TN Dowling (2010), An Analysis of Log Truck Turn Times at Harvest Sites and Mill Facilities , hdl : 10919/32156 ^ M. Bendz; J. McNally; C. Silversides (1974), Logging and log transport in tropical high forest , ISBN 978-92-5-100487-6 External links [ edit ] Log Truck — the site of New Zealand's Log Transport Safety Council The Washington Log Trucking Industry: Costs and Safety Analysis Transport Canada regulations Transport Alberta regulations v t e Forestry tools and equipment Tree planting , afforestation Caulk boots Hoedad (hoedag) Groasis Waterboxx Mattock Pottiputki Root trainer Seed trap Tree planting bar (dibble bar) Tree shelter (Tuley tube) Tree spade Mensuration 3D scanner Angle gauge Biltmore stick Chain Cruising rod Diameter tape Hemispherical photography Inclinometer Increment borer Rangefinder laser Microtome Relascope Tree caliper Wedge prism Fire suppression Aerial firefighting DC-10 UAVs Driptorch Fire flapper Fire rake Fire retardant Helitack McLeod (rakehoe) Pulaski Axes Billhook Broadaxe Brush hook Froe (shake axe) Hatchet Labrys Log splitter Marking axe Splitting maul Tomahawk Saws Bow saw Bucksaw Chainsaw safety clothing safety features Crosscut saw Dragsaw Hacksaw Head saw Lumber edger Polesaw Portable sawmill Resaw Two-man saw Whipsaw Logging Cant hook Feller buncher Forwarder Go-devil Harvester Helicopter Log truck Lombard Steam Log Hauler Peavey Pickaroon Pike pole Skid cone Skidder Washington Winch Steam donkey Yarder swing Other Denailer Firewood processor Forest railway Forestry mulcher Hand compass Hand hook Hydraulic debarker Log house moulder Log pond Log flume Machete Stump grinder Chainsaw mill Tree tyer Tsakat Whoopie sling Wood-drying kiln Woodchipper Categories tools equipment Commons tools equipment WikiProject Forestry Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Logging_truck&oldid=1285264625 " Categories : Logging Trucks Forestry equipment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 17:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Logging truck 12 languages Add topic

