Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 The problem of definition 3 Types of irony 4 Another typology Toggle Another typology subsection 4.1 Three grades of irony 4.2 Four modes of irony 5 The rhetorical dimension Toggle The rhetorical dimension subsection 5.1 Relation to sarcasm 6 General irony, or "irony as a way of life" Toggle General irony, or "irony as a way of life" subsection 6.1 Friedrich Schlegel 6.1.1 G. W. F. Hegel's interpretation 6.2 Søren Kierkegaard 7 Postmodernism 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Irony 72 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Literary and rhetorical device or general attitude towards life "Ironic" redirects here. For other uses, see Irony (disambiguation) .

Irony is the juxtaposition of what, on the surface, appears to be the case with what is actually or expected to be the case. Originally a rhetorical device and literary technique , irony has also come to assume a metaphysical significance with implications for ones attitude towards life.

The concept originated in ancient Greece , where it described a dramatic character who pretended to be less intelligent than he actually was in order to outwit boastful opponents. Over time, irony evolved from denoting a form of deception to, more liberally, describing the deliberate use of language to mean the opposite of what it says for a rhetorical effect intended to be recognized by the audience.

Due to its double-sided nature, irony is a powerful tool for social bonding among those who share an understanding. For the same reason, it is also a source of division, sorting people into insiders and outsiders depending upon whether they are able to see the irony.

In the nineteenth-century, philosophers began to expand the rhetorical concept of irony into a broader philosophical conception of the human condition itself. For instance, Friedrich Schlegel saw irony as an expression of always striving toward truth and meaning without ever being able to fully grasp them.

Søren Kierkegaard maintained that ironic awareness of our limitations and uncertainties is necessary to create a space for authentic human existence and ethical choice.

Etymology Socrates ( c.

470–399 BCE) has been central to discussions of irony from his time into the present (copy of bronze head by Lysippus in the Louvre ).

Irony comes from the Greek eironeia and dates back to the 5th century BCE. This term itself was coined in reference to a stock-character from Old Comedy (such as that of Aristophanes ) known as the eiron , who dissimulates and affects less intelligence than he has—and so ultimately triumphs over his opposite, the alazon , a vain-glorious braggart.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Although initially synonymous with lying, in Plato 's depiction of Socrates , eironeia came to acquire a new sense of "an intended simulation which the audience or hearer was meant to recognise".

[ 4 ] More simply put, it came to acquire the general definition, "the expression of one's meaning by using language that normally signifies the opposite, typically for humorous or emphatic effect".

[ 5 ] Until the Renaissance , the Latin ironia was considered a part of rhetoric, usually a species of allegory , along the lines established by Cicero and Quintilian near the beginning of the 1st century CE.

[ 6 ] Irony entered the English language as a figure of speech in the 16th century with a meaning similar to the French ironie , itself derived from the Latin.

[ 7 ] Around the end of the 18th century, irony takes on another sense, primarily credited to Friedrich Schlegel and other participants in what came to be known as early German Romanticism . They advance a concept of irony that is not a mere "artistic playfulness", but a "conscious form of literary creation", typically involving the "consistent alternation of affirmation and negation".

[ 8 ] No longer just a rhetorical device, on their conception, it refers to an entire metaphysical stance on the world.

[ 9 ] The problem of definition It is commonplace to begin a study of irony with the acknowledgement that the term quite simply eludes any single definition.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Philosopher Richard J. Bernstein opens his Ironic Life with the observation that a survey of the literature on irony leaves the reader with the " dominant impression" that the authors are simply "talking about different subjects".

[ 13 ] In popular culture, the 1996 song "Ironic" by Alanis Morissette is sometimes cited as evidence that the word no longer has any specific meaning.

[ 14 ] In the 1906 The King's English , Henry Watson Fowler writes, "any definition of irony—though hundreds might be given, and very few of them would be accepted—must include this, that the surface meaning and the underlying meaning of what is said are not the same." A consequence of this, he observes, is that an analysis of irony requires the concept of a double audience "consisting of one party that hearing shall hear & shall not understand, & another party that, when more is meant than meets the ear, is aware both of that more & of the outsiders' incomprehension".

[ 15 ] From this basic feature, literary theorist Douglas C. Muecke identifies three characteristics of verbal irony: Irony depends on a double-layered or two-story phenomenon for success: "At the lower level is the situation either as it appears to the victim of irony (where there is a victim) or as it is deceptively presented by the ironist." The upper level is the situation as it appears to the reader or the ironist.

[ 16 ] The ironist exploits a contradiction, incongruity, or incompatibility between the two levels.

Irony plays upon the innocence of a character or victim: "Either a victim is confidently unaware of the very possibility of there being an upper level or point of view that invalidates his own, or an ironist pretends not to be aware of it".

[ 17 ] According to Wayne Booth , this uneven double-character of irony makes it a rhetorically complex phenomenon. Admired by some and feared by others, it has the power to tighten social bonds, but also to exacerbate divisions.

[ 18 ] Types of irony A general example of situational irony: the clause "nothing is written in stone" is, in fact, written in stone.

How best to organize irony into distinct types is almost as controversial as how best to define it. There have been many proposals, generally relying on the same cluster of types; still, there is little agreement as to how to organize the types and what if any hierarchical arrangements might exist. Nevertheless, academic reference volumes standardly include at least all four of verbal irony , dramatic irony , cosmic irony , and Romantic irony as major types.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] The latter three types are sometimes contrasted with verbal irony as forms of situational irony , that is, irony in which there is no ironist; so, instead of " he is being ironical " one would instead say " it is ironical that ".

[ 23 ] [ 9 ] Verbal irony is "a statement in which the meaning that a speaker employs is sharply different from the meaning that is ostensibly expressed".

[ 1 ] Moreover, it is produced intentionally by the speaker, rather than being a literary construct, for instance, or the result of forces outside of their control.

[ 19 ] Samuel Johnson gives as an example the sentence, " Bolingbroke was a holy man" (he was anything but).

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Verbal irony is sometimes also considered to encompass various other literary devices such as hyperbole and its opposite, litotes , conscious naïveté, and others.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Dramatic irony provides the audience with information of which characters are unaware, thereby placing the audience in a position of advantage to recognize their words and actions as counter-productive or opposed to what their situation actually requires.

[ 28 ] Three stages may be distinguished—installation, exploitation, and resolution (often also called preparation, suspension, and resolution)—producing dramatic conflict in what one character relies or appears to rely upon, the contrary of which is known by observers (especially the audience, sometimes to other characters within the drama) to be true.

[ 29 ] Tragic irony is a specific type of dramatic irony.

[ 30 ] Cosmic irony , sometimes also called the irony of fate , presents agents as always ultimately thwarted by forces beyond human control. It is strongly associated with the works of Thomas Hardy .

[ 28 ] [ 30 ] This form of irony is also given metaphysical significance in the work of Søren Kierkegaard , among other philosophers.

[ 8 ] Romantic irony is closely related to cosmic irony, and sometimes the two terms are treated interchangeably.

[ 9 ] Romantic irony is distinct, however, in that it is the author who assumes the role of the cosmic force. The narrator in Tristram Shandy is one early example.

[ 31 ] The term is closely associated with Friedrich Schlegel and the early German Romantics , and in their hands it assumed a metaphysical significance similar to cosmic irony in the hands of Kierkegaard.

[ 9 ] It was also of central importance to the literary theory advanced by New Criticism in mid-20th century.

[ 31 ] [ 27 ] Another typology Building upon the double-level structure of irony, self-described "ironologist" D. C. Muecke proposes another, complementary way in which we may typify, and so better understand, ironic phenomena. What he proposes is a dual distinction between and among three grades and four modes of ironic utterance.

[ 32 ] Three grades of irony Grades of irony are distinguished "according to the degree to which the real meaning is concealed". Muecke names them overt , covert , and private : [ 33 ] In overt irony , the true meaning is clearly apparent to both parties, and the only thing that makes the utterance ironic is the "blatancy" of the "contradiction or incongruity". Those instances of sarcasm that may be classified as ironic are overt. Muecke notes that this form of irony has a short half-life; what is obvious to everyone quickly loses its rhetorical effect with repetition.

[ 33 ] Covert irony is "intended not to be seen but detected". The ironist feigns ignorance to achieve the intended effect, and so there is a real danger that it simply goes by unnoticed. This means that a comparatively larger rhetorical context is in play. This may involve, for instance, assumptions about prior knowledge, the ability of someone to detect an incongruity between what is being said and the manner in which it is said, or the perspicuity of the audience in spotting an internal contradiction in the content of the message.

[ 34 ] Private irony is not intended to be perceived at all. It is entirely for the internal satisfaction of the ironist. Muecke cites as an example Mr. Bennet from Pride and Prejudice , who "enjoys seeing his wife or Mr Collins take his remarks at face value; that is to say, he enjoys the irony of their being impervious to irony".

[ 35 ] Four modes of irony Muecke's typology of modes are distinguished "according to the kind of relationship between the ironist and the irony". He calls these impersonal irony , self-disparaging irony , ingénue irony , and dramatized irony : [ 33 ] Impersonal irony is distinguished by deadpan blankness of the ironist, a sort of affected graveness or poker-face.

[ 36 ] It is associated with 'dry humor' quite generally, but also encompasses more specific ironic postures such as 'pretend agreement with the ironic victim', 'false ignorance', 'understatement', 'overstatement', and many other familiar forms of ironic utterance.

[ 37 ] Self-disparaging irony is distinguished by the introduction of the personality of the ironist, often with a somewhat performative dimension. This, however, is intended to be transparent, and is done in the service of directing irony against another object. For instance, when Socrates laments his misfortune of having a poor memory, the object of his irony is the overly long speech made by the fictionalized Protagoras in Plato's dialogue ; his memory, we are to understand, is perfectly fine.

[ 38 ] Ingénue irony is distinguished by an assumed ignorance that is intended to be convincing. The canonical example is The Emperor's New Clothes . Another example is the Fool in King Lear . Muecke writes, "the effectiveness of this kind of irony comes from its economy of means: mere common sense or even simple innocence or ignorance may suffice" to break through the targeted hypocrisy or foolishness of received ideas.

[ 39 ] Dramatized irony is the simple presentation of ironic situations for the enjoyment of an audience. The ironist remains out of sight. The novels of Gustave Flaubert are among the many literary examples of this technique. Muecke notes an increase in this type of irony beginning in the latter half of the eighteenth century when, he says, "irony began to be attended to for its intrinsic interest and delight".

[ 40 ] In any of these four modes, irony may be used to emphasize a point, to satirically undermine a position, or to heuristically lead one's audience to a deeper understanding.

[ 41 ] The rhetorical dimension Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e To consider irony from a rhetorical perspective means to consider it as an act of communication.

[ 42 ] In A Rhetoric of Irony , Wayne C. Booth seeks to answer the question of "how we manage to share ironies and why we so often do not".

[ 18 ] Because irony involves expressing something in a way contrary to literal meaning, it always involves a kind of "translation" on the part of the audience.

[ 43 ] Booth identifies three principal kinds of agreement upon which the successful translation of irony depends: common mastery of language, shared cultural values, and (for artistic ironies) a common experience of genre.

[ 44 ] A consequence of this element of in-group membership is that there is more at stake in whether one grasps an ironic utterance than there is in whether one grasps an utterance presented straight. As he puts it, the use of irony is An aggressively intellectual exercise that fuses fact and value, requiring us to construct alternative hierarchies and choose among them; [it] demands that we look down on other men's follies or sins; floods us with emotion-charged value judgments which claim to be backed by the mind; accuses other men not only of wrong beliefs but of being wrong at their very foundations and blind to what these foundations imply[.] [ 45 ] This is why, when we misunderstand an intended ironic utterance, we often feel more embarrassed about our failure to recognize the incongruity than we typically do when we simply misunderstand a statement of fact.

[ 46 ] When one's deepest beliefs are at issue, so too, often, is one's pride.

[ 45 ] Nevertheless, even as it excludes its victims, irony also has the power to build and strengthen the community of those who do understand and appreciate.

[ 47 ] Relation to sarcasm Humor psychologist Rod A. Martin distinguishes the basic definition of irony ("the literal meaning is opposite to the intended") from sarcasm , which is an "aggressive humor that pokes fun".

[ 48 ] Similarly, psychology researchers Christopher J. Lee and Albert N. Katz find that ridicule is an important aspect of sarcasm, but not of verbal irony in general.

[ 49 ] This narrower connotation of disparagement associated with sarcasm is further supported by its etymology: where eiron refers to a dissembler, the verb sarkazein means "to tear flesh [like a dog]".

[ 28 ] [ 50 ] In spite of these differences, linguist Geoffrey Nunberg observes sarcasm replacing the "linguistic terrain" formerly held by verbal irony as early as 2000.

[ 51 ] In everyday usage, the term irony is sometimes more narrowly reserved for situational irony.

[ 50 ] General irony, or "irony as a way of life" Part of a series on Socrates " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Gadfly Trial of Socrates Eponymous concepts Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic irony Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic problem Socratic questioning Category v t e Typically irony is used, as described above, with respect to some specific act or situation. In more philosophical contexts, however, the term is sometimes assigned a more general significance, in which it is used to describe an entire way of life or a universal truth about the human situation. Even Booth, whose interest is expressly rhetorical, notes that the word "irony" tends to attach to "a type of character — Aristophanes' foxy eirons , Plato's disconcerting Socrates — rather than to any one device".

[ 52 ] In these contexts, what is expressed rhetorically by cosmic irony is ascribed existential or metaphysical significance. As Muecke puts it, such irony is that of "life itself or any general aspect of life seen as fundamentally and inescapably an ironic state of affairs.  No longer is it a case of isolated victims .... we are all victims of impossible situations".

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] This usage has its origins primarily in the work of Friedrich Schlegel and other early 19th-century German Romantics and in Søren Kierkegaard 's analysis of Socrates in The Concept of Irony .

[ 55 ] [ 54 ] Friedrich Schlegel Friedrich Schlegel was at the forefront of the intellectual movement that has come to be known as Frühromantik , or early German Romanticism, situated narrowly between 1797 and 1801.

[ 56 ] For Schlegel, the "romantic imperative" (a rejoinder to Immanuel Kant 's " categorical imperative ") is to break down the distinction between art and life with the creation of a "new mythology" for the modern age.

[ 57 ] In particular, Schlegel was responding to what he took to be the failure of the foundationalist enterprise, exemplified for him by the philosophy of Johann Gottlieb Fichte .

[ 58 ] Irony is a response to the apparent epistemic uncertainties of anti-foundationalism. In the words of scholar Frederick C. Beiser , Schlegel presents irony as consisting in "the recognition that, even though we cannot attain truth, we still must forever strive toward it, because only then do we approach it." His model is Socrates, who " knew that he knew nothing ", yet never ceased in his pursuit of truth and virtue.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] According to Schlegel, instead of resting upon a single foundation, "the individual parts of a successful synthesis formation support and negate each other reciprocally".

[ 61 ] Although Schlegel frequently does describe the Romantic project with a literary vocabulary, his use of the term "poetry"  ( Poesie ) is non-standard. Instead, he goes back to the broader sense of the original Greek poiētikós , which refers to any kind of making.

[ 62 ] As Beiser puts it, "Schlegel intentionally explodes the narrow literary meaning of Poesie by explicitly identifying the poetic with the creative power in human beings, and indeed with the productive principle in nature itself." Poetry in the restricted literary sense is its highest form, but in no way its only form.

[ 63 ] According to Schlegel, irony captures the human situation of always striving towards, but never completely possessing, what is infinite or true.

[ 64 ] G. W. F. Hegel's interpretation This presentation of Schlegel's account of irony is at odds with many 20th-century interpretations, which, neglecting the larger historical context, have been predominately postmodern .

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] These readings overstate the irrational dimension of early Romantic thought at the expense of its rational commitments—precisely the dilemma irony is introduced to resolve.

[ 67 ] Already in Schlegel's own day, G. W. F. Hegel was unfavorably contrasting Romantic irony with that of Socrates. On Hegel's reading, Socratic irony partially anticipates his own dialectical approach to philosophy. Romantic irony, by contrast, Hegel alleges to be fundamentally trivializing and opposed to all seriousness about what is of substantial interest.

[ 68 ] According to Rüdiger Bubner , however, Hegel's "misunderstanding" of Schlegel's concept of irony is "total" in its denunciation of a figure actually intended to preserve "our openness to a systematic philosophy".

[ 69 ] Yet, it is Hegel's interpretation that would be taken up and amplified by Kierkegaard , who further extends the critique to Socrates himself.

[ 70 ] Søren Kierkegaard Unfinished Sketch of Søren Kierkegaard by Niels Christian Kierkegaard , Royal Library, Denmark , c. 1840 Thesis VIII of the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard's dissertation, The Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates , states that "irony as infinite and absolute negativity is the lightest and the weakest form of subjectivity".

[ 71 ] Although this terminology is Hegelian in origin, Kierkegaard employs it with a somewhat different meaning. Richard J. Bernstein elaborates: It is infinite because it is directed not against this or that particular existing entity, but against the entire given actuality at a certain time. It is thoroughly negative because it is incapable of offering any positive alternative. Nothing positive emerges out of this negativity. And it is absolute because Socrates refuses to cheat.

[ 72 ] In this way, contrary to traditional accounts, Kierkegaard portrays Socrates as genuinely ignorant. According to Kierkegaard, Socrates is the embodiment of an ironic negativity that dismantles others' illusory knowledge without offering any positive replacement.

[ 73 ] Almost all of Kierkegaard's post-dissertation publications were written under a variety of pseudonyms. Scholar K. Brian Söderquist argues that these fictive authors should be viewed as explorations of the existential challenges posed by such an ironic, poetic self-consciousness. Their awareness of their own unlimited powers of self-interpretation prevents them from fully committing to any single self-narrative, and this leaves them trapped in an entirely negative mode of uncertainty.

[ 74 ] Nevertheless, seemingly against this, Thesis XV of the dissertation states that "Just as philosophy begins with doubt, so also a life that may be called human begins with irony".

[ 71 ] Bernstein writes that the emphasis here must be on begins .

[ 72 ] Irony is not itself an authentic mode of life, but it is a precondition for attaining such a life. Although pure irony is self-destructive, it generates a space in which it becomes possible to reengage with the world in a genuine mode of ethical passion .

[ 75 ] For Kierkegaard himself, this took the form of religious inwardness. What is crucial, however, is just to in some way move beyond the purely (or merely) ironic. Irony is what creates the space in which we can learn and meaningfully choose how to live a life worthy ( vita digna [ 76 ] ) of being called human.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Postmodernism Postmodern irony rejects the possibility of an authoritative viewpoint such as could discern true meaning behind contradictory appearances. Instead, it operates within a framework where all positions are understood as contextual and contingent. This, however, produces a contradiction: the postmodern theorist who declares the end of all master-narratives , just by making such a declaration, claims an authoritative stance. Rather than resolving this contradiction, postmodern irony embraces it as fundamental to the human condition of speech and meaning-making, in which every act of communication adopts a position necessarily of a limited and constructed nature.

[ 79 ] For instance, the neopragmatist philosopher Richard Rorty advances a concept of irony centered on the "liberal ironist", whom he contrasts with "the metaphysician ". The ironist, according to this theory, is someone who maintains radical doubts about their own "final vocabulary" (the fundamental concepts used to justify their beliefs and actions), recognizes that rational argument cannot resolve these doubts, and doesn't believe their vocabulary is closer to ultimate reality than others. This postmodern position is a consequence of acknowledging the historical contingency and plurality of vocabularies, where no neutral standards exist for choosing definitively between different ways of describing the world. On this theory, irony functions as both a philosophical method and way of life that disrupts entrenched vocabularies through redescription, metaphor, and narrative rather than traditional argument.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] See also Accismus Apophasis Auto-antonym Hypocrisy Ironism Irony punctuation Meta-communication Oxymoron Paradox Post-irony References ^ a b Abrams & Harpham 2008 , p. 165.

^ Preminger & Brogan 1993 , p. 633.

^ Frye 1990 , p. 172.

^ Colebrook 2004 , p. 6.

^ OED staff 2016 , sense 1.a.

^ Colebrook 2004 , p. 7.

^ OED staff 2016 , etymology.

^ a b Preminger & Brogan 1993 , p. 634.

^ a b c d Cuddon 2013 , p. 372.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 14–15.

^ Booth 1974 , pp. ix–x.

^ Colebrook 2004 , p. 1.

^ Bernstein 2016 , p. 1.

^ Peterson .

^ Fowler 1994 .

^ Muecke 2023 , p. 19.

^ Muecke 2023 , p. 20.

^ a b Booth 1974 , p. ix.

^ a b Preminger & Brogan 1993 , pp. 633–35.

^ Abrams & Harpham 2008 , pp. 165–68.

^ Hirsch 2014 , pp. 315–17.

^ Cuddon 2013 , pp. 371–73.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 42, 99.

^ Hirsch 2014 , p. 315.

^ Johnson 2021 .

^ Hirsch 2014 , pp. 315–16.

^ a b Preminger & Brogan 1993 , p. 635.

^ a b c Abrams & Harpham 2008 , p. 167.

^ Stanton 1956 , pp. 420–26.

^ a b Hirsch 2014 , p. 316.

^ a b Abrams & Harpham 2008 , p. 168.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 61–63.

^ a b c Muecke 2023 , pp. 52–53.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 56–59.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 59–60.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 64–65.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 67–86.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 87–88.

^ Muecke 2023 , p. 91.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 91–92.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 232–33.

^ Booth 1974 , p. 7.

^ Booth 1974 , p. 33.

^ Booth 1974 , p. 100.

^ a b Booth 1974 , p. 44.

^ Booth 1974 , pp. xi, 1.

^ Booth 1974 , p. 28.

^ Martin & Ford 2018 , p. 13.

^ Lee & Katz 1998 .

^ a b Kreuz 2020 , Verbal Irony and Sarcasm.

^ Kreuz 2020 , Skunked Terms?.

^ Booth 1974 , pp. 138–39.

^ Muecke 2023 , p. 120.

^ a b Bernstein 2016 , pp. 1–13.

^ Muecke 2023 , pp. 119–22.

^ Beiser 2006 , pp. 6–7.

^ Beiser 2006 , p. 19.

^ Beiser 2006 , pp. 107–08, 130.

^ Beiser 2006 , pp. 128–29.

^ Bubner 2003 , pp. 207–08.

^ Frank 2004 , p. 202.

^ Beiser 2006 , p. 16.

^ Beiser 2006 , p. 15.

^ Frank 2004 , p. 218.

^ Beiser 2006 , pp. 1–5.

^ Rush 2016 , pp. 2–3.

^ Beiser 2006 , p. 4.

^ Inwood 1992 , pp. 146–50.

^ Bubner 2003 , p. 213.

^ Bubner 2003 , p. 215.

^ a b Kierkegaard 1989 , p. 6.

^ a b Bernstein 2016 , p. 89.

^ Söderquist 2013 , pp. 252–53.

^ Söderquist 2013 , p. 354.

^ Bernstein 2016 , p. 94.

^ Kierkegaard 1989 , p. 5.

^ Bernstein 2016 , pp. 98–99.

^ Söderquist 2013 , pp. 356–60.

^ Colebrook 2004 , pp. 161–63.

^ Bernstein 2016 , pp. 31–35.

^ Ramberg & Dieleman 2024 , §3.3, Liberalism and Irony.

Bibliography Abrams, M. H.; Harpham, Geoffrey (2008).

A Glossary of Literary Terms . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-1413033908 .

Beiser, Frederick C. (2006).

The Romantic Imperative: The Concept of Early German Romanticism . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674019805 .

Bernstein, Richard J. (2016).

Ironic Life . Polity Press.

ISBN 978-1509505722 .

Booth, Wayne C. (1974).

A Rhetoric of Irony . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226065533 .

Bubner, Rudiger (2003).

The Innovations of Idealism . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521662628 .

Colebrook, Claire (2004).

Irony . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0415251334 .

Cuddon, J. A. (2013).

A Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary Theory . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9781444333275 .

Fowler, Henry Watson (1994).

A Dictionary of Modern English Usage . Wordsworth Editions.

ISBN 1-85326-318-4 .

Frank, Manfred (2004).

The Philosophical Foundations of Early German Romanticism . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0791459485 .

Frye, Northrop (1990).

Anatomy of criticism: 4 essays . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691012988 .

Hirsch, Edward (2014).

A Poet's Glossary . Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-0151011957 .

Inwood, Michael (1992).

A Hegel Dictionary . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0631175339 .

Johnson, Samuel (2021).

"I'rony n.s." A Dictionary of the English Language (1755, 1773) . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

Kierkegaard, Søren (1989).

The Concept of Irony With Continual Reference to Socrates . Translated by Howard V. Hong and Edna H. Hong. Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691020723 .

Kreuz, Roger (2020).

Irony and Sarcasm (eBook ed.). MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262538268 .

Lee, Christopher J.; Katz, Albert N. (1998). "The Differential Role of Ridicule in Sarcasm and Irony".

Metaphor and Symbol .

13 : 1– 15.

doi : 10.1207/s15327868ms1301_1 .

Martin, Rod A.; Ford, Thomas (2018).

The Psychology of Humor: An Integrative Approach (2nd ed.). Academic Press.

Muecke, D. C. (2023).

The Compass of Irony . Taylor & Francis Limited.

ISBN 978-0367655259 .

OED staff (2016).

"Irony, n." Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press . Retrieved Jan 23, 2016 .

Peterson, Britt.

"Learning to love Alanis Morissette's 'irony' – The Boston Globe" .

bostonglobe.com .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2016 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .

Preminger, Alex; Brogan, Terry V. F. (1993).

The New Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics . MJF Books.

ISBN 978-1567311525 .

Ramberg, Bjørn; Dieleman, Susan (2024). "Richard Rorty". In Edward N. Zalta & Uri Nodelman (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2024 Edition) .

Rush, Fred (2016).

Irony and Idealism: Rereading Schlegel, Hegel and Kierkegaard . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199688227 .

Söderquist, K. Brian (2013). "Irony". In Lippitt, John; Pattison, George (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Kierkegaard . OUP Oxford. pp.

344– 64.

ISBN 978-0199601301 .

Stanton, R (1956). "Dramatic Irony in Hawthorne's Romances".

Modern Language Notes .

71 (6). Johns Hopkins University Press: 420– 26.

doi : 10.2307/3043161 .

JSTOR 3043161 .

v t e Comedy Topics Comedian Comedic device Comedy festival Comedy troupe Comic timing Farce Humorist Humour Impersonator Impressionist Irony Joke Off-color humor Ribaldry Sophomoric humor Toilet humour Prank call Punch line Satire Visual gag Wit Word play Film Country American British French Italian Genre Action Fantasy Horror Mockumentary Parody Remarriage Romance Science fiction Screwball Sex Italian Mexican Silent Slapstick Stoner Thriller Theatre Country Europe Ancient Greek comedy Comédie-Française Comédie-Italienne Corral de comedias Theatre of ancient Rome Asia China Xiangsheng Hong Kong Mo lei tau Indonesia Lenong Ludruk Japan Kyōgen Manzai Owarai Rakugo Sarugaku Korea Genre Boulevard theatre Comedy drama Comedy of humours Comedy of manners Comedy of menace Commedia dell'arte Double act Improvisational Macchietta One-person show Pantomime Harlequinade Restoration comedy Sentimental comedy Comédie larmoyante Shadow play Shakespearean comedy Sketch comedy Spex Stand-up comedy Street theatre Theatre of the absurd Tragicomedy Vaudeville Music and dance Ballad opera Cabaret Café-chantant Café-théâtre Comédie-ballet Comedy club Light music Music hall Musical theatre Opéra bouffe Opéra bouffon Opera buffa Opéra comique Operetta Revue Media Music Album Rock Hip hop Parody Novelty Musical comedians Novel Radio Television Mockumentary Roast Sitcom Animated sitcom Black sitcom Teen sitcom Subgenres Alternative Black Blue Character Christian Clown Cringe Deadpan Documentary High / low Insult Observational Physical Prop Self-referential Shock Sick Slapstick Topics Surreal Ventriloquism Zombie Category Portal v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude v t e Figures of speech Schemes Alliteration Anadiplosis Anaphora Antimetabole Antithesis Aposiopesis Assonance Asyndeton Chiasmus Climax Anti Consonance Epanadiplosis Epiphrase Epistrophe Epizeuxis Hendiadys Homeoteleuton Hypallage Hyperbaton Hysteron proteron Isocolon Parallelism Polyptoton Polysyndeton Spoonerism Symploce Tmesis Zeugma Tropes Allegory Allusion Antiphrasis Antonomasia Aphorism Apostrophe Catachresis Ecphonesis Ekphrasis Epanorthosis Hyperbole Adynaton Dysphemism Euphemism Meiosis Innuendo Irony Apophasis Sarcasm Litotes Metaphor Metonymy Oxymoron Onomatopoeia Personification Pleonasm Procatalepsis Pun Antanaclasis Rhetorical question Simile Synecdoche Tautology Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Irony&oldid=1303913740 " Categories : Irony Comedy Narrative techniques Humour Rhetorical techniques Theme Tropes by type Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from January 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 20:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Irony 72 languages Add topic

