Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Advantages 2 Disadvantages 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Aerosol impaction Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method for removing particles in a gas This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Aerosol impaction" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the physics of aerosols , aerosol impaction is the process in which particles are removed from an air stream by forcing the gases to make a sharp bend.  Particles above a certain size possess so much momentum that they can not follow the air stream and strike a collection surface, which is available for later analysis of mass and composition. Removal of particles from an air-stream by impaction followed by mass and composition analysis has always been a different approach as to filter sampling, yet has been little utilized for routine analysis because of lack of suitable analytical methods.

Advantages [ edit ] The most clear and important advantage of impaction, as opposed to filtration, is that two key aerosol parameters , size and composition , can be simultaneously established.

[ 1 ] There are many advantages of impaction as a sampling method.

[ citation needed ] For two of the most common configurations, an orifice and an infinite slot , theoretical predictions can be made and empirically verified that give the cuts point and shape of the collection efficiency of an impaction stage. The air stream moves over the sample, not through it as in filtration, reducing desiccation and chemical transformations of the collected sample. Almost complete control of the type of surface on which the particles are impacted, as opposed to the limited choice of filter types. By varying the speed of the air stream and the sharpness of the bend, one can separate particles into numerous size classifications while retaining a sample for analysis.

Disadvantages [ edit ] There are also several disadvantages to impaction as a sampling method.

[ citation needed ] Only a limited amount of material is available for mass and compositional analysis, as one can not collect more than a few monolayers of particles before particle bounce and mis-sizing are a potential problem.

See also [ edit ] Deposition (aerosol physics) Cascade impactor Aerodynamic Aerosol Classifier References [ edit ] ^ Inertial Impaction, Size and Time Archived April 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine v t e Aerosol terminology Aerosol types Bioaerosol Indoor Cloud Dust Mist Fog Fume Haze Nanoparticle Particle Particulates Smog Smoke Spray Aerosol terms Aerosol impaction Agglomerate Primary particle Flocculate Primary aerosol Secondary aerosol Deposition Dispersity Monodisperse Polydisperse Aerosol measurement Particle counters Condensation particle counter Laser particle counter Optical particle counter Particle sizers Scanning electrical mobility spectrometer Diffusion battery Inertial classifier Time-of-flight Time-of-flight mass spectrometer Time-of-flight particle sizer Cascade impactors Low pressure impactor Microorifice imapctor Andersen impactor Combination Scanning mobility particle sizer Microscopy Optical microscope Scanning electron microscope Transmission electron microscope Category Aerosol measurement Commons Aerosol measurement Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aerosol_impaction&oldid=1253636952 " Categories : Particulates Aerosols Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2009 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 This page was last edited on 27 October 2024, at 02:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aerosol impaction Add languages Add topic

