Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Major existential feminists 2 Critiques Toggle Critiques subsection 2.1 Simone de Beauvoir 2.2 Critiques against sexism 2.3 Extension to gender and race studies 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Feminist existentialism 13 languages العربية Català Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Português Русский Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feminist movement Part of a series on Feminist philosophy Major works A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) The Subjection of Women (1869) The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884) The Second Sex (1949) The Feminine Mystique (1963) Sexual Politics (1969) The Dialectic of Sex (1970) Speculum of the Other Woman (1974) This Sex Which is Not One (1977) Gyn/Ecology (1978) Throwing Like a Girl (1980) In a Different Voice (1982) The Politics of Reality (1983) Women, Race, and Class (1983) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) The Creation of Patriarchy (1986) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) Gender Trouble (1990) Sexual Personae (1990) Black Feminist Thought (1990) Feminism and the Mastery of Nature (1993) Whipping Girl (2007) The Promise of Happiness (2010) Major thinkers Bartky Baier de Beauvoir Bebel Boggs Butler Cixous Cleyre De la Cruz Cobain Collins Daly Davis Démar Dworkin Faust Federici Firestone Fourier Friedan Frye Gamond Goldman Grosz Hanna Haslanger hooks Irigaray Jaggar Kristeva Lerner Lorde Lugones Luxemburg MacKinnon Mama Michel Mill Taylor Mill Millett Nussbaum Paglia Pankhurst Pateman Plumwood Rubin Saadawi Showalter Solanas Spivak Voilquin Whedon Wittig Wollstonecraft Young Zetkin Ideas Feminism analytical epistemology ethics existentialism metaphysics science Gender equality Gender performativity Social construction of gender Care ethics Intersectionality Standpoint theory Journals Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Radical Philosophy Signs Category Feminist philosophy v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminism is a collection of movements aimed at defining, establishing, and defending equal political, economic, and social rights for women.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Existentialism is a philosophical and cultural movement which holds that the starting point of philosophical thinking must be the individual and the experiences of the individual, that moral thinking and scientific thinking together are not sufficient for understanding all of human existence, and, therefore, that a further set of categories, governed by the norm of authenticity , is necessary to understand human existence.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ( Authenticity , in the context of existentialism, is to recognize the responsibility we have for our existence.

[ 6 ] )  This philosophy analyzes relationships between the individual and things, or other human beings, and how they limit or condition choice.

[ 7 ] Existentialist feminists emphasize concepts such as freedom, interpersonal relationships, and the experience of living as a human body.

[ 8 ] They value the capacity for radical change, but recognize that factors such as self-deception and the anxiety caused by the possibility of change can limit it. Many are dedicated to exposing and undermining socially imposed gender roles and cultural constructs limiting women's self-determination , and criticize post-structuralist feminists who deny the intrinsic freedom of individual women.

[ 9 ] A woman who makes considered choices regarding her way of life and suffers the anxiety associated with that freedom, isolation, or nonconformity, yet remains free, demonstrates the tenets of existentialism.

[ 10 ] The novels of Kate Chopin , Doris Lessing , Joan Didion , Margaret Atwood , and Margaret Drabble include such existential heroines.

Major existential feminists [ edit ] Simone de Beauvoir was a renowned existentialist and one of the principal founders of second-wave feminism .

[ 8 ] Beauvoir examined women's subordinate role as the 'Other', patriarchally forced into immanence [ 11 ] in her book, The Second Sex , which some claim to be the culmination of her existential ethics.

[ 12 ] The book includes the famous line, "One is not born but becomes a woman," introducing what has come to be called the sex-gender distinction. Beauvoir's The Second Sex provided the vocabulary for analyzing the social constructions of femininity and the structure for critiquing those constructions, which was used as a liberating tool by attending to the ways in which patriarchal structures used sexual difference to deprive women of the intrinsic freedom of their "can do" bodies.

[ 13 ] Some say Beauvoir is farther reaching than Sartre [ 14 ] despite often being overlooked in many comprehensive works about existentialist feminism.

[ 12 ] Jean-Paul Sartre was a French philosopher, existentialist and phenomenologist who contributed greatly to existential feminism through works like Existential Psychoanalysis.

[ 15 ] In this work, Sartre claims that the individual is the intersection of universal schemata and he rejects the idea of a pure individual.

[ 15 ] Maurice Merleau-Ponty was another French philosopher who contributed many existential works to the field. Many following theorists, such as Judith Butler , critiqued his methods, including his sexual ideology.

[ 8 ] Other theorists omit him, viewing him as a "Sartre knock-off".

[ 12 ] Judith Butler is a modern feminist philosopher who has been influenced by Simone de Beauvoir's work in The Second Sex and The Ethics of Ambiguity .

[ 16 ] A common theme in Butler's writing is that of vulnerability, and how one is vulnerable to society itself. This vulnerability is a core part of the human experience, according to Butler.

Critiques [ edit ] Simone de Beauvoir [ edit ] Some critiques of the field are of Beauvoir and her portrayal of existentialist feminism specifically. Gwendolyn Dolske critiques that Beauvoir is inconsistent between her works, noting that the women in Beauvoir's fictional works resign to cultural norms rather than conquering their Otherness.

[ 17 ] Margaret A. Simons critiques Beauvoir's inability to transfer her work in theory into praxis.

[ 11 ] Critiques against sexism [ edit ] However, most of the critiques are of the limitations of the field overall. Margery Collins and Christine Pierce fault Sartre's limited anti-essentialism for his sexist views [ 8 ] which Hazel Barnes then refutes.

[ 8 ] Maryellen MacGuigan criticizes Ortega's view of women's inferiority, Julia Maria's sexuate condition, and Frederick Buyendijk's narrative of women's experience.

[ 8 ] Extension to gender and race studies [ edit ] Jo-Ann Pilardi outlines the female eroticism in Beauvoir's work [ 8 ] and Julien Murphy compares the gaze or look in Sartre to Adrienne Rich.

[ 8 ] Nancy Potter aligns female incest survivors' experiences with dread and anxiety.

[ 8 ] Janice McLane uses Merleau-Ponty's Concept of flesh to describe self-mutilation.

[ 8 ] Shannon Sullivan criticizes Merleau-Ponty's anonymous body.

[ 8 ] Linda Bell moves Sartre's notion of authenticity from feminist existentialism to feminist ethics.

[ 8 ] T. Denean Sharpley-Whiting uses Fanon's analyses of racist and colonized subjectivities to discuss feminism.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Feminism – Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary" . merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 12 June 2011 .

^ "Definition of feminism noun from Cambridge Dictionary Online: Free English Dictionary and Thesaurus" . dictionary.cambridge.org . Retrieved 12 June 2011 .

^ Mullarkey, John, and Beth Lord (eds.).

The Continuum Companion to Continental Philosophy . London, 2009, p. 309 ^ Stewart, Jon.

Kierkegaard and Existentialism . Farnham, England, 2010, p. ix ^ Crowell, Steven (October 2010).

"Existentialism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2012-04-12 .

^ Varga, Somogy; Guignon, Charles (2016-01-01). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2016 ed.).

^ Abbagnano, Nicole.

"Existentialism (philosophy)" . Britannica Online Encyclopedia . Retrieved 10 October 2011 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Larrabee, Mary Jeanne (2000). Code, Lorraine (ed.).

"Existentialist Feminism" .

Encyclopedia of Feminist Theories : 187–188 .

ISBN 0415132746 .

^ Code, Lorraine (2000).

Encyclopedia of Feminist Theories . London and New York City: Routledge World Reference, Taylor & Francis. p. 266.

ISBN 0415132746 . Retrieved September 27, 2012 .

^ Hiatt, Mary P.

"Existentialism and Feminism" . ERIC: Education Resources Information Center . Retrieved September 27, 2012 .

^ a b Simons, Margaret (1995).

Feminist Interpretations of Simone de Beauvoir . University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. pp.

30– 32.

ISBN 978-0271014128 .

^ a b c Simons, Margaret (1999).

Beauvoir and the Second Sex: Feminism, Race, and the Origins of Existentialism . Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

101– 114.

ISBN 978-0847692569 .

^ Bergoffen, Debra.

"Simone de Beauvoir" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2 December 2011 .

^ Moi, Toril (January 2009). "What Can Literature Do? Simone de Beauvoir as a Literary Theorist".

Publications of the Modern Language Association of America .

124 (1): 189– 198.

doi : 10.1632/pmla.2009.124.1.189 .

JSTOR 25614258 .

S2CID 162313716 .

^ a b Sartre, Jean-Paul (1962).

Existential Psychoanalysis . Translated by Barnes, Hazel. Chicago: Regnery. pp.

19– 152.

^ Durmuş, Deniz (30 July 2022).

"Tracing the Influence of Simone de Beauvoir in Judith Butler's Work" .

Philosophies – via MDPI.

^ Dolske, Gwendolyn (February 2014). "Existential Destruction: de Beauvoir's Fictional Portrayal of Woman's Situation".

Women's Studies .

43 (2): 155– 169.

doi : 10.1080/00497878.2014.863104 .

S2CID 144543548 .

Further reading [ edit ] Joseph Mahon.

Existentialism, Feminism and Simone De Beauvoir .

Palgrave Macmillan. 1997.

v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_existentialism&oldid=1294466314 " Categories : Types of existentialism Feminist movements and ideologies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 21:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist existentialism 13 languages Add topic

