Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Applications 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Chain-linked model 3 languages العربية Македонски Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Model of innovation Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e The chain-linked model or Kline model of innovation was introduced by mechanical engineer Stephen J. Kline in 1985, [ 1 ] and further described by Kline and economist Nathan Rosenberg in 1986.

[ 2 ] The chain-linked model is an attempt to describe complexities in the innovation process. The model is regarded as Kline's most significant contribution.

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] In the chain-linked model, new knowledge is not necessarily the driver for innovation.  Instead, the process begins with the identification of an unfilled market need.  This drives research and design, then redesign and production, and finally marketing, with complex feedback loops between all the stages.  There are also important feedback loops with the organization's and the world's stored base of knowledge, with new basic research conducted or commissioned as necessary, to fill in gaps.

It is often contrasted with the so-called linear model of innovation , [ 4 ] in which basic research leads to applied development, then engineering, then manufacturing, and finally marketing and distribution.

Applications [ edit ] The Kline model was conceived primarily with commercial industrial settings in mind, but has found broad applicability in other settings, for example in military technology development.

[ 5 ] Variations and extensions of the model have been described by a number of investigators.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Actor-network theory Cybernetics Creativity techniques Crowdsourcing Diffusion of innovations Innovation List of emerging technologies New product development Open innovation Participatory design Phase–gate model Pro-innovation bias Product lifecycle Social shaping of technology Strategic foresight Technological change User-centered design User innovation References [ edit ] ^ Kline (1985). Research, Invention, Innovation and Production: Models and Reality, Report INN-1, March 1985, Mechanical Engineering Department, Stanford University.

^ Kline, S.J. & N. Rosenberg (1986). “An overview of innovation.” In R. Landau & N. Rosenberg (eds.), The Positive Sum Strategy: Harnessing Technology for Economic Growth. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, pp. 275–305.

^ "Salisbury, David F., "Memorial for Stephen Kline; engineer, interdisciplinary thinker," news release, Stanford University, October 27, 1997" . Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ Caraça, João,  Bengt-Åke Lundvall, and Sandro Mendonça (2009).  “The changing role of science in the innovation process: From Queen to Cinderella?” Technological Forecasting & Social Change 76, 861–867.

^ Marius Vassiliou, Stan Davis, and Jonathan Agre (2011).  Innovation Patterns in Some Successful C2 Technologies." Proc. 16th International Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium, Quebec, Canada.

^ Kameoka, A., D. Ito, and K. Kobayashi (2001).  “A Cross-Generation Framework for Deriving Next-Generation Innovation Model.”  Change Management and the New Industrial Revolution, IEMC ‘01 Proceedings, Albany, NY.

^ Micaëlli, J., Forest, J., Coatanéa, É. & Medyna, G. (2014). How to improve Kline and Rosenberg's chain-linked model of innovation: building blocks and diagram-based languages. Journal of Innovation Economics & Management, 15,(3), 59-77. doi:10.3917/jie.015.0059.

^ Corning, Peter. Review of Conceptual Foundations for Multidisciplinary Thinking by Stephen Jay Kline, Institute for the Study of Complex Systems, June 2, 2015.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chain-linked_model&oldid=1186588462 " Categories : Business management Control theory Futures techniques Innovation economics Innovation Product management Problem solving skills Transdisciplinarity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 November 2023, at 05:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chain-linked model 3 languages Add topic

