Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Human agency Toggle Human agency subsection 1.1 In philosophy 1.2 In other sciences 1.2.1 In economics 1.2.2 In psychology 1.2.3 In social cybernetics 1.2.4 In political economy 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Agency (philosophy) 12 languages Català Dansk Español Français Bahasa Melayu Português Русский کوردی Suomi Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Capacity of an actor to act in a given environment This article is about the philosophical concept. For the legal concept, see Law of agency . For other uses of the term, see Agency (sociology) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Agency" philosophy – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Agency In different fields Philosophy Psychology Social science Theories Action theory Self-determination theory Belief–desire–intention model Structure and agency Processes Decision-making Goal setting Goal pursuit Planning Individual difference Intentionality Goal orientation Concepts Action Goal ( category ) Intention ( category ) Locus of control Sense of agency Volition Self Self-agency Self-efficacy Self-concept Self-control Social identity theory Free will v t e Agency is the capacity of an actor to act in a given environment. It is independent of the moral dimension, which is called moral agency .

In sociology , an agent is an individual engaging with the social structure . Notably, though, the primacy of social structure vs. individual capacity with regard to persons' actions is debated within sociology. This debate concerns, at least partly, the level of reflexivity an agent may possess.

[ citation needed ] Agency may either be classified as unconscious, involuntary behavior, or purposeful, goal directed activity (intentional action). An agent typically has some sort of immediate awareness of their physical activity and the goals that the activity is aimed at realizing. In 'goal directed action' an agent implements a kind of direct control or guidance over their own behavior.

[ 1 ] Human agency [ edit ] See also: Action (philosophy) Agency is contrasted to objects reacting to natural forces involving only unthinking deterministic processes. In this respect, agency is subtly distinct from the concept of free will , the philosophical doctrine that our choices are not the product of causal chains, but are significantly free or undetermined. Human agency entails the claim that humans do in fact make decisions and enact them on the world.

How humans come to make decisions, by free choice or other processes, is another issue.

The capacity of a human to act as an agent is personal to that human, though considerations of the outcomes flowing from particular acts of human agency for us and others can then be thought to invest a moral component into a given situation wherein an agent has acted, and thus to involve moral agency. If a situation is the consequence of human decision making, persons may be under a duty to apply value judgments to the consequences of their decisions, and held to be responsible for those decisions. Human agency entitles the observer to ask should this have occurred?

in a way that would be nonsensical in circumstances lacking human decisions-makers, for example, the impact of comet Shoemaker–Levy on Jupiter .

In philosophy [ edit ] The philosophical discipline in charge of studying agency is action theory . In certain philosophical traditions (particularly those established by Hegel and Marx ), human agency is a collective, historical dynamic, rather than a function arising out of individual behavior. Hegel's Geist and Marx's universal class are idealist and materialist expressions of this idea of humans treated as social beings, organized to act in concert. There is ongoing debate, philosophically derived in part from the works of Hume , between determinism and indeterminacy .

Structure and agency forms an enduring core debate in sociology. Essentially the same as in the Marxist conception, "agency" refers to the capacity of individuals to act independently and to make their own free choices, based on their will, whereas "structure" refers to those factors (such as social class, but also religion, gender, ethnicity, subculture, etc.) that seem to limit or influence the opportunities that individuals have.

In other sciences [ edit ] Other notions of agency have arisen in the field of economics/management, psychology and social cybernetics: In economics [ edit ] Economics stresses the purposive action of economic agents, who act to advance their subjective well-being given fundamental constraints.  Thus, economic models typically begin with "an agent" maximizing some objective.  In contract theory, economics also addresses the problem of agents who represent another party (the principal) potentially unfaithfully.

In psychology [ edit ] The term of agency used in different fields of psychology with different meaning. It can refer to the ability of recognizing agents or attributing agency to objects based on simple perceptual cues or principles, for instance the principle of rationality, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] which holds that context-sensitive, goal-directed efficient actions are the crucial characteristics of agents . This topic is thoroughly investigated by developmental and comparative psychologists to understand how an observer is able to differentiate agentive entities from inanimate objects, but it can be also related to the term of autonomous intelligent agency used in cybernetics . Agency can also imply the sense of agency , that is the feeling of ownership of control.

Emergent interactive agency defines Bandura's view of agencies, where human agency can be exercised through direct personal agency.

[ 4 ] Bandura formulates his view of agency as a socio-cognitive one, where people are self-organizing , proactive, self-regulating , and engage in self-reflection , and are not just reactive organisms shaped and shepherded by external events. People have the power to influence their own actions to produce certain results. The capacity to exercise control over one’s thought processes, motivation, affect, and action operates through mechanisms of personal agency. Such agencies are emergent and interactive, apply perspectives of social cognition, and make causal contributions to its own motivations and actions using ‘ reciprocal causation ’.

[ 5 ] In social cybernetics [ edit ] Autonomous agency is able to embrace the concepts of both the economic agency and the emergent interactive agency. An autonomous system is self-directed, operating in, and being influenced by, interactive environments. It usually has its own immanent dynamics that impact on the way it interacts. It is also adaptable and (hence viable thus having a durable existence), proactive, self-organizing, self-regulating and so forth, participates in creating its own behaviour, and contributes to its life circumstances through cognitive and cultural functionality. Autonomous agency may also be concerned with the relationship between two or more agencies in a mutual relationship with each other and their environments, with imperatives for an agency's behaviour within an interactive context due to immanent emergent attributes.

[ 6 ] In political economy [ edit ] Human agency refers to the ability to shape one’s life and a few dimensions can be differentiated. Individual agency is reflected in individual choices and the ability to influence one’s life conditions and chances. The individual agency differs strongly within the society across age, gender, income, education, personal health status, position in social networks, and other dimensions. Collective agency refers to situations in which individuals pool their knowledge, skills, and resources, and act in concert to shape their future. Everyday agency refers to consumer and daily choices, and finally strategic agency refers to the capacity to affect the wider system change. Political economy approaches can be used to conceptualize the agency enabling or limiting rule system, which constitutes the “grammar” for social action and that is used by the actors to structure and regulate their transactions with one another in defined situations or spheres of activity.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Action theory (philosophy) Actor–network theory Agency (sociology) Agency (psychology) Sense of agency Collective intentionality Corporate personhood Intentionality Nature and nurture Serenity Prayer#Precursors Social action True Will References [ edit ] ^ Wilson, George; Shpall, Samuel (4 April 2012).

"Action" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Gergely, György; Nádasdy, Zoltán; Csibra, Gergely; Bíró, Szilvia (1995). "Taking the intentional stance at 12 months of age".

Cognition .

56 (2): 165– 193.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0277(95)00661-h .

ISSN 0010-0277 .

PMID 7554793 .

S2CID 4973766 .

^ Gergely, György; Csibra, Gergely (2003). "Teleological reasoning in infancy: the naı̈ve theory of rational action".

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

7 (7): 287– 292.

doi : 10.1016/s1364-6613(03)00128-1 .

ISSN 1364-6613 .

PMID 12860186 .

S2CID 5897671 .

^ Bandura, A. (1999).

"Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective" (PDF) .

Asian Journal of Social Psychology .

2 : 21– 41.

doi : 10.1111/1467-839X.00024 .

PMID 11148297 .

S2CID 11573665 . Retrieved 27 September 2016 .

^ Bandura, A. (1986). Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ Bormann, 1996 ^ Guo, K.J., Yolles, M., Fink, G., Iles, P., 2016, The Changing Organisation: Agency Theory in a Cross-cultural Context, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ^ Otto, Ilona M. (January 2020).

"Human Agency in the Anthropocene" .

Ecological Economics .

167 106463.

Bibcode : 2020EcoEc.16706463O .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.106463 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bandura, A. (2001).

"Social Cognitive Theory: An Agentic Perspective" .

Annual Review of Psychology .

52 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.1 .

PMID 11148297 .

S2CID 11573665 .

– Describes the form of agency.

Juarrero, Alicia (1999).

Dynamics in Action: Intentional Behavior as a Complex System (MIT Press). Examines agency from the perspective of complexity theory. Reconceptualizes intentional causality in terms of whole-part context-sensitive constraints.

"Agency (philosophy)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Agency (philosophy) at PhilPapers v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9jjrk
Cached time: 20250816100950
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.449 seconds
Real time usage: 0.552 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1619/1000000
Revision size: 10975/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 159119/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1357/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53426/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.299/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7263645/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  446.960      1 -total
 23.87%  106.674      1 Template:Agency_sidebar
 23.45%  104.830      1 Template:Sidebar
 21.29%   95.139      1 Template:Reflist
 15.07%   67.350      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 14.68%   65.592      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.41%   59.936      1 Template:Cite_web
 10.68%   47.730      1 Template:Short_description
  9.91%   44.290      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.21%   41.174      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:716672:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816100950 and revision id 1303808782. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agency_(philosophy)&oldid=1303808782 " Categories : Action (philosophy) Free will Personhood Sociological theories Concepts in social philosophy Concepts in ethics Metaphysical properties Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 04:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agency (philosophy) 12 languages Add topic

