Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historiographical term 2 Background 3 Art and architecture 4 Literature and education Toggle Literature and education subsection 4.1 Encyclopaedism 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Sources Toggle the table of contents Macedonian Renaissance 24 languages Alemannisch العربية Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Byzantine cultural movement during the Macedonian dynasty Virgin Mary with Christ mosaic, Hagia Sophia Interior of Hosios Loukas Macedonian Renaissance ( Greek : Μακεδονική Αναγέννηση ) is a historiographical term used for the blossoming of Byzantine culture in the 9th–11th centuries, under the eponymous Macedonian dynasty (867–1056), following the upheavals and transformations of the 7th–8th centuries, also known as the " Byzantine Dark Ages ". The period is also known as the era of Byzantine encyclopedism , because of the attempts to systematically organize and codify knowledge, exemplified by the works of the scholar-emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos .

Historiographical term [ edit ] Because of problems with the term, scholars have employed alternative names to describe this period, including "renaissance" (with a small "r"), "renascence", [ 1 ] Middle Byzantine Renaissance or First Byzantine Renaissance (the Palaeologan Renaissance from the 13th century on being the second).

Macedonian art refers to the art of this period.

Since the word Renaissance ( rinascita ) was created in the 15th and 16th centuries by Italian humanists to describe their own time, its use outside of that context is problematic; however, the period in question certainly did produce ideas and works of art that reflected a reassessment of classical ideals.

[ 2 ] The term Macedonian Renaissance was first used by Kurt Weitzmann in his 1948 work, The Joshua Roll: A Work of the Macedonian Renaissance .

[ 3 ] It describes the architecture of Macedonia. At the same time, the manuscripts of "Paris Psalter" (cod. gr. 139, Paris, Bib. Nat. de France) were indicated as the best examples of Macedonian Renaissance by scholars.

[ 4 ] Background [ edit ] During the 7th to 8th centuries, literary production saw a drastic decline despite the gradual introduction of paper instead of the more expensive parchment.  Books were scarce in this period and were only owned by the richest aristocrats.

[ 5 ] From the 7th century onwards, Medieval Greek was the only language of administration, government and art in the Byzantine Empire, while the religion was Orthodox Christianity .

[ 6 ] While the Western Roman Empire had collapsed at the outset of the Middle Ages , its Eastern half, the Eastern Roman Empire , was able to survive, due mainly to its strategic location for commerce but also to the way it was able to hold back its enemies.

Basil I (867–886), the founder of the Macedonian Dynasty of Byzantine rulers, was born in Thrace to a peasant family said to be of paternal Armenian descent. He was employed in the influential circles of Constantinople and was rapidly promoted by the emperor Michael III eventually becoming co-emperor.

[ 7 ] By means of political maneuvering he was able to secure his future as emperor and then began military and diplomatic campaigns to secure the empire. His dynasty was able to maintain a period of peace under which economics, philosophy, art, and culture could thrive.

Two main developments helped drive the revival in culture and education in the empire: this was the greater involvement of the church in education (such as those in the Studite Monastery ), while the other was the concentration of cultural life in Constantinople due to the movement of peoples from the countryside, which became a magnet for intellectuals.

[ 5 ] Art and architecture [ edit ] See also: Byzantine art and Byzantine architecture Illustration of Ignatius of Antioch being martyred.

Large-scale productions of religious art resumed only after the Second Iconoclasm in 843. The art of the Macedonian Renaissance maintained its roots from the Late Roman period, utilizing its decorative and artistic styles.

[ 5 ] This period produced a shift from the ban on the painting of religious figures to icons being painted to reflect the more classical and naturalistic influences of art on the culture. The new style of art may have inspired Italian artists such as Cimabue and Giotto [ 8 ] at the dawn of the Italian Renaissance , in the Proto-Renaissance .

The second half of the 9th century saw a lavish programme of redecoration of churches, such as the creation of mosaics in the Hagia Sophia .

[ 5 ] Literature and education [ edit ] By the Macedonian Renaissance, the period also saw a proliferation of literature, such as De Ceremoniis ("The Book of Ceremonies"), which focused on governance, diplomatic interactions with neighboring nations, and other customs of the time. Education had also become a priority once again and the University of Constantinople boasted scholars such as Michael Psellus , who wrote the Chronographia , a history of fourteen Byzantine rulers.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Meanwhile, reforms in law sought to limit the power and growth of large land owners by the formation of trade guilds that allowed the state to control growth as described in the Book of the Eparch .

While in science and mathematics, Leo the Mathematician contributed vastly on the subject and he was also known for constructing an optical telegraph from Constantinople to the eastern regions of the empire.

[ 5 ] The building Magnaura in Constantinople had already become a school in 849 and was headed by Leo the Mathematician, [ 11 ] whose works are now lost.

Encyclopaedism [ edit ] Paul Lemerle introduced the term "encyclopaedism" for this period, to reflect the systematic attempts at ordering and organizing knowledge in all spheres of cultural and administrative activity.

[ 12 ] This activity resulted in the compilation of manuals on court hierarchy and administration ( Taktika ), military affairs , taxation, agriculture ( Geoponika ), reference works such as the Suda encyclopaedia and the Bibliotheca , as well as new codifications of Roman law (the Basilika ) and regulations in the Book of the Eparch .

[ 12 ] The spirit of the age was exemplified by Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos , who produced three encyclopaedic manuals: the De Administrando Imperio , De Thematibus , and De Ceremoniis .

[ 12 ] Other notable figures were the polymaths Leo the Mathematician , Patriarch Photios , and Arethas of Caesarea .

[ 12 ] However, as Alexander Kazhdan notes, their "emphasis was not on creativity, but on copying and collecting".

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Macedonian art (Byzantine) Paris Psalter Leo Bible Notes [ edit ] ^ Cormack, Robin (2000).

Byzantine Art . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

131 .

ISBN 0-19-284211-0 .

^ For a discussion on the topic, see Cormack, Byzantine Art , pp. 130-142.

^ Weitzmann, Kurt.

The Joshua Roll: A Work of the Macedonian Renaissance.

Studies in Manuscript Illumination III, Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1948.

^ Kaya, İlkgül (January 2015).

"Paris Psalterionu (Cod. gr. 139, Paris-Ulusal Kütüphane) ve Makedonyan Rönesansı (full paper text)" .

Sanat ve Estetikte Asal Değerler: Mekan-Zaman Bildiriler Kitabı, Ankara Üniversitesi Dil ve Tarih-Coğrafya Fakültesi Sanat Tarihi Bölümü . Retrieved 2015-12-01 .

^ a b c d e Brown, Thomas; Holmes, George (1988).

The Oxford History of Medieval Europe . Great Britain: Oxford University Press. pp.

51– 54.

^ Elizabeth Jeffreys; John Haldon; Robin Cormack, eds. (2008).

The Oxford Handbook of Byzantine Studies . Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-925246-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ " Basil I ". Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2012. Web. Retrieved on 13 May 2012.

^ Byzantine art ^ John H. Rosser, Historical Dictionary of Byzantium , Scarecrow Press, 2001, p. xxx.

^ Aleksandr Petrovich Kazhdan, Annabel Jane Wharton, Change in Byzantine Culture in the Eleventh and Twelfth Centuries , University of California Press, 1985, p. 122.

^ macedonian-heritage.gr: Leon the Mathematician ^ a b c d e ODB , "Encyclopedism" (A. Kazhdan), pp. 696–697.

Sources [ edit ] Kazhdan, Alexander , ed. (1991).

The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-504652-8 .

Treadgold, Warren (1984). "The Macedonian Renaissance". In Warren Treadgold (ed.).

Renaissances before the Renaissance. Cultural Revivals of Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0-8047-1198-4 .

v t e Byzantine Greece Provinces and regions Achaea Province Theme of the Aegean Crete Theme of Hellas Theme of Samos Macedonia Province Theme of Macedonia Theme of Strymon Theme of Thessalonica Theme of the Peloponnese Theme of Cephallenia Theme of Nicopolis Sclaviniae Melingoi and Ezeritai Tsakonia Great Vlachia People Justinian I Heraclius Justinian II Irene of Athens Danielis Nikephoros I Basil I Nikephoros II Phokas Basil II Nikephoros Melissenos Michael Choniates Leo Sgouros Leo Gabalas Michael I Komnenos Doukas Theodore Komnenos Doukas Demetrios Chomatenos John Apokaukos Michael II Komnenos Doukas Michael VIII Palaiologos John I Doukas of Thessaly Nikephoros I Komnenos Doukas Thomas I Komnenos Doukas Gregory Palamas Demetrios Kydones Catalan Company Nicholas Orsini Andronikos Asen John II Orsini Andronikos III Palaiologos Michael Monomachos John Angelos Stephen Gabrielopoulos Nikephoros II Orsini Manuel Kantakouzenos Simeon Uroš Thomas Preljubović Esau de' Buondelmonti Alexios Angelos Philanthropenos Theodore II Palaiologos Gemistos Plethon Constantine XI Palaiologos Demetrios Palaiologos Thomas Palaiologos Byzantine bureaucracy and aristocracy Byzantine scholars in Renaissance Historians : Niketas Choniates George Akropolites Nicephorus Gregoras John Scylitzes Eustathius of Thessalonica Michael Glykas Anna Komnene Joannes Zonaras George Kodinos George Sphrantzes Major centres Thessaloniki Athens Corinth Mystras Patras Thebes Arta Ioannina Greek states after 1204 Despotate of Epirus Empire of Nicaea Empire of Thessalonica Despotate of the Morea Thessaly History Persecution of paganism Barbarian invasions Under the Heraclian dynasty Byzantine Iconoclasm Siege of Thessalonica (676–678) Siege of Patras (805 or 807) Arab–Byzantine wars Muslim conquest of Crete Byzantine reconquest of Crete Macedonian Renaissance Byzantine conquest of Bulgaria East-West Schism Byzantine–Norman wars Sack of Thessalonica (1185) Fourth Crusade Battle of the Olive Grove of Kountouras Battle of Klokotnitsa Battle of Pelagonia Under the Palaiologos dynasty Reconquest of Constantinople Battle of Prinitza Battle of Makryplagi Battle of Neopatras Battle of Pharsalus (1277) Battle of Demetrias Byzantine civil war of 1321–1328 Hesychast controversy ( Palamism ) Byzantine–Genoese War (1348–1349) Zealots of Thessalonica Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347 Byzantine–Ottoman Wars Siege of Thessalonica (1422–1430) Battle of the Echinades (1427) Morea revolt of 1453–1454 Ottoman conquest of the Morea Culture Byzantine art ( Macedonian art ) Byzantine music Byzantine literature Alexander romance Miracles of Saint Demetrius Suda Greek Anthology Acritic songs Byzantine architecture Byzantine dress Byzantine cuisine Eastern Orthodox Christianity Byzantine law Hexabiblos Monuments Acrocorinth Angelokastro (Corfu) Athens Church of the Holy Apostles Daphni Monastery Little Metropolis Soteira Lykodemou Castle of Chios Church of the Parigoritissa Didymoteicho Fortress Feraklos Castle Gardiki Castle Hexamilion wall Hosios Loukas Kassiopi Castle Meteora Mount Athos Monastery of Saint John the Theologian Monemvasia Mystras Nea Moni of Chios Old Metropolis of Veria Panagia Episkopi Panagia Kontariotissa Paleochristian and Byzantine monuments of Thessaloniki Panagia Ekatontapiliani Patras Castle Porta Panagia Saints Theodoroi, Serres Trikala Castle v t e Byzantine Empire topics History Preceding Roman Empire Later Roman Empire Early (330–717) Constantinian–Valentinianic era Constantinian dynasty Valentinianic dynasty Theodosian era Leonid era Justinian era Heraclian era " Byzantine Dark Ages " Twenty Years' Anarchy Middle (717–1204) Isaurian era Nikephorian era Amorian era Macedonian era Doukid era Komnenian era Angelid era Late (1204–1453) Sack of Constantinople Fourth Crusade Frankokratia Latin Empire Byzantine successor states ( Nicaea / Epirus – Thessalonica / Morea / Trebizond – Theodoro ) Palaiologan era Decline of the Byzantine Empire Fall of Constantinople By modern region or territory Albania Anatolia Armenia Bulgaria Corsica Crete Cyprus Dalmatia Egypt Greece Italy Sardinia Sicily Maghreb Malta Mesopotamia Serbia Spain (Iberian Peninsula and Balearic Islands) Syria Thrace Governance Central Emperors Coronation Family tree Empresses Imperial bureaucracy Medieval Greek Senate Early Praetorian prefects Magister officiorum Comes sacrarum largitionum Comes rerum privatarum Quaestor sacri palatii Middle Logothetes tou dromou Sakellarios Logothetes tou genikou Logothetes tou stratiotikou Chartoularios tou sakelliou Chartoularios tou vestiariou Epi tou eidikou Protasekretis Epi ton deeseon Late Megas logothetes Mesazon Provincial Early Praetorian prefectures Dioceses Provinces Quaestura exercitus Exarchate of Ravenna Exarchate of Africa Middle Themata Kleisourai Bandon Catepanates Late Kephale Despotates Foreign relations Treaties Diplomats Diplomacy Wars Military Army Battle tactics Battles Beacon Generals Mercenaries Military manuals Military units Revolts Early Late Roman army East Roman army Foederati Bucellarii Scholae Palatinae Excubitors Middle Themata Kleisourai Tourma Droungos Bandon Tagmata Domestic of the Schools Hetaireia Akritai Varangian Guard Late Komnenian army Pronoia Vestiaritai Palaiologan army Allagion Paramonai Grand domestic Navy Karabisianoi Maritime themata Cibyrrhaeot Aegean Sea Samos Dromon Greek fire Droungarios of the Fleet Megas doux Admirals Naval battles Conflicts Persian Serbian Lombard Arab Bulgarian Rus Norman Georgian Seljuk Ottoman Religion and law Religion Eastern Orthodoxy Byzantine Rite Hesychasm Hayhurum Patriarchate of Constantinople Saints Oriental Orthodoxy Alexandrian Rite Armenian Rite West Syriac Rite Miaphysitism Ecumenical councils Arianism Monophysitism Paulicianism Iconoclasm Great Schism Bogomilism Mount Athos Missionary activity Bulgaria Moravia Serbs Kievan Rus' Jews Law Codex Theodosianus Corpus Juris Civilis Code of Justinian Ecloga Basilika Hexabiblos Mutilation Culture and society Architecture Secular Sacred Cross-in-square Domes Constantinople Basilica Cistern Baths of Zeuxippus Blachernae Palace Chora Church City Walls Great Palace of Constantinople Hagia Irene Hagia Sophia Hippodrome Pammakaristos Church Prison of Anemas Thessalonica Arch of Galerius and Rotunda Byzantine Bath Hagia Sophia Hagios Demetrios Panagia Chalkeon Walls of Thessaloniki Ravenna San Vitale Sant'Apollinare in Classe Sant'Apollinare Nuovo Other locations Daphni Monastery Hosios Loukas Nea Moni of Chios Panagia Gorgoepikoos Saint Catherine's Monastery Mystras Art Icons Enamel Glass Mosaics Early Byzantine mosaics Painters Macedonian period art Komnenian renaissance Economy Agriculture Coinage Mints Trade silk Silk Road Varangians Dynatoi Literature Novel Acritic songs Digenes Akritas Alexander Romance Historians Everyday life Calendar Cities Cuisine Dance Dress Flags and insignia Gardens Hellenization Music Lyra Octoechos People Byzantine Greeks Women Slavery Death Units of measurement Science Learning Encyclopedias Imperial Library Inventions Medicine Philosophy Rhetoric Scholars University University of Constantinople Impact Byzantine commonwealth Byzantine studies Museums Byzantinism Cyrillic script Neo-Byzantine architecture Greek scholars in the Renaissance Third Rome Megali Idea Index Outline Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Macedonian_Renaissance&oldid=1252843072 " Categories : Byzantine Greece Macedonian dynasty History of Macedonia (region) Byzantine art Byzantine architecture Cultural history of Greece Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 23 October 2024, at 05:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Macedonian Renaissance 24 languages Add topic

