Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Doctrine 3 Anniversaries 4 History 5 Recent history 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Cheondoism 32 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Korean pantheistic religion Cheondoism Flag representing Cheondoism Korean name Hangul 천도교 Hanja 天道敎 Revised Romanization Cheondogyo McCune–Reischauer Ch'ŏndogyo Part of a series on the Culture of Korea Society History People Diaspora Language Names of Korea Religion Arts and literature Architecture Art Pottery Painting Dance Film North South Literature North South Poetry Manhwa Webtoon Media Television K-drama Music Traditional North South K-pop Theater Other Cuisine Kimchi Banchan Mythology Folklore Holidays Clothing Hanbok Tal Sports Martial arts Taekwondo Ssireum Video games Symbols " Arirang " Mugunghwa Paektu Mountain " Aegukka " North Korea " Aegukga " South Korea Flags Taegeuk Emblem of North Korea Emblem of South Korea World Heritage Sites 100 Cultural Symbols of Korea v t e Cheondoism ( Hanja : 天道敎; spelled Chondoism in North Korea [ 1 ] ) is a Korean indigenous religion that emerged as a continuation and development of Donghak , which was founded by Choe Je-u (Su-un) in 1860 during the late Joseon Dynasty as an antithesis to Christianity .

Cheondoism upholds the principles of spreading virtue throughout the world (布德天下), saving all living beings from suffering (廣濟蒼生), protecting the nation and ensuring the well-being of the people (輔國安民), and realizing heaven on earth (地上天國).

On December 1, 1905, Son Byong-hi , the third leader of Cheondoism, restructured Donghak into an institutionalized religion under the name "Cheondoism." This transformation was intended to formalize Donghak, which had previously remained a philosophical movement, and to bring it under legal recognition. Additionally, this reformation aimed to protect the faith from the suppression of Korean nationalism by the Japanese colonial authorities, who sought to eradicate native ideological movements.

Name [ edit ] Cheondogyo translated literally means "religion of the Celestial Way", where cheon means "sky", do means "way" (written with the same character as Chinese Tao ), and gyo means "religion", "teaching", "-ism".

Doctrine [ edit ] As a religion that inherited the traditions of Donghak, Cheondoism maintains a fundamental framework largely consistent with its predecessor. During the era of Donghak, Choi Je-u himself stated, "Donghak is the unity of Confucianism, Buddhism, and Daoism. However, while their principles are the same, their realization differs." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Understanding this statement requires an examination of the key aspects each of these religions emphasizes: nature (性), mind (心), and body (身).

Daoism primarily focuses on mystical experiences in which an individual unites with the omnipotent energy of heaven, making the mind (心) central to its practice.

[ 4 ] Buddhism, which perceives the world as transient and empty, directs its attention not to the physical body—seen as a mere shell—but to the fundamental essence of existence, aligning with nature (性).

[ 4 ] In contrast, Confucianism prioritizes the realization of compassion, justice, manners, and wisdom, without making claims about the afterlife, as Confucius himself remained silent on the matter. Consequently, Confucianism regards the governance of a stable and virtuous society as the highest moral pursuit, emphasizing direct action in the material world, which places importance on the body (身).

[ 5 ] Similarly, Donghak values religious experiences in which an individual becomes one with Hanul, the vital energy of the universe (心). It also encourages deep contemplation of one's origin in Hanul and seeks ultimate return to it (性). At the same time, practical application in the real world necessitates attention to the body (身) as well. Thus, in terms of its guiding principles, Donghak aligns with the spiritual paths of Daoism, Buddhism, and Confucianism.

However, unlike these three traditions, each of which emphasizes one of the three aspects—nature, mind, or body—Donghak seeks to integrate all three completely, aiming to cultivate a "whole person" (全人) for the advancement of society and the nation. In this regard, its approach to direct realization sets it apart from the three established religions.

While this constitutes the core doctrine of Donghak, in the 46th year of Podŏk (1905), Son Byeong-hui transformed Donghak from a philosophical movement into an institutionalized religion under the name Cheondoism. This transition brought about the development of a modern religious doctrine and organizational system. Inspired by Western religious structures, Cheondoism established places of worship (교당) and modernized its administrative framework.

In the later sections of Les Paroles Doctrinales du Maître Ui-am, Son Byeong-hui focused less on doctrine itself and more on the role of Cheondoism as an institutional religion. For instance, in the chapter " 천도태원경(Cheondo Taeweongyeong) ", he narrates and compares the history of human religions, presenting Cheondoism as the culmination of religious evolution, moving beyond animism and monotheism toward a belief system in which humans and the divine are unified.

The chapter titled " 대종정의(Daejongjeongui) " further elaborates on Cheondoism’s role in society, emphasizing that religion is not merely for prayer and gathering but should guide the development of human ethics (心學). It calls upon Cheondoist scholars to educate one another, ensuring collective progress toward both material and moral civilization.

Whereas Choi Je-u and Choi Si-hyeong primarily focused on explaining doctrine, Son Byeong-hui deeply explored the structure of Cheondoism as a modern religion. His efforts sought to establish Cheondoism not merely as a philosophical movement but as an organized faith that could stand alongside the world’s great religious traditions, instilling a sense of religious identity and pride among its followers.

Anniversaries [ edit ] Cheonil (天日) – April 5: Commemorates Choi Je-u’s enlightenment in 1860.

Ji-il (地日) – August 14: Commemorates Choi Si-hyeong’s succession as the leader of Donghak in 1863.

Inil (人日) – December 24: Commemorates Son Byeong-hui’s succession as the leader of Cheondoism in 1897.

Doil (道日) – January 18: Commemorates Park In-ho’s succession as the leader of Cheondoism in 1908.

History [ edit ] Cheondogyo Central Temple in Seoul Cheondoism originated from the Donghak ("Eastern Learning"), a religious movement that arose in 19th-century Korea as a reaction to Western encroachment, particularly the spread of Catholicism . The Donghak movement began with Ch'oe Che-u in 1860, [ 6 ] who  formulated the Donghak ideology in 1860 as an alternative to Catholicism ("Western Learning"), which was gaining momentum within the lower classes in Korea due to its ability to provide a sense of structure and stability beyond the family unit.

[ 6 ] Due to its basis in established religions— Confucianism , Buddhism , and Taoism —and its commitment to representing Eastern ideals, the movement rapidly gained broad acceptance among the peasantry.

[ 7 ] The movement "offered the most oppressed and downtrodden of Korean society a sense of their intrinsic worth." [ 8 ] Because the movement taught that the divine could be lived out on earth (a teaching with "immense socio-economic implications"), it was viewed unfavorably by local landlords and foreign powers who sought to outlaw the movement and oversaw Ch'oe's trial and execution in 1864.

[ 8 ] Cheondoism became an officially recognized religion under its third leader, Son Byong-hi .

[ 9 ] Cheondoism as a religion evolved in the early 1900s from the Donghak peasant liberation movements in the southern provinces of Korea, particularly the unsuccessful, yet consequential, rebellion of 1894. Followers of Donghak were severely persecuted until the establishment of the Protectorate Treaty of 1905, which guaranteed freedom of religion. Therefore, on 1 December 1905, Son Byong-hi decided to modernize the religion and usher in an era of openness and transparency in order to legitimize it in the eyes of the Japanese , who had strong influence over Korea at the time. As a result, he officially changed the name of Donghak to Cheondoism ("religion of the Celestial Way"). Following this, a constitution and a Central General Bureau were laid out for the religion, centralizing it and making it more accessible to the public.

[ 9 ] Recent history [ edit ] As of 2005, Cheondoism reportedly had about 45,000 followers and 280 churches in South Korea .

[ 10 ] According to the 2015 national census, Cheondoism had about 65,000 followers in South Korea.

[ 11 ] In North Korea, the state recognizes and favors Chondoism as a distinctly Korean revolutionary religion.

[ 8 ] Chondoists are nominally represented in North Korean politics by the minor Chondoist Chongu Party .

North Korean leader Kim Il Sung 's memoirs recount at length an effort to persuade his communist comrades to accept a Chondoist recruit.

[ 12 ] While Kim's memoirs lightly criticize the Korean faith (given his own Marxist–Leninist perspective), they also stress how Chondoism draws close to the Korean form of communism.

[ 13 ] Among other aspects, Kim's memoirs highlight Chondoism's concern for the intrinsic worth of all people, especially the poor and lowly.

[ 14 ] According to Kim, Chondoism is a "progressive religion" characterized by the novelty of its principles, its spirit of resistance, the simplicity of its rites and practices, and its inherently popular nature.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Chondoist Chongu Party Donghak Donghak Peasant Revolution Korean shamanism (Sinism) New religious movement Taoism in Korea Yongdamjeong References [ edit ] ^ "Anniversary of Chondoism Observed, KCNA" . Archived from the original on 12 October 2014 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ "(천도와 유불선) Haewol sinsa beobseol - Sacred Texts of Cheondoism" .

Chondogyo .

^ "(삼화일목) Ui-am seongsa beobseol - Sacred Texts of Cheondoism" .

^ a b 천도교경전(Sacred Textes of Cheondoism) (2022).

천도태원경 . Central Church of Chondogyo. p. 554.

^ 천도교경전(Sacred Textes of Cheondoism) (2022).

천도태원경 . Central Church of Chondogyo. p. 553.

^ a b Young, Carl F. pp.6–7 ^ Young, Carl F. pp.10–12 ^ a b c Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . p. 216.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ a b Young, Carl F. pp.113–121 ^ "Consulate General of the Republic of Korea in Toronto" . Archived from the original on 7 September 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ "2018년 한국의 종교 현황" (in Korean). Archived from the original on 27 October 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2020 .

^ Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . pp.

218– 220.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . p. 219.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . p. 220.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

^ Boer, Roland (2019).

Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition . Boston: Haymarket Books . p. 221.

ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2 .

OCLC 1078879745 .

This article incorporates text from Korea Web Weekly . Used with permission. Korea Web Weekly is not an independent source of information but is instead associated with various North Korea government sources.

Sources [ edit ] Lee Chi-ran. Chief Director, Haedong Younghan Academy.

The Emergence of National Religions in Korea .

Young, Carl F. Associate Professor, Western University.

Eastern Learning and the Heavenly Way: The Tonghak and Chondogyo Movements and the Twilight of Korean Independence .

[ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cheondoism .

천도교서울교구 천도교 v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal Authority control databases : National Germany Korea Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cheondoism&oldid=1304699463 " Categories : Cheondoism Donghak Peasant Revolution Monotheistic religions Religion in Korea Religion in North Korea Religious Confucianism Korean Confucianism East Asian religions Hidden categories: CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 Articles containing Korean-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 16:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cheondoism 32 languages Add topic

