Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Galaxy and larger 3 Within a galaxy 4 Shape 5 Categories by location 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Astronomical object 103 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული کٲشُر Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол Naijá Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий Oromoo ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sakizaya ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Natural physical entity in space Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see List of Solar System objects , Satellite , Body of light , Celestial , Heavenly Body (disambiguation) , and Heavenly Bodies (disambiguation) .

Selection of astronomical bodies and objects An astronomical object , celestial object , stellar object or heavenly body is a naturally occurring physical entity , association, or structure that exists within the observable universe .

[ 1 ] In astronomy , the terms object and body are often used interchangeably. However, an astronomical body or celestial body is a single, tightly bound, contiguous entity, while an astronomical or celestial object is a complex, less cohesively bound structure, which may consist of multiple bodies or even other objects with substructures.

Examples of astronomical objects include planetary systems , star clusters , nebulae , and galaxies , while asteroids , moons , planets , and stars are astronomical bodies. A comet may be identified as both a body and an object: It is a body when referring to the frozen nucleus of ice and dust, and an object when describing the entire comet with its diffuse coma and tail .

History [ edit ] Further information: History of astronomy See also: Scientific Revolution and Copernican Revolution According to NASA astrophysicists, early astronomical objects began to emerge plausibly 13.6 billion years ago, roughly 200 million years after the Big Bang formed the early universe. Over time, light was left from gravity to fuse into the first stars and galaxies .

[ 2 ] Astronomical objects such as stars , planets , nebulae , asteroids and comets have been observed for thousands of years, although early cultures thought of these bodies as deities . These early cultures found the movements of the bodies very important as they used these objects to help navigate over long distances, tell between the seasons, and to determine when to plant crops. During the Middle Ages , cultures began to study the movements of these bodies more closely. Several astronomers of the Middle East began to make detailed descriptions of stars and nebulae, and would make more accurate calendars based on the movements of these stars and planets. In Europe, astronomers focused more on devices to help study the celestial objects and creating textbooks, guides, and universities to teach people more about astronomy.

During the Scientific Revolution , in 1543, Nicolaus Copernicus's heliocentric model was published. This model described the Earth , along with all of the other planets as being astronomical bodies which orbited the Sun located in the center of the Solar System .

Johannes Kepler discovered Kepler's laws of planetary motion , which are properties of the orbits that the astronomical bodies shared; this was used to improve the heliocentric model. In 1584, Giordano Bruno proposed that all distant stars are their own suns, being the first in centuries to suggest this idea.

Galileo Galilei was one of the first astronomers to use telescopes to observe the sky, in 1610 he observed the four largest moons of Jupiter , now named the Galilean moons . Galileo also made observations of the phases of Venus , craters on the Moon , and sunspots on the Sun. Astronomer Edmond Halley was able to successfully predict the return of Halley's Comet , which now bears his name, in 1758. In 1781, Sir William Herschel discovered the new planet Uranus , being the first discovered planet not visible by the naked eye.

In the 19th and 20th centuries, new technologies and scientific innovations allowed scientists to greatly expand their understanding of astronomy and astronomical objects. Larger telescopes and observatories began to be built and scientists began to print images of the Moon and other celestial bodies on photographic plates. New wavelengths of light unseen by the human eye were discovered, and new telescopes were made that made it possible to see astronomical objects in other wavelengths of light.

Joseph von Fraunhofer and Angelo Secchi pioneered the field of spectroscopy , which allowed them to observe the composition of stars and nebulae, and many astronomers were able to determine the masses of binary stars based on their orbital elements . Computers began to be used to observe and study massive amounts of astronomical data on stars, and new technologies such as the photoelectric photometer allowed astronomers to accurately measure the color and luminosity of stars, which allowed them to predict their temperature and mass. In 1913, the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram was developed by astronomers Ejnar Hertzsprung and Henry Norris Russell independently of each other, which plotted stars based on their luminosity and color and allowed astronomers to easily examine stars. It was found that stars commonly fell on a band of stars called the main-sequence stars on the diagram. A refined scheme for stellar classification was published in 1943 by William Wilson Morgan and Philip Childs Keenan based on the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram. Astronomers also began debating whether other galaxies existed beyond the Milky Way , these debates ended when Edwin Hubble identified the Andromeda nebula as a different galaxy, along with many others far from the Milky Way.

Galaxy and larger [ edit ] The universe can be viewed as having a hierarchical structure.

[ 3 ] At the largest scales, the fundamental component of assembly is the galaxy . Galaxies are organized into groups and clusters , often within larger superclusters , that are strung along great filaments between nearly empty voids , forming a web that spans the observable universe.

[ 4 ] Galaxies have a variety of morphologies , with irregular , elliptical and disk-like shapes, depending on their formation and evolutionary histories, including interaction with other galaxies, which may lead to a merger .

[ 5 ] Disc galaxies encompass lenticular and spiral galaxies with features, such as spiral arms and a distinct halo . At the core, most galaxies have a supermassive black hole , which may result in an active galactic nucleus . Galaxies can also have satellites in the form of dwarf galaxies and globular clusters .

[ 6 ] Within a galaxy [ edit ] The constituents of a galaxy are formed out of gaseous matter that assembles through gravitational self-attraction in a hierarchical manner. At this level, the resulting fundamental components are the stars, which are typically assembled in clusters from the various condensing nebulae.

[ 7 ] The great variety of stellar forms are determined almost entirely by the mass, composition and evolutionary state of these stars. Stars may be found in multi-star systems that orbit about each other in a hierarchical organization. A planetary system and various minor objects such as asteroids, comets and debris, can form in a hierarchical process of accretion from the protoplanetary disks that surround newly formed stars.

The various distinctive types of stars are shown by the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram (H–R diagram)—a plot of absolute stellar luminosity versus surface temperature. Each star follows an evolutionary track across this diagram. If this track takes the star through a region containing an intrinsic variable type, then its physical properties can cause it to become a variable star . An example of this is the instability strip , a region of the H-R diagram that includes Delta Scuti , RR Lyrae and Cepheid variables .

[ 8 ] The evolving star may eject some portion of its atmosphere to form a nebula, either steadily to form a planetary nebula or in a supernova explosion that leaves a remnant . Depending on the initial mass of the star and the presence or absence of a companion, a star may spend the last part of its life as a compact object ; either a white dwarf , neutron star , or black hole .

Shape [ edit ] Further information: Spherical Earth § Cause See also: Equatorial bulge and Hydrostatic equilibrium § Planetary geology Composite image showing the round dwarf planet Ceres ; the slightly smaller, mostly round Vesta ; and the much smaller, much lumpier Eros The IAU definitions of planet and dwarf planet require that a Sun-orbiting astronomical body has undergone the rounding process to reach a roughly spherical shape, an achievement known as hydrostatic equilibrium . The same spheroidal shape can be seen on smaller rocky planets like Mars to gas giants like Jupiter .

Any natural Sun-orbiting body that has not reached hydrostatic equilibrium is classified by the IAU as a small Solar System body (SSSB). These come in many non-spherical shapes which are lumpy masses accreted haphazardly by in-falling dust and rock; not enough mass falls in to generate the heat needed to complete the rounding. Some SSSBs are just collections of relatively small rocks that are weakly held next to each other by gravity but are not actually fused into a single big bedrock . Some larger SSSBs are nearly round but have not reached hydrostatic equilibrium. The small Solar System body 4 Vesta is large enough to have undergone at least partial planetary differentiation.

Stars like the Sun are also spheroidal due to gravity's effects on their plasma , which is a free-flowing fluid . Ongoing stellar fusion is a much greater source of heat for stars compared to the initial heat released during their formation.

Categories by location [ edit ] See also: Lists of astronomical objects See also: List of Solar System objects by size The table below lists the general categories of bodies and objects by their location or structure.

Solar bodies Extrasolar Observable universe Simple bodies Compound objects Extended objects Solar System Terrestrial planet Giant planet Gas giant Ice giant Heliosphere Oort cloud Hills Cloud Meteoroid Micrometeoroid Meteor Bolide Moons Moonlets Subsatellites (hypothet.) Minor planets (see below) Asteroids Dwarf planets Moons Binaries Synestia (hypothet.) Planets (see below) Ring system Trans-Neptunian objects Small Solar System body Comets Planetesimal Contact binary Sun Planets Mercury Venus Earth – Moon Mars – moons Jupiter – moons Saturn – moons Uranus – moons Neptune – moons Dwarf planets Pluto – moons Eris – Dysnomia Ceres Makemake – moon Haumea – moons Quaoar – Weywot Orcus – Vanth Gonggong – Xiangliu Sedna Others Minor planets Vulcanoids (hypothet.) ꞌAylóꞌchaxnims Atiras Near-Earth objects PHO Arjunas Atens Apollos Amors Mars-crossers Asteroid belt ( families ) Alindas Cybeles Eos Floras Hildas Hungarias Hygieas Koronis Marias Nysas Pallas Phocaeas Themis Vesta Trojans Earth Mars Jupiter Uranus Neptune Centaurs Damocloids Kuiper belt objects Classical KBOs Resonant TNOs Plutinos (2:3) Twotinos (1:2) Scattered disc objects Detached objects Sednoids Exoplanets Chthonian (theoret.) Earth analog Eccentric Jupiter Exomoon Tidally detached exomoon Exocomet Hot Jupiter Hot Neptune Rogue planet Ocean (theoret.) Pulsar planet Super-Earth Tidally locked planet Eyeball planet (theoret.) Toroidal planet (theoret.) Trojan (theoret.) USP Brown dwarfs Types M · L · T · Y Sub-brown dwarfs Stars (see sections below) Stellar classification Stellar population III, II, I Peculiar star Stellar evolution Variable star Compact star By luminosity / evolution Protostar Young stellar object Pre-main-sequence Main sequence Subdwarfs Subgiants Giants Red / Blue Bright giants Supergiants Red / Blue Hypergiants Ultra-cool dwarf Quasi-star (hypothet.) Compact stars (see below) Compact stars Black hole Stellar Intermediate-mass Supermassive GRBs BBHs Exotic star (hypothet.) Iron star (hypothet.) Neutron star Blitzar (hypothet.) Magnetar Pulsar Thorne–Żytkow object (hypothet.) Planck star (hypothet.) Preon star (hypothet.) Quark star (hypothet.) Strange star (hypothet.) White dwarf Black dwarf (theoret.) By peculiar stars A-type Peculiar · Metallic Barium Blue straggler Carbon P Cygni S-type Shell Wolf–Rayet Variables – Extrinsic Rotating Alpha2 CVn Ellipsoidal Eclipsing binaries Algol Beta Lyrae W Ursae Majoris Variables – Intrinsic Pulsating Cepheids W Virginis Delta Scuti RR Lyrae Mira Semiregular Irregular Beta Cephei Alpha Cygni RV Tauri Eruptive variables Flare stars T Tauri FU Orionis RCr Borealis Luminous blue Cataclysmic Symbiotics Micronova Dwarf nova Nova Supernova Type: Ia · Ib/c · II Hypernova GRBs Failed supernova By spectral types O (blue) B (blue-white) A (white) F (yellow-white) G (yellow) K (orange) M (red) Systems Planetary Star Stars in general Binary (see below) Triples Higher order Binary stars By observation Optical Visual Astrometric Spectroscopic Eclipsing Close binaries Detached Semidetached Contact X-ray Burster Stellar groupings Star cluster Stellar association Open Globular Hypercompact Constellation Asterism Galaxies Galaxies in general Group and cluster Satellite galaxy Supercluster By component Bulge Spiral arm Thin disk Thick disk Halo Corona Tidal tail Stellar stream By morphology Spiral Barred spiral Lenticular Elliptical Ring Irregular By size Brightest cluster Giant elliptical Dwarf By type Protogalaxy Starburst Dark Active Radio Seyfert Quasar Microquasar Blazar OVV Red nugget Void galaxy Discs and media Interplanetary Dust cloud Medium Magnetic field Stellar disc Accretion Circumstellar Protoplanetary Debris Interstellar Cloud Medium ORCs Intergalactic Dust Medium ORCs Nebulae Emission Planetary Supernova remnant Plerion H II region Reflection Dark nebulae Molecular cloud Bok globule Proplyd H I region Cosmic scale CMB Cosmic string (hypothet.) Dark matter MACHO WIMP Domain wall (hypothet.) Dust Filament LQG Void Supervoid Logarithmic representation of the observable universe with the notable astronomical objects known today. From down to up the celestial bodies are arranged according to their proximity to the Earth.

Infographic listing 210 notable astronomical objects marked on a central logarithmic map of the observable universe. A small view and some distinguishing features for each astronomical object are included.

See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal List of light sources List of Solar System objects List of Solar System objects by size Lists of astronomical objects Outer space References [ edit ] ^ Task Group on Astronomical Designations from IAU Commission 5 (April 2008).

"Naming Astronomical Objects" . International Astronomical Union (IAU).

Archived from the original on 2 August 2010 . Retrieved 4 July 2010 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "The Early Universe" .

NASA .

^ Narlikar, Jayant V. (1996).

Elements of Cosmology . Universities Press.

ISBN 81-7371-043-0 .

^ Smolin, Lee (1998).

The life of the cosmos .

Oxford University Press US . p.

35 .

ISBN 0-19-512664-5 .

^ Buta, Ronald James; Corwin, Harold G.; Odewahn, Stephen C. (2007).

The de Vaucouleurs atlas of galaxies .

Cambridge University Press . p. 301.

ISBN 978-0-521-82048-6 .

^ Hartung, Ernst Johannes (1984-10-18).

Astronomical Objects for Southern Telescopes . CUP Archive.

ISBN 0521318874 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 .

^ Elmegreen, Bruce G. (January 2010). "The nature and nurture of star clusters".

Star clusters: basic galactic building blocks throughout time and space, Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union, IAU Symposium . Vol. 266. pp.

3– 13.

arXiv : 0910.4638 .

Bibcode : 2010IAUS..266....3E .

doi : 10.1017/S1743921309990809 .

^ Hansen, Carl J.; Kawaler, Steven D.; Trimble, Virginia (2004).

Stellar interiors: physical principles, structure, and evolution . Astronomy and astrophysics library (2nd ed.). Springer. p.

86 .

ISBN 0-387-20089-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Astronomical objects .

SkyChart, Sky & Telescope at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 2005-06-13) Monthly skymaps for every location on Earth .

Archived 2007-09-13 at the Wayback Machine .

Portals : Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary ... in space Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared ( Far-infrared ) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray History Gamma-ray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Radar Spherical Multi-messenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Extremely Large Telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hale Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Astrophysics Astrotourism Binoculars Constellation IAU Cosmogony Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope X-ray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons Authority control databases : National Germany Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bfjw7
Cached time: 20250817025553
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.599 seconds
Real time usage: 0.772 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3195/1000000
Revision size: 29613/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 74006/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4707/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53201/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.344/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6134104/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  572.125      1 -total
 23.77%  136.003      1 Template:Reflist
 17.51%  100.192      2 Template:Navbox
 16.71%   95.618      1 Template:Astronomy_navbox
 14.38%   82.298      2 Template:Cite_web
 13.04%   74.612      1 Template:Short_description
  9.51%   54.419      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.12%   52.163      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.85%   50.611      1 Template:Side_box
  7.60%   43.468      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:206542:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817025553 and revision id 1306311259. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astronomical_object&oldid=1306311259 " Category : Astronomical objects Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template other archives Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 02:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astronomical object 103 languages Add topic

