Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents University of Pennsylvania Press 12 languages বাংলা Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Books publisher University of Pennsylvania Press Parent company University of Pennsylvania Status Active Founded March 26, 1890 ; 135 years ago ( March 26, 1890 ) Country of origin United States Headquarters location 3905 Spruce St., Philadelphia , Pennsylvania, U.S.

Distribution Hopkins Fulfillment Services (the Americas) Scholarly Book Services (Canada) Combined Academic Publishers (Europe, Asia, Africa, Australasia) [ 1 ] Publication types Books, magazine, journals Official website www .upenn .edu /pennpress / The University of Pennsylvania Press , also known as Penn Press , is a university press affiliated with the University of Pennsylvania , an Ivy League university in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania.

History [ edit ] The Potts House at 3905 Spruce Street in Philadelphia . A mid-nineteenth century villa, it serves as home of the press [ 2 ] The press was originally incorporated with by the Pennsylvania state government on March 26, 1890, [ 3 ] and the imprint of the University of Pennsylvania Press first appeared on publications in the 1890s, among the earliest such imprints in America. One of the press's first book publications, published in 1899, was The Philadelphia Negro: A Social Study , written by black reformer, scholar, and social critic W. E. B. Du Bois .

University of Pennsylvania Press has an active backlist of roughly 2,000 titles and an annual output of upward of 120 new books in a focused editorial program. It focuses heavily on publishing works related to American history and culture, ancient, medieval, and Renaissance studies, anthropology, landscape architecture, studio arts, human rights, Jewish studies, and political science. The press also publishes 27 peer-reviewed academic journals , [ 4 ] mostly in the humanities, and the magazine Dissent .

As of July 2023, [update] Wharton School Press is an imprint of University of Pennsylvania Press.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The University of Pennsylvania Press, Inc. is a nonprofit Pennsylvania corporation wholly owned by the University of Pennsylvania, which maintains nonprofit tax status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Code .

University of Pennsylvania Press is headquartered at 3905 Spruce Street in Philadelphia . The building housing the press is the former Potts House built by the Wilson Brothers & Company architecture firm in 1876.

[ 9 ] The house previously served as both the headquarters of International House Philadelphia and WXPN .

See also [ edit ] Literature portal Pennsylvania portal List of English-language book publishing companies List of university presses Journal of Austrian-American History References [ edit ] ^ Ordering Information ^ "Spruce Street, 3905 | University of Pennsylvania Facilities and Real Estate Services" .

facilities.upenn.edu . Retrieved May 25, 2024 .

^ "University of Pennsylvania Press" .

De Gruyter . Retrieved June 26, 2020 .

^ "Homepage" .

journals.pennpress.org . Retrieved September 23, 2023 .

^ "Wharton School Press becomes an imprint of the University of Pennsylvania Press" .

University of Pennsylvania Press . July 11, 2023.

Archived from the original on October 26, 2023.

^ "Wharton School Press Merges with Penn Press" .

Publishers Weekly . July 11, 2023.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2024.

^ "Wharton School Press Becomes Imprint of Univ. of Pennsylvania Press" .

Shelf Awareness . July 13, 2023.

^ Somers, Erin (July 12, 2023).

"Imprints: Wharton School Press" .

Publishers Lunch .

^ Mark Frazier Lloyd (August 2000).

"A Brief History of the "Carriage House" at the Rear of 3905 Spruce Street: Part I: The Family of Joseph D. Potts, its Connection with the University, and the Property at 3905 Spruce Street  1875 - 1917" . University of Pennsylvania Archives and Records Center. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018.

External links [ edit ] Official website Penn Press Log Historic American Buildings Survey documentation, filed under 3905 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Philadelphia County, PA: HABS No. PA-1638, " Potts House ", 10 photos, 1 data page, 1 photo caption page HABS No. PA-1638-A, " Potts House, Carriage House and Stable ", 1 photo, 1 photo caption page v t e University of Pennsylvania Schools Arts and Sciences College Communication Dental Design Education Engineering Law Medicine Nursing Social Policy Veterinary Wharton Programs Advanced Judaic Studies Government Global Communication Studies Mediterranean Art and Archaeology International Studies and Business Management and Technology Lauder Institute Health Economics Networked and Social Systems Engineering Molecular Life Science Public Policy Diplomacy and Global Engagement Places University City Annenberg Center College Hall College Houses David Rittenhouse Laboratory Fisher Fine Arts Library Historic District Houston Hall Institute of Contemporary Art Irvine Auditorium Kelly Writers House Meyerson Hall Moore School Morris Arboretum Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology New Bolton Center Penn Park Perelman Quadrangle The Quadrangle Richards Laboratories Van Pelt Library Athletics Teams Men's basketball Women's basketball Football Men's Lacrosse Women's Lacrosse Rowing Men's soccer Men's squash Venues Class of 1923 Arena Franklin Field Meiklejohn Stadium Palestra Traditions Band " Fight on, Pennsylvania!

" Penn Relays Media The Daily Pennsylvanian 34th Street Magazine Under the Button Pennsylvania Punch Bowl Penn Press Wharton School Publishing WQHS WXPN Life Student life Penn Band Mask and Wig Glee Club Masala MERT Philomathean Society Penn Club of New York " Hail, Pennsylvania!

" " The Red and Blue " People President : J. Larry Jameson (interim) Notable alumni and faculty Wharton alumni Art Benjamin Franklin statue Edgar Fahs Smith statue George Whitefield statue The Button sculpture Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX This article about a university or college in Pennsylvania is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e This article about a United States publishing company is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_of_Pennsylvania_Press&oldid=1289940990 " Categories : University of Pennsylvania Press 1890 establishments in Pennsylvania American companies established in 1890 Book publishing companies based in Pennsylvania Companies based in Philadelphia Historic American Buildings Survey in Philadelphia Publishing companies established in 1890 University of Pennsylvania Press academic journals University presses of the United States Northeastern United States university stubs Pennsylvania school stubs United States publishing company stubs Hidden categories: Use American English from April 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All stub articles This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 20:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents University of Pennsylvania Press 12 languages Add topic

