Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Single-color gardens Toggle Single-color gardens subsection 1.1 White garden 2 Role of symbolism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Monochromatic garden 1 language 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Color garden ) Type of garden focused on multi- or monochromatism The White Garden at Sissinghurst A monochromatic garden is a garden in which a single color is highlighted.

Single-color gardens [ edit ] Such a garden is planted so that it overwhelms the observer with a single color.  While this may seem a rather bland approach at first, such gardens were made popular by the work of famous garden designers such as Gertrude Jekyll and Vita Sackville-West . Sackville-West, for example, created what may have been one of the most famous single-color gardens, the White Garden room of the Sissinghurst Castle Garden .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The red garden at Lytes Cary Many single-color gardens use flowers of different shades, such as light yellow and deep gold, or a range that includes dark burgundy, bright scarlet, and also pink for a red garden.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] (A similar idea uses analogous colors , such as purple, red, and orange, rather than a single color.

[ 5 ] ) Plants with colored leaves, such as silver leaves or plants with variegated foliage for a white garden, might also be included.

[ 4 ] Britzer Garten has two monochromatic gardens, one in red and another in yellow.

The color for a monochromatic garden may be chosen for any reason, including to fit a small garden, as part of a clean, contemporary design, or to highlight a favorite color .

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] Another possibility is an all-green garden, which may feel peaceful or harmonious.

[ 1 ] A monochromatic edible garden is possible, but more challenging to design than a flower garden in any color except green.

[ 7 ] Yellow variegated leaves can be difficult to include in a multi-colored garden, but they blend easily into an all-yellow garden, such as all-yellow Gold Border garden at Wave Hill in New York.

[ 8 ] Beyond the choice of color, single-color gardens are designed with a variety of types and sizes of flowers as well as plants of different heights, shapes and textures.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Other elements of the garden, such as pathways, walls, and furniture, may match or contrast with the chosen color.

[ 4 ] White garden [ edit ] White Garden at Kensington Palace A white garden is a feature garden composed of plants that produce white flowers and spathes as well as plants with a white or silvery cast to their foliage. The white garden is a variant of the color garden. The most essential feature of the white garden is its unity of color.

1912 painting by Henri Le Sidaner of a white garden at dusk The white garden is an informal gardening style that is similar in design to the English cottage garden. The open and informal design creates associations with romance, peace, and elegance. The white flowers are not usually placed in clusters, but spread throughout the garden's green areas, creating a natural look and feel. The mildly dense placement of white flowers creates a luminescent sight that is especially powerful in the twilight .  Because of this effect, they are sometimes called moon gardens .

[ 9 ] The white flowers in a white garden are not necessarily pure white; they may have hints of other colors, such as gray, blue, pink, yellow, or green.

[ 2 ] The White Garden at Sissinghurst, for example, contains white, grey and silver.

[ 10 ] Flowers used in white gardens may include: White camellia Shasta daisy White lilac Madonna lily White periwinkle White rose Role of symbolism [ edit ] The color white, and white flowers in particular, carry a vast amount of symbolism .

In parts of the US in 1915, single-color flower gardens featuring yellow flowers were used as a symbol of support for women's right to vote .

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Gardens portal List of garden types References [ edit ] ^ a b Phillips, Charles (2004).

Color for Life . Ryland Peters & Small. pp. 29, 77.

ISBN 978-1-84172-691-5 .

^ a b Taylor, Patricia A. (1995).

Perennials . Better Homes and Gardens Books. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-696-02554-9 .

Probably the most famous single-color garden is Vita Sackville-West's white garden at Sissinghurst in England.

^ a b Halpin, Anne Moyer (2006-01-01). "Planning and Designing".

Seascape Gardening: From New England to the Carolinas . Storey Publishing. p. 38.

ISBN 978-1-58017-531-9 .

^ a b c d e Better Homes & Gardens (2010-12-28).

Better Homes & Gardens Perennial Gardening . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

58– 59.

ISBN 978-0-470-87844-6 .

^ Hill, Lewis; Hill, Nancy (2012-05-04).

The Flower Gardener's Bible: A Complete Guide to Colorful Blooms All Season Long: 400 Favorite Flowers, Time-Tested Techniques, Creative Garden Designs, and a Lifetime of Gardening Wisdom . Storey Publishing, LLC. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1-60342-807-1 .

^ Morrison, Susan (2018-02-07).

The Less Is More Garden: Big Ideas for Designing Your Small Yard . Timber Press. p. 151.

ISBN 978-1-60469-791-9 .

^ Soler, Ivette (2011-02-23).

The Edible Front Yard: The Mow-Less, Grow-More Plan for a Beautiful, Bountiful Garden . Timber Press. p. 108.

ISBN 978-1-60469-199-3 .

^ Christopher, Thomas (2019-09-17).

Nature into Art: The Gardens of Wave Hill . Timber Press. pp.

58– 69.

ISBN 978-1-60469-851-0 .

^ Heath, Carolyn (1994).

550 Perennial Garden Ideas . Simon and Schuster. p. 92.

ISBN 978-0-671-79839-0 .

^ Helen Champion.

"A moonlit masterpiece at Sissinghurst Castle Garden" .

National Trust .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2018 .

^ Chapman, Mary (2014-03-20).

Making Noise, Making News: Suffrage Print Culture and U.S. Modernism . Oxford University Press. pp.

143– 144.

ISBN 978-0-19-998830-3 .

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject This garden-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monochromatic_garden&oldid=1192797128 " Categories : Types of garden Garden stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 31 December 2023, at 10:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monochromatic garden 1 language Add topic

