Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Education 1.2 World War II 1.3 Personal 1.4 Harvard 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Logic 2.2 Set theory 2.3 Metaphysics 2.3.1 Rejection of the analytic–synthetic distinction 2.3.2 Confirmation holism and ontological relativity 2.3.3 Existence and its contrary 2.3.4 Ontological commitment 2.3.5 Indispensability argument for mathematical realism 2.4 Epistemology 3 In popular culture 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Selected books 4.2 Important articles 5 Filmography 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Willard Van Orman Quine 49 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from W. V. O. Quine ) American philosopher and logician (1908–2000) Willard Van Orman Quine Quine in 1980 Born ( 1908-06-25 ) June 25, 1908 Akron, Ohio , U.S.

Died December 25, 2000 (2000-12-25) (aged 92) Boston, Massachusetts , U.S.

Spouses Naomi Clayton ​ ​ ( m.

1932; div.

1947) ​ Marjorie Boynton ​ ​ ( m.

1948; died 1998) ​ Awards Rolf Schock Prize in Logic and Philosophy (1993) Kyoto Prize (1996) Education Education Oberlin College ( BA ) Harvard University ( PhD ) Thesis The Logic of Sequences: A Generalization of Principia Mathematica (1932) Doctoral advisor Alfred North Whitehead Other advisors C. I. Lewis [ 2 ] Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Institutions Harvard University Doctoral students David Lewis , Gilbert Harman , Dagfinn Føllesdal , Hao Wang , Burton Dreben , Charles Parsons , John Myhill , Robert McNaughton Notable students Donald Davidson , Daniel Dennett Main interests Logic , ontology , epistemology , philosophy of language , philosophy of mind , philosophy of mathematics , philosophy of science , set theory Notable ideas New Foundations , abstract objects , indeterminacy of translation , referential inscrutability , naturalized epistemology , ontological commitment , [ 1 ] Duhem–Quine thesis , Quine–Putnam indispensability argument , confirmation holism , Plato's beard , predicate functor logic Willard Van Orman Quine ( / k w aɪ n / KWYNE ; known to his friends as "Van"; [ 3 ] June 25, 1908 – December 25, 2000) was an American philosopher and logician in the analytic tradition , recognized as "one of the most influential philosophers of the twentieth century".

[ 4 ] He was the Edgar Pierce Chair of Philosophy at Harvard University from 1956 to 1978.

Quine was a teacher of logic and set theory . He was famous for his position that first-order logic is the only kind worthy of the name, and developed his own system of mathematics and set theory, known as New Foundations . In the philosophy of mathematics , he and his Harvard colleague Hilary Putnam developed the Quine–Putnam indispensability argument , an argument for the reality of mathematical entities .

[ 5 ] He was the main proponent of the view that philosophy is not conceptual analysis , but continuous with science; it is the abstract branch of the empirical sciences. This led to his famous quip that " philosophy of science is philosophy enough".

[ 6 ] He led a "systematic attempt to understand science from within the resources of science itself" [ 7 ] and developed an influential naturalized epistemology that tried to provide "an improved scientific explanation of how we have developed elaborate scientific theories on the basis of meager sensory input".

[ 7 ] He also advocated holism in science, known as the Duhem–Quine thesis .

His major writings include the papers "On What There Is" (1948), which elucidated Bertrand Russell 's theory of descriptions and contains Quine's famous dictum of ontological commitment, "To be is to be the value of a variable ", and " Two Dogmas of Empiricism " (1951), which attacked the traditional analytic-synthetic distinction and reductionism, undermining the then-popular logical positivism , advocating instead a form of semantic holism and ontological relativity . They also include the books The Web of Belief (1970), which advocates a kind of coherentism , and Word and Object (1960), which further developed these positions and introduced Quine's famous indeterminacy of translation thesis, advocating a behaviorist theory of meaning .

Biography [ edit ] Quine's parents were Robert Cloyd Quine and Harriet Ellis Van Orman. Quine grew up in Akron, Ohio , where he lived with his parents and older brother Robert Cloyd. His father was a manufacturing entrepreneur (founder of the Akron Equipment Company, which produced tire molds) and his mother was a schoolteacher and housewife .

[ 8 ] [ 3 ] Quine became an atheist around the age of 9 [ 9 ] and remained one for the rest of his life.

[ 10 ] Education [ edit ] Quine received his B.A.

summa cum laude in mathematics from Oberlin College in 1930, and his Ph.D. in philosophy from Harvard University in 1932. His thesis supervisor was Alfred North Whitehead . He was then appointed a Harvard Junior Fellow , which excused him from having to teach for four years. During the academic year 1932–33, he travelled in Europe thanks to a Sheldon Fellowship, meeting Polish logicians (including Stanislaw Lesniewski and Alfred Tarski ) and members of the Vienna Circle (including Rudolf Carnap ), as well as the logical positivist A. J. Ayer .

[ 3 ] It was in Prague that Quine developed a passion for philosophy, thanks to Carnap, whom he defined as his "true and only maître à penser ".

[ 11 ] World War II [ edit ] Quine arranged for Tarski to be invited to the September 1939 Unity of Science Congress in Cambridge, for which the Jewish Tarski sailed on the last ship to leave Danzig before Nazi Germany invaded Poland and triggered World War II . Tarski survived the war and worked another 44 years in the US. During the war, Quine lectured on logic in Brazil , in Portuguese, and served in the United States Navy in a military intelligence role, deciphering messages from German submarines, and reaching the rank of lieutenant commander.

[ 3 ] Quine could lecture in French, German, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish as well as his native English.

Personal [ edit ] He had four children by two marriages.

[ 3 ] Guitarist Robert Quine was his nephew.

Quine was politically conservative, but the bulk of his writing was in technical areas of philosophy removed from direct political issues.

[ 12 ] He did, however, write in defense of several conservative positions: for example, he wrote in defense of moral censorship ; [ 13 ] while, in his autobiography, he made some criticisms of American postwar academics.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Harvard [ edit ] At Harvard, Quine helped supervise the Harvard graduate theses of, among others, David Lewis , Gilbert Harman , Dagfinn Føllesdal , Hao Wang , Hugues LeBlanc , Henry Hiz and George Myro . For the academic year 1964–1965, Quine was a fellow on the faculty in the Center for Advanced Studies at Wesleyan University .

[ 16 ] In 1980
Quine received an honorary doctorate from the Faculty of Humanities at Uppsala University , Sweden.

[ 17 ] Quine's student Dagfinn Føllesdal noted that Quine suffered from memory loss towards his final years. The deterioration of his short-term memory was so severe that he struggled to continue following arguments. Quine also had considerable difficulty in his project to make the desired revisions to Word and Object . Before passing away, Quine noted to Morton White : "I do not remember what my illness is called, Althusser or Alzheimer , but since I cannot remember it, it must be Alzheimer." He died from the illness on Christmas Day in 2000.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Work [ edit ] Quine's Ph.D. thesis and early publications were on formal logic and set theory . Only after World War II did he, by virtue of seminal papers on ontology , epistemology and language, emerge as a major philosopher. By the 1960s, he had worked out his " naturalized epistemology " whose aim was to answer all substantive questions of knowledge and meaning using the methods and tools of the natural sciences. Quine roundly rejected the notion that there should be a "first philosophy," a theoretical standpoint somehow prior to natural science and capable of justifying it. These views are intrinsic to his naturalism .

Like the majority of analytic philosophers, who were mostly interested in systematic thinking, Quine evinced little interest in the philosophical canon : only once did he teach a course in the history of philosophy, on David Hume , in 1946.

[ 20 ] [ clarification needed ] Logic [ edit ] Over the course of his career, Quine published numerous technical and expository papers on formal logic, some of which are reprinted in his Selected Logic Papers and in The Ways of Paradox . His most well-known collection of papers is From A Logical Point of View . Quine confined logic to classical bivalent first-order logic , hence to truth and falsity under any (nonempty) universe of discourse . Hence the following were not logic for Quine: Higher-order logic and set theory. He referred to higher-order logic as "set theory in disguise"; Much of what Principia Mathematica included in logic was not logic for Quine.

Formal systems involving intensional notions, especially modality . Quine was especially hostile to modal logic with quantification , a battle he largely lost when Saul Kripke 's relational semantics became canonical for modal logics .

Quine wrote three undergraduate texts on formal logic: Elementary Logic . While teaching an introductory course in 1940, Quine discovered that extant texts for philosophy students did not do justice to quantification theory or first-order predicate logic . Quine wrote this book in 6 weeks as an ad hoc solution to his teaching needs.

Methods of Logic . The four editions of this book resulted from a more advanced undergraduate course in logic Quine taught from the end of World War II until his 1978 retirement.

Philosophy of Logic . A concise and witty undergraduate treatment of a number of Quinian themes, such as the prevalence of use-mention confusions, the dubiousness of quantified modal logic , and the non-logical character of higher-order logic.

Mathematical Logic is based on Quine's graduate teaching during the 1930s and 1940s. It shows that much of what Principia Mathematica took more than 1000 pages to say can be said in 250 pages. The proofs are concise, even cryptic. The last chapter, on Gödel's incompleteness theorem and Tarski's indefinability theorem , along with the article Quine (1946), became a launching point for Raymond Smullyan 's later lucid exposition of these and related results.

Quine's work in logic gradually became dated in some respects. Techniques he did not teach and discuss include analytic tableaux , recursive functions , and model theory . His treatment of metalogic left something to be desired. For example, Mathematical Logic does not include any proofs of soundness and completeness . Early in his career, the notation of his writings on logic was often idiosyncratic. His later writings nearly always employed the now-dated notation of Principia Mathematica . Set against all this are the simplicity of his preferred method (as exposited in his Methods of Logic ) for determining the satisfiability of quantified formulas, the richness of his philosophical and linguistic insights, and the fine prose in which he expressed them.

Most of Quine's original work in formal logic from 1960 onwards was on variants of his predicate functor logic , one of several ways that have been proposed for doing logic without quantifiers . For a comprehensive treatment of predicate functor logic and its history, see Quine (1976). For an introduction, see ch. 45 of his Methods of Logic .

Quine was very warm to the possibility that formal logic would eventually be applied outside of philosophy and mathematics. He wrote several papers on the sort of Boolean algebra employed in electrical engineering , and with Edward J. McCluskey , devised the Quine–McCluskey algorithm of reducing Boolean equations to a minimum covering sum of prime implicants .

Set theory [ edit ] While his contributions to logic include elegant expositions and a number of technical results, it is in set theory that Quine was most innovative. He always maintained that mathematics required set theory and that set theory was quite distinct from logic. He flirted with Nelson Goodman 's nominalism for a while [ 21 ] but backed away when he failed to find a nominalist grounding of mathematics.

[ 22 ] Over the course of his career, Quine proposed three axiomatic set theories.

New Foundations , NF, creates and manipulates sets using a single axiom schema for set admissibility, namely an axiom schema of stratified comprehension, whereby all individuals satisfying a stratified formula compose a set. A stratified formula is one that type theory would allow, were the ontology to include types. However, Quine's set theory does not feature types. The metamathematics of NF are curious. NF allows many "large" sets the now-canonical ZFC set theory does not allow, even sets for which the axiom of choice does not hold. Since the axiom of choice holds for all finite sets, the failure of this axiom in NF proves that NF includes infinite sets. The consistency of NF relative to other formal systems adequate for mathematics is an open question, albeit that a number of candidate proofs are current in the NF community suggesting that NF is equiconsistent with Zermelo set theory without Choice. A modification of NF, NFU , due to R. B. Jensen and admitting urelements (entities that can be members of sets but that lack elements), turns out to be consistent relative to Peano arithmetic , thus vindicating the intuition behind NF. NF and NFU are the only Quinean set theories with a following. For a derivation of foundational mathematics in NF, see Rosser (1952); The set theory of Mathematical Logic is NF augmented by the proper classes of von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory , except axiomatized in a much simpler way; The set theory of Set Theory and Its Logic does away with stratification and is almost entirely derived from a single axiom schema. Quine derived the foundations of mathematics once again. This book includes the definitive exposition of Quine's theory of virtual sets and relations, and surveyed axiomatic set theory as it stood circa 1960.

All three set theories admit a universal class, but since they are free of any hierarchy of types , they have no need for a distinct universal class at each type level.

Quine's set theory and its background logic were driven by a desire to minimize posits; each innovation is pushed as far as it can be pushed before further innovations are introduced. For Quine, there is but one connective, the Sheffer stroke , and one quantifier, the universal quantifier . All polyadic predicates can be reduced to one dyadic predicate, interpretable as set membership. His rules of proof were limited to modus ponens and substitution. He preferred conjunction to either disjunction or the conditional , because conjunction has the least semantic ambiguity. He was delighted to discover early in his career that all of first order logic and set theory could be grounded in a mere two primitive notions: abstraction and inclusion . For an elegant introduction to the parsimony of Quine's approach to logic, see his "New Foundations for Mathematical Logic", ch. 5 in his From a Logical Point of View .

Metaphysics [ edit ] Quine has had numerous influences on contemporary metaphysics . He coined the term " abstract object ".

[ 23 ] In his famous essay "On What There Is", he connected each of the three main metaphysical ontological positions— realism / conceptualism / nominalism —with one of three dominant schools in the modern philosophy of mathematics : logicism , intuitionism , and formalism respectively. In the same work, he coined the term " Plato's beard " to refer to the problem of empty names : Suppose now that two philosophers, McX and I, differ over ontology . Suppose McX maintains there is something which I maintain there is not. McX can, quite consistently with his own point of view, describe our difference of opinion by saying that I refuse to recognize certain entities ... When I try to formulate our difference of opinion, on the other hand, I seem to be in a predicament. I cannot admit that there are some things which McX countenances and I do not, for in admitting that there are such things I should be contradicting my own rejection of them ... This is the old Platonic riddle of nonbeing. Nonbeing must in some sense be, otherwise what is it that there is not? This tangled doctrine might be nicknamed Plato's beard ; historically it has proved tough, frequently dulling the edge of Occam’s razor.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Quine was unsympathetic, however, to the claim that saying 'X does not exist' is a tacit acceptance of X's existence and, thus, a contradiction. Appealing to Bertrand Russell and his theory of "singular descriptions", Quine explains how Russell was able to make sense of "complex descriptive names" ('the present King of France', 'the author of Waverly ' , etc.) by thinking about them as merely "fragments of the whole sentences". For example, 'The author of Waverly was a poet' becomes 'some thing is such that it is the author of Waverly and was a poet, and nothing else is such that it is the author of Waverly' .

[ 26 ] Using this sort of analysis with the word ' Pegasus ' (that which Quine is wanting to assert does not exist), he turns Pegasus into a description. Turning the word 'Pegasus' into a description is to turn 'Pegasus' into a predicate, to use a term of First-order logic : i.e. a property. As such, when we say 'Pegasus', we are really saying 'the thing that is Pegasus' or 'the thing that Pegasizes' . This introduces, to use another term from logic, bound variables (ex: 'everything', 'something,' etc.) As Quine explains, bound variables, "far from purporting to be names specifically...do not purport to be names at all: they refer to entities generally, with a kind of studied ambiguity peculiar to themselves." [ 27 ] Putting it another way, to say 'I hate everything' is a very different statement than saying 'I hate Bertrand Russell', because the words 'Bertrand Russell' are a proper name that refer to a very specific person. Whereas the word 'everything' is a placeholder. It does not refer to a specific entity or entities. Quine is able, therefore, to make a meaningful claim about Pegasus' nonexistence for the simple reason that the placeholder (a thing) happens to be empty. It just so happens that the world does not contain a thing that is such that it is winged and it is a horse.

Rejection of the analytic–synthetic distinction [ edit ] See also: Two Dogmas of Empiricism In the 1930s and 40s, discussions with Rudolf Carnap , Nelson Goodman and Alfred Tarski , among others, led Quine to doubt the tenability of the distinction between "analytic" statements [ 28 ] —those true simply by the meanings of their words, such as "No bachelor is married"— and "synthetic" statements, those true or false by virtue of facts about the world, such as "There is a cat on the mat." [ 29 ] This distinction was central to logical positivism . Although Quine is not normally associated with verificationism , some philosophers believe the tenet is not incompatible with his general philosophy of language, citing his Harvard colleague B. F. Skinner and his analysis of language in Verbal Behavior .

[ 30 ] But Quine believes, with all due respect to his "great friend" [ 31 ] Skinner, that the ultimate reason is to be found in neurology and not in behavior. For him, behavioral criteria establish only the terms of the problem, the solution of which, however, lies in neurology .

[ 31 ] Like other analytic philosophers before him, Quine accepted the definition of "analytic" as "true in virtue of meaning alone." Unlike them, however, he concluded that ultimately the definition was circular . In other words, Quine accepted that analytic statements are those that are true by definition, then argued that the notion of truth by definition was unsatisfactory.

Quine's chief objection to analyticity is with the notion of cognitive synonymy (sameness of meaning). He argues that analytical sentences are typically divided into two kinds; sentences that are clearly logically true (e.g. "no unmarried man is married") and the more dubious ones; sentences like "no bachelor is married." Previously it was thought that if you can prove that there is synonymity between "unmarried man" and "bachelor," you have proved that both sentences are logically true and therefore self evident. Quine however gives several arguments for why this is not possible, for instance that "bachelor" in some contexts means a Bachelor of Arts , not an unmarried man.

[ 32 ] Confirmation holism and ontological relativity [ edit ] Colleague Hilary Putnam called Quine's indeterminacy of translation thesis "the most fascinating and the most discussed philosophical argument since Kant 's Transcendental Deduction of the Categories ".

[ 33 ] The central theses underlying it are ontological relativity and the related doctrine of confirmation holism . The premise of confirmation holism is that all theories (and the propositions derived from them) are under-determined by empirical data (data, sensory-data , evidence); although some theories are not justifiable, failing to fit with the data or being unworkably complex, there are many equally justifiable alternatives. While the Greeks ' assumption that (unobservable) Homeric gods exist is false and our supposition of (unobservable) electromagnetic waves is true, both are to be justified solely by their ability to explain our observations.

The gavagai thought experiment tells about a linguist, who tries to find out, what the expression gavagai means, when uttered by a speaker of a yet unknown, native language upon seeing a rabbit. At first glance, it seems that gavagai simply translates with rabbit . Now, Quine points out that the background language and its referring devices might fool the linguist here, because he is misled in a sense that he always makes direct comparisons between the foreign language and his own. However, when shouting gavagai , and pointing at a rabbit, the natives could as well refer to something like undetached rabbit-parts , or rabbit- tropes and it would not make any observable difference. The behavioural data the linguist could collect from the native speaker would be the same in every case, or to reword it, several translation hypotheses could be built on the same sensoric stimuli.

Quine concluded his " Two Dogmas of Empiricism " as follows: As an empiricist I continue to think of the conceptual scheme of science as a tool, ultimately, for predicting future experience in the light of past experience. Physical objects are conceptually imported into the situation as convenient intermediaries not by definition in terms of experience, but simply as irreducible posits comparable, epistemologically, to the gods of Homer …. For my part I do, qua lay physicist, believe in physical objects and not in Homer's gods; and I consider it a scientific error to believe otherwise. But in point of epistemological footing, the physical objects and the gods differ only in degree and not in kind. Both sorts of entities enter our conceptions only as cultural posits.

Quine's ontological relativism (evident in the passage above) led him to agree with Pierre Duhem that for any collection of empirical evidence , there would always be many theories able to account for it, known as the Duhem–Quine thesis . However, Duhem's holism is much more restricted and limited than Quine's. For Duhem, underdetermination applies only to physics or possibly to natural science , while for Quine it applies to all of human knowledge. Thus, while it is possible to verify or falsify whole theories, it is not possible to verify or falsify individual statements. Almost any particular statement can be saved, given sufficiently radical modifications of the containing theory. For Quine, scientific thought forms a coherent web in which any part could be altered in the light of empirical evidence, and in which no empirical evidence could force the revision of a given part.

Existence and its contrary [ edit ] The problem of non-referring names is an old puzzle in philosophy, which Quine captured when he wrote, A curious thing about the ontological problem is its simplicity. It can be put into three Anglo-Saxon monosyllables: 'What is there?' It can be answered, moreover, in a word—'Everything'—and everyone will accept this answer as true.

[ 24 ] More directly, the controversy goes: How can we talk about Pegasus ? To what does the word 'Pegasus' refer? If our answer is, 'Something', then we seem to believe in mystical entities; if our answer is, 'nothing', then we seem to talk about nothing and what sense can be made of this? Certainly when we said that Pegasus was a mythological winged horse we make sense, and moreover we speak the truth! If we speak the truth, this must be truth about something . So we cannot be speaking of nothing.

Quine resists the temptation to say that non-referring terms are meaningless for reasons made clear above. Instead he tells us that we must first determine whether our terms refer or not before we know the proper way to understand them. However, Czesław Lejewski criticizes this belief for reducing the matter to empirical discovery when it seems we should have a formal distinction between referring and non-referring terms or elements of our domain. Lejewski writes further: This state of affairs does not seem to be very satisfactory. The idea that some of our rules of inference should depend on empirical information, which may not be forthcoming, is so foreign to the character of logical inquiry that a thorough re-examination of the two inferences [existential generalization and universal instantiation] may prove worth our while.

Lejewski then goes on to offer a description of free logic , which he claims accommodates an answer to the problem.

Lejewski also points out that free logic additionally can handle the problem of the empty set for statements like ∀ ∀ x F x → → ∃ ∃ x F x {\displaystyle \forall x\,Fx\rightarrow \exists x\,Fx} . Quine had considered the problem of the empty set unrealistic, which left Lejewski unsatisfied.

[ 34 ] Ontological commitment [ edit ] The notion of ontological commitment plays a central role in Quine's contributions to ontology.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] A theory is ontologically committed to an entity if that entity must exist in order for the theory to be true.

[ 37 ] Quine proposed that the best way to determine this is by translating the theory in question into first-order predicate logic . Of special interest in this translation are the logical constants known as existential quantifiers (' ∃ '), whose meaning corresponds to expressions like "there exists..." or "for some...". They are used to bind the variables in the expression following the quantifier.

[ 38 ] The ontological commitments of the theory then correspond to the variables bound by existential quantifiers.

[ 39 ] For example, the sentence "There are electrons" could be translated as " ∃ x Electron ( x ) ", in which the bound variable x ranges over electrons, resulting in an ontological commitment to electrons.

[ 37 ] This approach is summed up by Quine's famous dictum that "[t]o be is to be the value of a variable".

[ 40 ] Quine applied this method to various traditional disputes in ontology. For example, he reasoned from the sentence "There are prime numbers between 1000 and 1010" to an ontological commitment to the existence of numbers, i.e.

realism about numbers.

[ 40 ] This method by itself is not sufficient for ontology since it depends on a theory in order to result in ontological commitments. Quine proposed that we should base our ontology on our best scientific theory.

[ 37 ] Various followers of Quine's method chose to apply it to different fields, for example to "everyday conceptions expressed in natural language".

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Indispensability argument for mathematical realism [ edit ] In philosophy of mathematics , he and his Harvard colleague Hilary Putnam developed the Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis , an argument for the reality of mathematical entities .

[ 5 ] The form of the argument is as follows.

One must have ontological commitments to all entities that are indispensable to the best scientific theories, and to those entities only (commonly referred to as "all and only").

Mathematical entities are indispensable to the best scientific theories. Therefore, One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities.

[ 43 ] The justification for the first premise is the most controversial. Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non-scientific entities, and hence to defend the "only" part of "all and only". The assertion that "all" entities postulated in scientific theories, including numbers, should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism . Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion, but as a whole, there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well-confirmed theories. This puts the nominalist who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non-Euclidean geometry , but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics, for example, in a difficult position.

[ 43 ] Epistemology [ edit ] Just as he challenged the dominant analytic–synthetic distinction, Quine also took aim at traditional normative epistemology . According to Quine, traditional epistemology tried to justify the sciences, but this effort (as exemplified by Rudolf Carnap ) failed, and so we should replace traditional epistemology with an empirical study of what sensory inputs produce what theoretical outputs: [ 44 ] Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter of psychology and hence of natural science. It studies a natural phenomenon, viz., a physical human subject. This human subject is accorded a certain experimentally controlled input—certain patterns of irradiation in assorted frequencies, for instance—and in the fullness of time the subject delivers as output a description of the three-dimensional external world and its history. The relation between the meager input and the torrential output is a relation that we are prompted to study for somewhat the same reasons that always prompted epistemology: namely, in order to see how evidence relates to theory, and in what ways one's theory of nature transcends any available evidence... But a conspicuous difference between old epistemology and the epistemological enterprise in this new psychological setting is that we can now make free use of empirical psychology.

[ 45 ] As previously reported, in other occasions Quine used the term "neurology" instead of "empirical psychology".

[ 31 ] Quine's proposal is controversial among contemporary philosophers and has several critics, with Jaegwon Kim the most prominent among them.

[ 46 ] In popular culture [ edit ] A computer program whose output is its own source code is called a " quine " after Quine. This usage was introduced by Douglas Hofstadter in his 1979 book, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid .

Quine is a recurring character in the webcomic " Existential Comics ".

[ 47 ] Quine was selected for inclusion in the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry 's "Pantheon of Skeptics", which celebrates contributors to the cause of scientific skepticism .

[ 48 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Selected books [ edit ] 1934 A System of Logistic . Harvard Univ. Press.

[ 49 ] 1951 (1940).

Mathematical Logic . Harvard Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-674-55451-5 .

1980 (1941).

Elementary Logic . Harvard Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-674-24451-6 .

1982 (1950).

Methods of Logic . Harvard Univ. Press.

1980 (1953).

From a Logical Point of View . Harvard Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-674-32351-3 . Contains " Two dogmas of Empiricism.

" 1960 Word and Object . MIT Press; ISBN 0-262-67001-1 . The closest thing Quine wrote to a philosophical treatise. Ch. 2 sets out the indeterminacy of translation thesis.

1969 (1963).

Set Theory and Its Logic . Harvard Univ. Press.

1966.

Selected Logic Papers . New York: Random House.

1976 (1966).

The Ways of Paradox . Harvard Univ. Press.

1969 Ontological Relativity and Other Essays . Columbia Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-231-08357-2 . Contains chapters on ontological relativity , naturalized epistemology , and natural kinds .

1970 (2nd ed., 1978). With J. S. Ullian.

The Web of Belief . New York: Random House.

1986 (1970).

The Philosophy of Logic . Harvard Univ. Press.

1974 (1971).

The Roots of Reference . Open Court Publishing Company ISBN 0-8126-9101-6 (developed from Quine's Carus Lectures ).

1981.

Theories and Things . Harvard Univ. Press.

1985.

The Time of My Life: An Autobiography . Cambridge, The MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-17003-5 .

1987.

Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary . Harvard Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-14-012522-1 . A work of essays, many subtly humorous, for lay readers, very revealing of the breadth of his interests.

1992 (1990).

Pursuit of Truth . Harvard Univ. Press. A short, lively synthesis of his thought for advanced students and general readers not fooled by its simplicity.

ISBN 0-674-73951-5 .

1995.

From Stimulus to Science . Harvard Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-674-32635-0 .

2004.

Quintessence: Basic Readings from the Philosophy of W V Quine . Harvard Univ. Press.

2008.

Confessions of a Confirmed Extensionalist and Other Essays . Harvard Univ. Press.

Important articles [ edit ] 1946, "Concatenation as a basis for arithmetic". Reprinted in his Selected Logic Papers . Harvard Univ. Press.

1948, " On What There Is ", Review of Metaphysics 2 (5) ( JSTOR ). Reprinted in his 1953 From a Logical Point of View . Harvard University Press.

1951, " Two Dogmas of Empiricism ", The Philosophical Review 60 : 20–43. Reprinted in his 1953 From a Logical Point of View . Harvard University Press.

1956, "Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes", Journal of Philosophy 53 . Reprinted in his 1976 Ways of Paradox . Harvard Univ. Press: 185–196.

1969, "Epistemology Naturalized" in Ontological Relativity and Other Essays . New York: Columbia University Press: 69–90.

"Truth by Convention", first published in 1936. Reprinted in the book, Readings in Philosophical Analysis , edited by Herbert Feigl and Wilfrid Sellars , pp. 250–273, Appleton-Century-Crofts , 1949.

Filmography [ edit ] Bryan Magee (host), Men of Ideas : "The Ideas of Quine", BBC, 1978.

Rudolf Fara (host), In Conversation: W. V. Quine (7 videocassettes), Philosophy International, Centre for Philosophy of the Natural and Social Sciences, London School of Economics , 1994.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Definitions of philosophy List of American philosophers Notes [ edit ] ^ Quine, Willard Van Orman (1983).

"Ontology and ideology revisited" .

Confessions of a Confirmed Extensionalist: And Other Essays . Harvard University Press. pp. 315 ff .

ISBN 0-674-03084-2 .

^ Hunter, Bruce (2021).

"Clarence Irving Lewis" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ a b c d e O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

(October 2003), "Willard Van Orman Quine" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Lehmann-Haupt, Christopher (December 29, 2000).

"W. V. Quine, Philosopher Who Analyzed Language and Reality, Dies at 92" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 .

^ a b Colyvan, Mark, "Indispensability Arguments in the Philosophy of Mathematics" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

^ Quine, W. V. (August 28, 2023). "Mr. Strawson on Logical Theory".

Mind .

62 (248): 433– 451.

JSTOR 2251091 .

^ a b "Quine, Willard Van Orman: Philosophy of Science" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2009.

^ Gibson, Jr, Roger F., ed. (March 29, 2004).

The Cambridge Companion to Quine . Cambridge Companions to Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. p. 1.

doi : 10.1017/ccol0521630568 .

ISBN 978-0-521-63056-6 .

^ The Time of My Life: An Autobiography , p. 14.

^ Quine, Willard Van Orman; Hahn, Lewis Edwin (1986).

The Philosophy of W.V. Quine . Open Court. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0812690101 .

In my third year of high school I walked often with my new Jamaican friends, Fred and Harold Cassidy, trying to convert them from their Episcopalian faith to atheism.

^ Borradori, Giovanna (1994).

The American Philosopher: Conversations with Quine, Davidson, Putnam, Nozick, Danto, Rorty, Cavell, MacIntyre, Kuhn . University of Chicago Press. pp.

30– 31.

ISBN 978-0-226-06647-9 .

^ The Wall Street Journal , obituary for W. V. Quine – January 4, 2001 ^ Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary , entry for Tolerance (pp. 206–208).

^ "Paradoxes of Plenty" in Theories and Things , p. 197.

^ The Time of My Life: An Autobiography , pp. 352–353.

^ "Guide to the Center for Advanced Studies Records, 1958–1969" Archived March 14, 2017, at the Wayback Machine . Weselyan University. Wesleyan.edu. Accessed March 8, 2010.

^ "Honorary doctorates – Uppsala University, Sweden" . June 9, 2023.

^ Quine, Willard Van Orman (2013).

Word and Object . The MIT Press.

doi : 10.7551/mitpress/9636.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-262-31279-0 .

^ "Willard van Orman Quine; Renowned Philosopher" .

Los Angeles Times . December 31, 2000.

^ Pakaluk, Michael (1989). "Quine's 1946 Lectures on Hume".

Journal of the History of Philosophy .

27 (3): 445– 459.

doi : 10.1353/hph.1989.0050 .

S2CID 171052872 .

^ Nelson Goodman and W. V. O. Quine, "Steps Toward a Constructive Nominalism" , Journal of Symbolic Logic , 12 (1947): 105–122.

^ Bueno, Otávio (2020).

"Nominalism in the Philosophy of Mathematics" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Armstrong, D. M. (2010).

Sketch for a systematic metaphysics . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780199655915 .

^ a b W. V. O. Quine, " On What There Is ", The Review of Metaphysics 2 (5), 1948.

^ van Inwagen, Peter; Zimmerman, Dean W. (2008).

Metaphysics: the big questions (2. rev. and expanded ed.). Malden, Mass.: Blackwell. p. 28-29.

ISBN 978-1-4051-2586-4 .

^ van Inwagen, Peter; Zimmerman, Dean W. (2008).

Metaphysics: the big questions (2. rev. and expanded ed.). Malden, Mass.: Blackwell. p. 31.

ISBN 978-1-4051-2586-4 .

^ van Inwagen, Peter; Zimmerman, Dean W. (2008).

Metaphysics: the big questions (2. rev. and expanded ed.). Malden, Mass.: Blackwell. p. 31-32.

ISBN 978-1-4051-2586-4 .

^ Frost-Arnold, Greg (2013).

Carnap, Tarski, and Quine at Harvard: Conversations on Logic, Mathematics, and Science . Chicago: Open Court. p. 89.

ISBN 9780812698374 .

^ Quine, W. V. (1980) [1961].

From a Logical Point of View: Nine Logico-Philosophical Essays, Second Revised Edition . Harper torchbooks. Harvard University Press. p. 22.

ISBN 978-0-674-32351-3 .

^ Prawitz, Dag (1994).

"Quine and verificationism" .

Inquiry .

37 (4): 487– 494.

doi : 10.1080/00201749408602369 .

ISSN 0020-174X .

^ a b c Borradori, Giovanna (1994).

The American Philosopher: Conversations with Quine, Davidson, Putnam, Nozick, Danto, Rorty, Cavell, MacIntyre, Kuhn . University of Chicago Press. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-226-06647-9 .

^ Quine, W. V. (1980) [1961].

From a Logical Point of View: Nine Logico-Philosophical Essays, Second Revised Edition . Harper torchbooks. Harvard University Press. pp.

22– 23, 28.

ISBN 978-0-674-32351-3 .

^ Putnam, Hilary (March 1974). "The refutation of conventionalism".

Noûs .

8 (1): 25– 40.

doi : 10.2307/2214643 .

JSTOR 2214643 .

Reprinted in Putnam, Hilary (1979).

"Chapter 9: The refutation of conventionalism" .

Philosophical Papers; Volume 2: Mind, Language and Reality . Cambridge University Press. pp.

153– 191.

ISBN 0521295513 .

Quote on p. 159.

^ Czeslaw Lejewski, "Logic and Existence".

British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , Vol. 5 (1954–1955), pp. 104–119.

^ Craig, Edward (1996). "Ontological commitment".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

^ Simons, Peter M.

"Ontology" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved December 13, 2020 .

^ a b c Bricker, Phillip (2016).

"Ontological Commitment" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved December 13, 2020 .

^ Magnus, P. D.; Ichikawa, Jonathan Jenkins (2020). "V. First-order logic".

Forall X (UBC ed.). Creative Commons: Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0.

^ Schaffer, Jonathan (2009). "On What Grounds What".

Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations of Ontology . Oxford University Press. pp.

347– 383.

^ a b Quine, Willard Van Orman (1948).

"On What There Is" .

Review of Metaphysics .

2 (5): 21– 38.

^ Inwagen, Peter van (2004). "A Theory of Properties".

Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, Volume 1 . Clarendon Press. pp.

107– 138.

^ Kapelner, Zsolt-kristof (2015). "3. Quinean Metaontology".

Reconciling Quinean and neo-Aristotelian Metaontology (PDF) .

^ a b Putnam, H.

Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical Papers , vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2nd. ed., 1985.

^ "Naturalism in Epistemology" .

Naturalized Epistemology .

stanford.edu . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2017.

^ Quine, Willard Van Orman (1969).

Ontological Relativity and Other Essays . Columbia University Press. pp.

82– 83.

ISBN 0-231-08357-2 .

^ "Naturalized Epistemology" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Plato.stanford.edu. July 5, 2001. Accessed March 8, 2010.

^ C. Mohler.

"Existential Comics: The Sighting" .

Existential Comics . Retrieved November 24, 2014 .

^ "The Pantheon of Skeptics" .

CSI .

Committee for Skeptical Inquiry .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2017 . Retrieved April 30, 2017 .

^ Church, Alonzo (1935).

"Review: A System of Logistic by Willard Van Orman Quine" (PDF) .

Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.

41 (9): 598– 603.

doi : 10.1090/s0002-9904-1935-06146-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Gibson, Roger F.

, ed. (2004).

The Cambridge companion to Quine .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 0521639492 .

Gibson, Roger F. (1988).

The Philosophy of W. V. Quine: An Expository Essay . Tampa: University of South Florida .

Gibson, Roger F. (1988).

Enlightened Empiricism: An Examination of W. V. Quine's Theory of Knowledge . Tampa: University of South Florida .

Gibson, Roger F. (2004).

Quintessence: Basic Readings from the Philosophy of W. V. Quine .

Harvard University Press .

Gibson, Roger F.; Barrett, R., eds. (1990).

Perspectives on Quine . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing .

Gochet, Paul , 1978.

Quine en perspective , Paris, Flammarion.

Godfrey-Smith, Peter , 2003.

Theory and Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science .

Grattan-Guinness, Ivor , 2000.

The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940 . Princeton University Press.

Grice, Paul and Peter Strawson . "In Defense of a Dogma".

The Philosophical Review 65 (1965).

Hahn, L. E., and Schilpp, P. A., eds., 1986.

The Philosophy of W. V. O. Quine (The Library of Living Philosophers). Open Court.

Janssen-Lauret, Frederique (2020) Quine, Structure, and Ontology , Oxford University Press Köhler, Dieter, 1999/2003.

Sinnesreize, Sprache und Erfahrung: eine Studie zur Quineschen Erkenntnistheorie . Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Heidelberg.

MacFarlane, Alistair (March–April 2013). "W. V. O. Quine (1908-2000)".

Philosophy Now .

95 : 35– 36.

Murray Murphey , The Development of Quine's Philosophy (Heidelberg, Springer, 2012) (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 291).

Orenstein, Alex (2002).

W.V. Quine . Princeton University Press.

Putnam, Hilary . "The Greatest Logical Positivist". Reprinted in Realism with a Human Face , ed. James Conant. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.

Rosser, John Barkley , "The axiom of infinity in Quine's new foundations", Journal of Symbolic Logic 17 (4):238–242, 1952.

Verhaeg, Sander (2018).

Working from Within: The Nature and Development of Quine's Naturalism . Oxford University Press.

External links [ edit ] Willard Van Orman Quine at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource WVQuine.org Willard Van Orman Quine at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy "Quine's Rejection of the Analytic/Synthetic Distinction" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

" Quine's Philosophy of Science " at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Quine's New Foundations at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Willard Van Orman Quine at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Obituary from The Guardian Summary and Explanation of "On What There Is" "Two Dogmas of Empiricism" "On Simple Theories Of A Complex World" Links to related articles v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo v t e Rolf Schock Prize laureates Logic and philosophy Willard Van Orman Quine (1993) Michael Dummett (1995) Dana Scott (1997) John Rawls (1999) Saul Kripke (2001) Solomon Feferman (2003) Jaakko Hintikka (2005) Thomas Nagel (2008) Hilary Putnam (2011) Derek Parfit (2014) Ruth Millikan (2017) Saharon Shelah (2018) Dag Prawitz / Per Martin-Löf (2020) David Kaplan (2022) Hans Kamp / Irene Heim (2024) Mathematics Elias M. Stein (1993) Andrew Wiles (1995) Mikio Sato (1997) Yuri I. Manin (1999) Elliott H. Lieb (2001) Richard P. Stanley (2003) Luis Caffarelli (2005) Endre Szemerédi (2008) Michael Aschbacher (2011) Yitang Zhang (2014) Richard Schoen (2017) Ronald Coifman (2018) Nikolai G. Makarov (2020) Jonathan Pila (2022) Lai-Sang Young (2024) Visual arts Rafael Moneo (1993) Claes Oldenburg (1995) Torsten Andersson (1997) Herzog & de Meuron (1999) Giuseppe Penone (2001) Susan Rothenberg (2003) SANAA / Kazuyo Sejima + Ryue Nishizawa (2005) Mona Hatoum (2008) Marlene Dumas (2011) Anne Lacaton / Jean-Philippe Vassal (2014) Doris Salcedo (2017) Andrea Branzi (2018) Francis Alÿs (2020) Rem Koolhaas (2022) Steve McQueen (2024) Musical arts Ingvar Lidholm (1993) György Ligeti (1995) Jorma Panula (1997) Kronos Quartet (1999) Kaija Saariaho (2001) Anne Sofie von Otter (2003) Mauricio Kagel (2005) Gidon Kremer (2008) Andrew Manze (2011) Herbert Blomstedt (2014) Wayne Shorter (2017) Barbara Hannigan (2018) György Kurtág (2020) Víkingur Ólafsson (2022) Oumou Sangaré (2024) v t e Recipients of the Kyoto Prize in Arts and Philosophy in the field of Thought and Ethics Paul Thieme (1988) Karl Popper (1992) Willard Van Orman Quine (1996) Paul Ricœur (2000) Jürgen Habermas (2004) Charles Taylor (2008) Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (2012) Martha Nussbaum (2016) Bruno Latour (2021) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH DBLP MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Willard_Van_Orman_Quine&oldid=1297016772 " Categories : Willard Van Orman Quine 1908 births 2000 deaths 20th-century American philosophers American atheists United States Navy personnel of World War II American philosophy academics Analytic philosophers Atheist philosophers Empiricists American epistemologists Harvard University alumni Harvard University Department of Philosophy faculty Kyoto laureates in Arts and Philosophy American logicians Materialists Metaphilosophers American metaphysicians Model theorists Oberlin College alumni Ontologists People from Akron, Ohio Military personnel from Ohio American philosophers of language American philosophers of logic American philosophers of mathematics American philosophers of mind American philosophers of science Pragmatists Rolf Schock Prize laureates Set theorists Wesleyan University faculty United States Navy officers Philosophers from Ohio Corresponding fellows of the British Academy Philosophers of linguistics Members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2023 Articles with hCards Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2014 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 18:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Willard Van Orman Quine 49 languages Add topic

