Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Existence 2 Theories Toggle Theories subsection 2.1 The level- n theory 2.1.1 The cognitive hierarchy theory 2.2 The team reasoning 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Schelling's questions 3.2 In coordination game 3.3 Collision game 3.4 “Guess 2/3 of the average” game 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Focal point (game theory) 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Polski 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in game theory In game theory , a focal point (or Schelling point ) is a solution that people tend to choose by default in the absence of communication in order to avoid coordination failure .

[ 1 ] The concept was introduced by the American economist Thomas Schelling in his book The Strategy of Conflict (1960).

[ 2 ] Schelling states that "[p]eople can often concert their intentions or expectations with others if each knows that the other is trying to do the same" in a cooperative situation (p. 57), so their action would converge on a focal point which has some kind of prominence compared with the environment. However, the conspicuousness of the focal point depends on time, place and people themselves. It may not be a definite solution.

Existence [ edit ] The existence of the focal point is first demonstrated by Schelling with a series of questions. Here is one example: to determine the time and place to meet a stranger in New York City, but without being able to communicate in person beforehand. In this coordination game , any place and time in the city could be an equilibrium solution. Schelling asked a group of students this question and found that the most common answer was "noon at (the information booth at) Grand Central Terminal ". There is nothing that makes Grand Central Terminal a location with a higher payoff because people could just as easily meet at another public location, such as a bar or a library, but its tradition as a meeting place raises its salience and therefore makes it a natural "focal point".

[ 2 ] Later, Schelling's informal experiments have been replicated under controlled conditions with monetary incentives by Judith Mehta.

[ 3 ] The existence of focal points can help explain the use of social norms , including traditional gender roles , in order to ensure coordination, and why changing said norms can be difficult.

[ 1 ] Theories [ edit ] Although the concept of a focal point has been widely accepted in game theory, it is still unclear how a focal point forms. The researchers have proposed theories from two aspects.

The level- n theory [ edit ] Stahl and Wilson argue that a focal point is formed because players would try to predict how other players act. They model the level of "rational expectation" players have by their ability to form priors (models) about the behavior of other players; choose the best responses given these priors.

A level-0 player will choose actions regardless of the actions of other players. A level-1 player believes that all other players are level-0 types. A level- n player estimates that all other players are level-0, 1, 2, ..., n − 1 types. Based on experimental data, most of the players only use one model to predict the behavior of all the other players. Although the hierarchy of types could be indefinite, the benefits of higher levels would decrease substantially while incurring a much greater cost.

[ 4 ] Because of the limit of players' expectation level and players' priors, it is possible to reach an equilibrium in games without communication.

The cognitive hierarchy theory [ edit ] The cognitive hierarchy (CH) theory is a derivation of level- n theory. A level- n player from the CH model would assume that their strategy is the most sophisticated and that the levels 0, 1, 2, ..., n − 1 on which their opponents play follow a normalized Poisson distribution .

[ 5 ] This model works well in multi-player games where the players need to estimate a number in a given range, such as the Guess 2/3 of the average game. A player would be able to determine the value which they should play based on the assumed distribution of lower-level players described by the Poisson distribution.

[ 5 ] Another example of a game involving CH theory is the Keynesian beauty contest .

The team reasoning [ edit ] Bacharach argued that people could find a focal point because they act as members of a team instead of individuals in a cooperative game.

[ 6 ] With the identity changed, the player follows the prescription of an imaginary group leader to maximize the group interest.

Examples [ edit ] Schelling's questions [ edit ] Here is a subset of the questions raised by Schelling to prove the existence of a focal point.

[ 2 ] Head-tail game: Name "heads" or "tails". If the two players name the same, they win an award, otherwise, they get nothing.

Letter order game: Give an order to letters A, B, and C. If the three players give the same order, they win an award, otherwise they get nothing.

Split money game: Two players share $100. They first write down their individual claims on a sheet of paper. If their claims add to $100 or less, both of them will get exactly what they claimed, but if the sum is higher than $100, they get nothing.

The results of the informal experiments are For the two players, A and B, in head-tail game. 16 out of 22 A and 15 out of 22 B chose "heads".

For the three players, A, B, and C, in letter order game. 9 out of 12 A, 10 out of 12 B, and 14 out of 16 C wrote "ABC".

For the players to claim part of the $100. 36 out of 40 chose $50. 2 of the remainder chose $49 and $49.99.

These games suggest that focal points have some saliency. These characteristics make them preferable choices to people. Furthermore, people would assume each other has also noticed the saliency and make the same decision.

[ 3 ] In coordination game [ edit ] Coordination game example In a simple example, two people unable to communicate with each other are each shown a panel of four squares and asked to select one; if and only if they both select the same one, they will each receive a prize. Three of the squares are blue and one is red. Assuming they each know nothing about the other player, but that they each do want to win the prize, then they will, reasonably, both choose the red square.

The red square is not in a sense a better square; they could win by both choosing any square and in this sense, all squares are technically a Nash equilibrium . The red square is the "right" square to select only if a player can be sure that the other player has selected it, but by hypothesis neither can. However, it is the most salient and notable square, so—lacking any other one—most people will choose it, and this will in fact (often) work.

Collision game [ edit ] Collision game example Player 2 Player 1 Straight Left Right Straight Crash Win Win Left Win Win Crash Right Win Crash Win Focal points can also have real-life applications. For example, imagine two bicycles headed towards each other and in danger of crashing. Avoiding collision becomes a coordination game where each player's winning choice depends on the other player's choice. Each player, in this case, has the choice to go straight, swerve to the left or swerve to the right. Both players want to avoid crashing, but neither knows what the other will do.

[ 7 ] In this case, the decision to swerve right can serve as a focal point which leads to the winning right–right outcome. It seems a natural focal point in places using right-hand traffic .

This idea of anti-coordination game is also apparent in the game of chicken , which involves two cars racing toward each other on a collision course and in which the driver who first decides to swerve is seen as a coward, while no driver swerving results in a fatal collision for both.

“Guess 2/3 of the average” game [ edit ] The Guess 2/3 of the average game shows the level- n theory in practice. In this game, players are tasked with guessing an integer from 0 to 100 inclusive which they believe is closest to 2/3 of the average of all players’ guesses. A Nash equilibrium can be found by thinking through each level: Level 0: The average can be in [0, 100].

Level 1: The average can be in [0, 67], which is 2/3 of the maximum average of level 0.

Level 2: The average can be in [0, 45], which is 2/3 of the maximum average of level 1.

Level N: Assuming all other players reason similarly, 2/3 of the maximum average will never be higher than 100 ⋅ ⋅ ( 2 / 3 ) N .

{\displaystyle 100\cdot (2/3)^{N}.} As N grows, 2/3 of the average will trend towards zero. At this point, the only Nash equilibrium is for all players to guess 0.

Adding repetition to the game introduces a focal point at the Nash equilibrium solution of 0. This was shown by Camerer as, “[when] the game is played multiple times with the same group, the average moves close to 0”.

[ 5 ] Introducing the iterative aspect to the game forces all players onto higher levels of thinking, which allows them all to play guesses trending towards 0.

See also [ edit ] Game theory Coordination failure (economics) Coordination game Simultaneous game Surprisingly popular Equilibrium selection Rendezvous problem , the mathematical problem of maximising the probability of two people meeting References [ edit ] ^ a b Pastin, Ivan; Pastine, Tuvana; Humberstone, Tom (2017).

Game Theory: A Graphic Guide . United Kingdom: Icon Books Inc. pp.

54– 61.

ISBN 978-1-78578-082-0 .

^ a b c Schelling, Thomas C. (1960).

The strategy of conflict (First ed.). Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-84031-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Mehta, Judith; Starmer, Chris; Sugden, Robert (1994). "The Nature of Salience: An Experimental Investigation of Pure Coordination Games".

The American Economic Review .

84 (3): 658– 673.

ISSN 0002-8282 .

JSTOR 2118074 .

^ Stahl, Dale O.; Wilson, Paul W. (1 July 1995).

"On Players′ Models of Other Players: Theory and Experimental Evidence" (PDF) .

Games and Economic Behavior .

10 (1): 218– 254.

doi : 10.1006/game.1995.1031 .

ISSN 0899-8256 .

^ a b c Camerer, Colin F.; Ho, Teck-Hua; Chong, Juin-Kuan (1 August 2004).

"A Cognitive Hierarchy Model of Games" (PDF) .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

119 (3): 861– 898.

doi : 10.1162/0033553041502225 .

ISSN 0033-5533 .

^ Bacharach, Michael (1 June 1999). "Interactive team reasoning: A contribution to the theory of co-operation".

Research in Economics .

53 (2): 117– 147.

doi : 10.1006/reec.1999.0188 .

ISSN 1090-9443 .

^ "Focal Points (or Schelling Points): How We Naturally Organize in Games of Coordination – Mind Your Decisions" .

mindyourdecisions.com . Retrieved 2017-12-12 .

External links [ edit ] Rare Entries Contests (an example) and Common Entries Contests , games of respectively avoiding and seeking out focal points TED community experiment on focal / Schelling points Schelling Points for Alien Contact https://youtu.be/3lwlNWMl86M v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Focal_point_(game_theory)&oldid=1295425154 " Categories : Game theory Strategy (game theory) Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 17:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Focal point (game theory) 10 languages Add topic

