Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cultural theory 2 Notable Australian feminists 3 1800 to 1920 4 1920 to 1970 5 1970s to 1990s Toggle 1970s to 1990s subsection 5.1 2000s onwards 6 Support groups and societies 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Australia 5 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی 한국어 اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of feminism in Australia Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Australia has a long-standing association with the protection and creation of women's rights.  Australia was the second country in the world to give women the right to vote (after New Zealand in 1893) and the first to give women the right to be elected to a national parliament.

[ 1 ] The Australian state of South Australia , then a British colony, was the first parliament in the world to grant some women full suffrage rights.

[ 2 ] Australia has since had multiple notable women serving in public office as well as other fields. In Australia, women (with the notable exception of Indigenous women and most women not of European descent) were granted the right to vote and to be elected at federal elections in 1902.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Australia has also been home to several prominent feminist activists and writers, including Germaine Greer , author of The Female Eunuch ; Julia Gillard , former prime minister; Vida Goldstein , suffragist; and Edith Cowan , the first woman to be elected to an Australian parliament.

[ 3 ] Feminist action seeking equal opportunity in employment has resulted in partially successful legislation, but more changes are required.

[ 5 ] Laws against sex discrimination exist and women's units in government departments have been established. Australian feminists have fought for and won the right to federally funded child care and women's refuges .  The success gained by feminists entering the Australian public service and changing policy led to the descriptive term 'femocrats'.

[ 6 ] Cultural theory [ edit ] Germaine Greer's 1970 novel The Female Eunuch became a global bestseller and a highly influential text in the feminist movement. It discusses and challenges the role of Australian housewives as a homemaker, which Greer suggests leads to a repression. The predominant critical theory of feminism in Australia is that male dominance of business, politics , law and the media has resulted in gender inequality .

[ 7 ] Feminism research has expanded the scope of political science in Australia to include issues related to femininity , motherhood and violence against women .

[ 7 ] Joanna Murray-Smith , a Melbourne-based newspaper columnist claimed in a 2004 column that 'feminism had failed us'.

[ 6 ] Virginia Haussegger has also criticised feminism for promising she 'could have it all'.

Miranda Devine consistently argued that feminism has been a mistake and failed to liberate.

[ 6 ] In 2016, feminist and sociologist Eva Cox writing in The Conversation said that feminism has failed and needs a radical rethink using, "feminist perspectives to set social goals that are sustainable, and create social resilience".

[ 8 ] Holly Lawford-Smith , feminist and Lecturer in Political Philosophy wrote 'Academic mobbing needs to be challenged, both inside and outside the institution'.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Notable Australian feminists [ edit ] Australia has and has had several notable feminist authors, academics and activists whose work has been recognised internationally. Perhaps most widely recognised is Germaine Greer , whose book The Female Eunuch was held in high acclaim after its publication. The book's content was considered [ by whom?

] highly radical at the time of its publication in 1970, with Greer recommending female practices like tasting their own menstrual blood .

From June 2010 to June 2013, Australia was led by its first female prime minister , Julia Gillard. Gillard is perhaps best known, internationally, for the Misogyny Speech delivered in the Australian Federal Parliament on 9 October 2012 to then Federal Opposition Leader, Tony Abbott . In 2020, Gillard's speech was voted 'Most Unforgettable" moment in Australian television history by readers of The Guardian newspaper.

[ 11 ] Australia has had several feminist organisations during its history, many of which helped the push for basic women's rights like granting of full suffrage , financial independence from husbands, access to abortions, and equal pay. Other high-profile Australian feminists include Eva Cox and Jocelynne Scutt .

1800 to 1920 [ edit ] The women of Queensland were granted the right to vote in 1905.

The first examples of Australian feminism occurred during the mid 1800s to 1900. The early movement mostly concerned the applications of basic human rights to women, including the right to vote, the right to stand for parliamentary election, and protection from sexual exploitation.

Mary Lee , an Australian-Irish woman, was influential in garnering support for many women's rights movements in Australia. From 1883 onwards, Lee was involved in the raising of the Age of Consent for girls in Australia from 13 to 16, the founding of The Working Women's Trades Union , and co-founded the Women's Suffrage League , which led to the granting of suffrage rights to women in South Australia. In the early 1900s the Australian Labor Party displayed reluctance toward women and their entrance to the parliament.

[ 12 ] During World War I, women were introduced into the workforce at higher rates than previous years, although often in fields already populated by women.

1920 to 1970 [ edit ] Edith Cowan , the first woman to be elected to an Australian parliament in 1920, is depicted on the back of the Australian fifty-dollar note .  In August 1943, Enid Lyons and Dorothy Tangney became the first two women to elected to the federal parliament .

[ 3 ] Between the World Wars, the Country Women's Association was founded in New South Wales and Queensland , spreading throughout the rest of Australia over the following 14 years. An overarching, national group was formed in 1945. The popular magazine, the Women's Weekly , created for a female market by Frank Packer , was also founded during this period. However, from its first edition in 1933, the magazine was edited by men until Ita Buttrose was appointed in 1975.

During World War II, Australia, like other Allied countries, encouraged the introduction of women into the workforce, replacing many male workers who had joined the military e.g.

Australian Women's Land Army . The second-wave of Feminism in Australia began during the 1960s with the confrontation of legal and social double standards as well as workplace discrimination and sexual harassment. Equally, feminists worldwide began a push for female sexual freedom.

Germaine Greer rose to international prominence during the later part of this period, with the publication and widespread adoption of, her ideas in her book, The Female Eunuch in 1970. At the time of the book's publication, Greer was considered a radical feminist , with her ideas and claims at times described as "polemic".

[ 13 ] During this period Aboriginal Women's rights also became more prominent, with Fay Gale earning her Ph.D from the University of Adelaide in 1960. Her thesis was titled "A Study of Assimilation: Part Aborigines in South Australia". Other notable female Indigenous Australians during this period include Lyndall Ryan and Aileen Moreton-Robinson . This contributed to the rise in Indigenous feminism in Australia.

Dame Roma Mitchell was made the first female Justice of the Supreme Court of South Australia in 1965, at the recommendation of Don Dunstan , South Australia's 38th Attorney-General.

[ 14 ] She was still the only female judge in South Australia when she retired 18 years later in 1983 although Justices Elizabeth Evatt and Mary Gaudron had been appointed to federal courts by the Whitlam Government. It was not until 1993 that the second woman was appointed to the court, Mitchell's former student, Margaret Nyland .

1970s to 1990s [ edit ] See also: Women's cinema § Australia Percentage of females employed As the feminist movement led to the organisation of British, Canadian and American feminists in the late 1960s, so too did Australian women move to address oppressive social conditions.

[ 15 ] The social base of the Australian feminist movement was boosted by the growing segment of women employed as juniors in the 1970s.

[ 12 ] Feminist authors have been credited with stimulating the movement at the time.  By the early 1970s the feminist movement in Australia was divided.  On one side was the Women's Liberation Movement which leaned left and believed men did not have a role in women's liberation. The other side was represented by the Women's Electoral Lobby which was considered more mainstream and sought to engage change within existing structures.

[ 15 ] The first Australian state to deal with marital rape was South Australia , under the progressive initiatives of Premier Don Dunstan , which in 1976 partially removed the exemption. Section 73 of the Criminal Law Consolidation Act Amendment Act 1976 (SA) read: "No person shall, by reason only of the fact that he is married to some other person, be presumed to have consented to sexual intercourse with that other person".

[ 16 ] Around 1977, Women Against Rape (WAR) groups started emerging in Australia, [ 17 ] after Women Against Rape was formed in the UK in 1976, [ 18 ] and others were created in other countries. They were possibly influenced by American feminist Susan Brownmiller 's book Against Our Will , published in 1975, as well as women's personal experience of working with rape victims .

[ 17 ] The Sydney Women Against Rape collective was formed with three aims: [ 19 ] to mourn raped women of all countries in all wars to publicly raise the issue of rape to oppose the system that creates rape and wars Women Against Rape in War groups started forming in the late 1970s and early 1980s, starting in Canberra . The Canberra group came  to national attention on Anzac Day 1981, when they staged a demonstration mourning "all women of all countries raped in all wars", and groups formed in Sydney , Adelaide , and Melbourne . Women laid wreaths at the Stone of Remembrance during the Anzac Day service at the Australian War Memorial in 1983, and in 1984 the Anti-Anzac Day Collective formed in Melbourne, which challenged the "exclusionist, masculine mythology" of Anzac Day. The protests were met with highly negative responses from the public, police, and politicians, and hundreds of women were arrested.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Criminalization of marital rape in Australia began with the state of New South Wales in 1981, followed by all other states from 1985 to 1992.

[ 22 ] Prominent writer Helen Garner attracted widespread controversy for her 1995 non-fiction reportage The First Stone , which details the fallout from a sexual harassment scandal aimed at a well-respected master at the University of Melbourne .

[ 23 ] Garner, who could not access the two female complainants due to their refusal to speak to her, used her own personal experiences to highlight feminism, female and male sexuality, sexual harassment, as well as abuse of power and fraternalism in universities. The book became a bestseller, but it was hotly debated both in Australia and the United States by some critics and feminists as an example of victim blaming .

[ 24 ] Janet Malcolm , writing for the New Yorker in a 1997 review of The First Stone , says that Garner "closes ranks with the abuser".

[ 25 ] Australia's first woman Premier was Carmen Lawrence , becoming Premier of Western Australia in 1990.

[ 3 ] The short-lived Australian Women's Party sought to ensure equal representation of men and women at all levels of government.

Quentin Bryce was the first woman to hold the position of Governor-General of Australia between September 2008 and March 2014.

2000s onwards [ edit ] Former Prime Minister Julia Gillard gained international attention and praise in 2012 for an off-the-cuff speech in the Australian federal parliament directed at then Opposition Leader, Tony Abbott . The speech, known as the Misogyny Speech , has been uploaded to YouTube multiple times, garnering many thousands of views. The speech was also discussed internationally across media, with the feminist blog , Jezebel , calling Gillard " one badass motherfucker ".

[ 26 ] Other world leaders were also said to have offered praise in public and private conversations with Gillard.

[ 27 ] Abbott, who later became prime minister of Australia, has frequently been accused of sexism and misogyny . In David Marr 's 2012 article in the Australian Quarterly Essay , titled "Political Animal: The Making of Tony Abbott", Marr describes several alleged incidents which Abbott committed or was involved with, that were highly offensive and sexual in nature towards women.

[ 28 ] Support groups and societies [ edit ] Australia has and has had a wide array of supporting groups and agencies that have been funded by governments, public donations, and members. These groups include: Australian Women's Health Network Country Women's Association Emily's List ( Australian Labor Party organisation for the equalising of women in politics, started by Joan Kirner ) National Council of Jewish Women of Australia , founded 1923 [ 29 ] National Council of Women of Australia , founded 1888, affiliated with the International Council of Women Women's Electoral Lobby Queensland Women's Electoral League NOWSA (Network Of Women Students Australia) See also [ edit ] Australia portal Feminism portal Australian feminist art timeline Goddess movement No FGM Australia Women's suffrage in Australia Women and government in Australia References [ edit ] ^ "Australian suffragettes" .

australia.gov.au . Commonwealth of Australia. 5 March 2010. Archived from the original on 20 April 2014 . Retrieved 29 April 2014 .

^ Electoral Milestones for Women Archived 2013-12-12 at the Wayback Machine . Australian Electoral Commission. Retrieved 29 April 2014.

^ a b c d "Australian women in politics" .

australia.gov.au . Commonwealth of Australia. 21 September 2011.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 29 April 2014 .

^ corporateName=National Museum of Australia; address=Lawson Crescent, Acton Peninsula.

"National Museum of Australia - Franchise Act" .

www.nma.gov.au . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "A 10-year-plan to unleash the full capacity and contribution of women to the Australian economy 2023 - 2033" .

Australian Government Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2024 . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ a b c Campo, Natasha (2009).

From Superwomen to Domestic Goddesses: The Rise and Fall of Feminism . Peter Lang. pp.

1– 4.

ISBN 978-3034300162 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 .

^ a b Smith, Rodney; Ariadne Vromen; Ian Cook (2012).

Contemporary Politics in Australia: Theories, Practices and Issues . Cambridge University Press. pp.

42– 43.

ISBN 978-0521137539 .

Archived from the original on 17 June 2016 . Retrieved 29 April 2014 .

^ Cox, Eva (8 March 2016).

"Feminism has failed and needs a radical rethink" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2017 . Retrieved 27 March 2017 .

^ "Academic mobbing needs to be challenged, both inside and outside the institution" . 27 June 2019.

^ "Media articles" . 13 August 2020.

^ "Julia Gillard's misogyny speech voted 'most unforgettable' moment in Australian TV history" .

TheGuardian.com . 7 February 2020.

^ a b Dixson, M. (1992). "Social Movements: The Women's Movement: Gender, Class and the Women's Movements in Australia 1890, 1980". In Jagtenberg, T; D'Alton, P.C. (eds.).

Four Dimensional Social Space . Sydney, New South Wales: Harper Educational Publishers. p. 463.

ISBN 0063121271 .

^ (27 October 2010) Laurie Penny.

The Female Eunuch 40 years on Archived 2017-08-09 at the Wayback Machine . The Guardian. Retrieved on 29 April 2014.

^ Margarey, Susan (1 April 2008).

"Dame Roma Mitchell's Unmentionables: Sex, Politics and Religion" .

History Australia : 12.1 – 12.20 – via Research Gate.

^ a b Goldrick-Jones, Amanda (2002).

Men who Believe in Feminism . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

20– 21.

ISBN 0275968227 . Retrieved 29 April 2014 .

^ "An Act to amend the Criminal Consolidation Act, 1936-1975" .

Dspace.flinders.edu.au . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ a b "Women Against Rape in War" .

Canberra Museum & Gallery . 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 15 December 2024 .

^ "Statement of Aims 1976" .

Women Against Rape . 26 November 2018. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

Statement of aims ^ Burgmann, Meredith (18 February 2015).

"The Women Against Rape in War Collective's protests against ANZAC Day in Sydney, 1983 and 1984" .

Cosmopolitan Civil Societies .

6 (3). University of Technology, Sydney (UTS): 116– 122.

doi : 10.5130/ccs.v6i3.4222 .

ISSN 1837-5391 . Retrieved 15 December 2024 .

(or here ) Text may have been copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution 4.0 International  (CC BY 4.0) licence.

^ "Best We Forget: Excluding Women, Rape and Protest From the Anzac Myth and Memorial" .

makinghistoryatmacquarie . 18 November 2013 . Retrieved 15 December 2024 .

^ Burghman, Meredith (24 April 2018).

"The forgotten Anzac Day protests of the '80s" .

Crikey .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2025.

^ Temkin, Jennifer (2002). "Defining and redefining rape". In Temkin, Jennifer (ed.).

Rape and the legal process (2nd ed.). Oxford New York: Oxford University Press. p. 86.

ISBN 9780198763543 .

: Citing : "Criminal Law (Rape) (Amendment) Act, 1990, section 5" .

irishstatutebook.ie .

Irish Statute Book . Archived from the original on 29 April 2017 . Retrieved 21 December 2017 .

^ Alcorn, Gay (8 January 2018).

"Helen Garner's The First Stone is outdated. But her questions about sexual harassment aren't" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2018 . Retrieved 31 October 2018 .

^ "Just Making a Pass?" .

The New York Times . 20 April 1997.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2018 . Retrieved 31 October 2018 .

^ Malcolm, Janet (7 July 1997).

"Women at War" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 6 November 2017 .

^ (10 September 2012) Tracie Egan Morrissey.

Best Thing You'll See All Day: Australia's Female Prime Minister Rips Misogynist a New One in Epic Speech on Sexism Archived 2014-04-27 at the Wayback Machine .

^ (8 November 2012).

World leaders praise Gillard sexism speech at ASEM Archived 2013-10-21 at the Wayback Machine . Australian Times. Blue Sky Publication. Retrieved 29 April 2014.

^ Marr, David (2012).

"Political Animal: The making of Tony Abbott" .

Quarterly Essay (47).

ISBN 9781863955980 . Retrieved 27 April 2014 .

^ National Council of Jewish Women of Australia Archived 2019-03-19 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 29 April 2014.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Feminism in Australia at Wikimedia Commons v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Women in Oceania v t e Women's liberation movement in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Feminism in  Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Gender inequality in  Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Women in Asia v t e Women Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Women's liberation movement in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Feminism in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Gender inequality in  Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Australia articles History Timeline Bibliography Prehistory Archaeology European exploration Territorial evolution 1788–1850 1851–1900 1901–1945 Since 1945 By topic Asian Australians Constitutional Diplomatic Economic Federation Immigration Indigenous Military Monarchy Peace Railway Geography Climate Climate change Continent Deserts Environment issues Earthquakes Flora Fauna Forests Geology Islands Mountains Regions Protected areas Rivers Waterfalls World Heritage Sites Subdivisions States and territories Capitals Cities Politics Asylum Constitution Courts Elections Donations Electoral system Parties Federal budget Foreign relations Human rights Intersex LGBTQ Transgender Intelligence and security Law Constitution Judiciary Enforcement Military Monarchy National debt Parliament Political ideology Anarchism Christian Conservatism Far-right Liberalism Nationalism Republicanism Socialism Public Service Women Government leaders Government ministers Shadow Cabinet Government Cabinet of Australia list Governor-General list Prime Minister list Economy Agriculture Dollar Energy Gross state product Home ownership Public housing Household income Manufacturing Media Mining Poverty Reserve Bank Stock exchange Superannuation Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Welfare system Society Abortion Aged care Censorship Citizenship Crime Education Euthanasia Healthcare Homelessness Human trafficking Immigration Irreligion Languages Life expectancy People Demographics Ethnic groups Indigenous Australians Prostitution Racism Religion Squatting Waste management Women Culture Architecture Art Arts Australian English Cinema Cuisine Dance Literature Music Public holidays Radio Sport Symbols Television Theatre Anglosphere Australian studies Outline Index Bibliography Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminism_in_Australia&oldid=1289761948 " Categories : Feminism in Australia Feminism by country Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2014 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 17:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Australia 5 languages Add topic

