Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Parent disciplines 3 Subdisciplines Toggle Subdisciplines subsection 3.1 Historical musicology 3.2 New musicology 3.3 Ethnomusicology 3.4 Popular music studies 3.5 Music theory, analysis and composition 3.6 Music psychology 3.7 Performance practice and research 4 Education and careers 5 Notable journals 6 Women in music 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Musicology 75 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kotava Kurdî Ladin Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scholarly study of music For other uses, see Musicology (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Musicology is the academic, research-based study of music , as opposed to musical composition or performance .

[ 1 ] Musicology research combines and intersects with many fields, including psychology , sociology , acoustics , neurology , natural sciences , formal sciences and computer science .

Musicology is traditionally divided into three branches: music history , systematic musicology , and ethnomusicology . Historical musicologists study the history of musical traditions, the origins of works, and the biographies of composers. Ethnomusicologists draw from anthropology (particularly field research ) to understand how and why people make music. Systematic musicology includes music theory , aesthetics , pedagogy , musical acoustics , the science and technology of musical instruments , and the musical implications of physiology, psychology, sociology, philosophy and computing.

Cognitive musicology is the set of phenomena surrounding the cognitive modeling of music. When musicologists carry out research using computers, their research often falls under the field of computational musicology .

Music therapy is a specialized form of applied musicology which is sometimes considered more closely affiliated with health fields, and other times regarded as part of musicology proper.

Background [ edit ] The word musicology comes from Greek μουσική mousikē 'music' and -λογια -logia , 'domain of study'.

The 19th-century philosophical trends that led to the re-establishment of formal musicology education in German and Austrian universities had combined methods of systematization with evolution. These models were established not only in the field of physical anthropology , but also cultural anthropology . This was influenced by Hegel 's ideas on ordering "phenomena" which can be understood & distinguished from simple to complex stages of evolution.  They are further classified into primitive & developed sections; whereas the particular stages of history are understood & distinguished as ancient to modern . Comparative methods became more widespread in musicology beginning around 1880.

[ 2 ] Parent disciplines [ edit ] The parent disciplines of musicology include: General history Cultural studies Philosophy (particularly philosophy of music , aesthetics and semiotics ) Ethnology and cultural anthropology Archaeology and prehistory Psychology and sociology Physiology and neuroscience Acoustics and psychoacoustics Information sciences and mathematics Musicology also has two central, practically oriented sub-disciplines with no parent discipline: performance practice and research, and the theory, analysis and composition of music. The disciplinary neighbors of musicology address other forms of art, performance, ritual, and communication, including the history and theory of the visual and plastic arts and architecture; linguistics , literature and theater ; religion and theology ; and sport. Musical knowledge is applied within medicine, education and music therapy —which, effectively, are parent disciplines of applied musicology.

Subdisciplines [ edit ] Historical musicology [ edit ] Music history or historical musicology is concerned with the composition, performance, reception and criticism of music over time. Historical studies of music are for example concerned with a composer's life and works, the developments of styles and genres (such as baroque concertos), the social function of music for a particular group of people, (such as court music), or modes of performance at a particular place and time (such as Johann Sebastian Bach's choir in Leipzig). Like the comparable field of art history , different branches and schools of historical musicology emphasize different types of musical works and approaches to music. There are also national differences in various definitions of historical musicology. In theory, "music history" could refer to the study of the history of any type or genre of music, such as the music of India or rock music . In practice, these research topics are more often considered within ethnomusicology and "historical musicology" is typically assumed to imply Western Art music of the European tradition.

The methods of historical musicology include source studies (especially manuscript studies), palaeography , philology (especially textual criticism ), style criticism, historiography (the choice of historical method ), musical analysis (analysis of music to find "inner coherence") [ 3 ] and iconography . The application of musical analysis to further these goals is often a part of music history, though pure analysis or the development of new tools of music analysis is more likely to be seen in the field of music theory. Music historians create a number of written products, ranging from journal articles describing their current research, new editions of musical works, biographies of composers and other musicians, book-length studies or university textbook chapters or entire textbooks. Music historians may examine issues in a close focus, as in the case of scholars who examine the relationship between words and music for a given composer's art songs . On the other hand, some scholars take a broader view and assess the place of a given type of music, such as the symphony in society using techniques drawn from other fields, such as economics, sociology or philosophy.

New musicology [ edit ] New musicology is a term applied since the late 1980s to a wide body of work emphasizing cultural study, analysis and criticism of music. Such work may be based on feminist , gender studies , queer theory or postcolonial theory, or the work of Theodor W. Adorno .

[ citation needed ] Although New Musicology emerged from within historical musicology, the emphasis on cultural study within the Western art music tradition places New Musicology at the junction between historical, ethnological and sociological research in music.

New musicology was a reaction against traditional historical musicology, which according to Susan McClary , "fastidiously declares issues of musical signification off-limits to those engaged in legitimate scholarship." [ 4 ] Charles Rosen , however, retorts that McClary, "sets up, like so many of the 'new musicologists', a straw man to knock down, the dogma that music has no meaning, and no political or social significance." [ 5 ] Today, many musicologists no longer distinguish between musicology and new musicology since it has been recognized that many of the scholarly concerns once associated with new musicology already were mainstream in musicology, so that the term "new" no longer applies.

Ethnomusicology [ edit ] Ethnomusicology , formerly comparative musicology, is the study of music in its cultural context. It is often considered the anthropology or ethnography of music.

Jeff Todd Titon has called it the study of "people making music".

[ 6 ] Although it is most often concerned with the study of non-Western music, it also includes the study of Western music from an anthropological or sociological perspective, cultural studies and sociology as well as other disciplines in the social sciences and humanities. Some ethnomusicologists primarily conduct historical studies, [ 7 ] but the majority are involved in long-term participant observation or combine ethnographic, musicological, and historical approaches in their fieldwork. Therefore, ethnomusicological scholarship can be characterized as featuring a substantial, intensive fieldwork component, often involving long-term residence within the community studied. Closely related to ethnomusicology is the emerging branch of sociomusicology . For instance, Ko (2011) proposed the hypothesis of "Biliterate and Trimusical" in Hong Kong sociomusicology.

[ 8 ] Popular music studies [ edit ] Popular music studies, known, "misleadingly", [ 9 ] as popular musicology , emerged in the 1980s as an increasing number of musicologists, ethnomusicologists and other varieties of historians of American and European culture began to write about popular music past and present. The first journal focusing on popular music studies was Popular Music which began publication in 1981.

[ 10 ] The same year an academic society solely devoted to the topic was formed, the International Association for the Study of Popular Music . The association's founding was partly motivated by the interdisciplinary agenda of popular musicology though the group has been characterized by a polarized 'musicological' and 'sociological' approach also typical of popular musicology.

[ 11 ] Music theory, analysis and composition [ edit ] Music theory is a field of study that describes the elements of music and includes the development and application of methods for composing and for analyzing music through both notation and, on occasion, musical sound itself. Broadly, theory may include any statement, belief or conception of or about music ( Boretz , 1995) [ incomplete short citation ] . A person who studies or practices music theory is a music theorist.

Some music theorists attempt to explain the techniques composers use by establishing rules and patterns. Others model the experience of listening to or performing music. Though extremely diverse in their interests and commitments, many Western music theorists are united in their belief that the acts of composing, performing and listening to music may be explicated to a high degree of detail (this, as opposed to a conception of musical expression as fundamentally ineffable except in musical sounds). Generally, works of music theory are both descriptive and prescriptive, attempting both to define practice and to influence later practice.

Musicians study music theory to understand the structural relationships in the (nearly always notated) music. Composers study music theory to understand how to produce effects and structure their own works. Composers may study music theory to guide their precompositional and compositional decisions. Broadly speaking, music theory in the Western tradition focuses on harmony and counterpoint , and then uses these to explain large scale structure and the creation of melody .

Music psychology [ edit ] Music psychology applies the content and methods of psychology to understand how music is created, perceived, responded to, and incorporated into individuals' and societies' daily lives.

[ 12 ] Its primary branches include cognitive musicology , which emphasizes the use of computational models for human musical abilities and cognition, and the cognitive neuroscience of music , which studies the way that music perception and production manifests in the brain using the methodologies of cognitive neuroscience . While aspects of the field can be highly theoretical, much of modern music psychology seeks to optimize the practices and professions of music performance, composition, education and therapy.

[ 13 ] Performance practice and research [ edit ] Performance practice draws on many of the tools of historical musicology to answer the specific question of how music was performed in various places at various times in the past. Although previously confined to early music, recent research in performance practice has embraced questions such as how the early history of recording affected the use of vibrato in classical music or instruments in Klezmer .

Within the rubric of musicology, performance practice tends to emphasize the collection and synthesis of evidence about how music should be performed. The important other side, learning how to sing authentically or perform a historical instrument is usually part of conservatory or other performance training. However, many top researchers in performance practice are also excellent musicians.

Music performance research (or music performance science) is strongly associated with music psychology. It aims to document and explain the psychological, physiological, sociological and cultural details of how music is actually performed (rather than how it should be performed). The approach to research tends to be systematic and empirical and to involve the collection and analysis of both quantitative and qualitative data. The findings of music performance research can often be applied in music education.

Education and careers [ edit ] Music historian Jack Stewart lectures at a conference.

Musicologists in tenure track professor positions typically hold a PhD in musicology. In the 1960s and 1970s, some musicologists obtained professor positions with an MA as their highest degree, but in the 2010s, the PhD is the standard minimum credential for tenure track professor positions. As part of their initial training, musicologists typically complete a BMus or a BA in music (or a related field such as history) and in many cases an MA in musicology. Some individuals apply directly from a bachelor's degree to a PhD, and in these cases, they may not receive an MA. In the 2010s, given the increasingly interdisciplinary nature of university graduate programs, some applicants for musicology PhD programs may have academic training both in music and outside of music (e.g., a student may apply with a BMus and an MA in psychology). In music education, individuals may hold an M.Ed and an Ed.D .

Most musicologists work as instructors, lecturers or professors in colleges, universities or conservatories. The job market for tenure track professor positions is very competitive. Entry-level applicants must hold a completed PhD or the equivalent degree and applicants to more senior professor positions must have a strong record of publishing in peer-reviewed journals. Some PhD-holding musicologists are only able to find insecure positions as sessional lecturers . The job tasks of a musicologist are the same as those of a professor in any other humanities discipline: teaching undergraduate and/or graduate classes in their area of specialization and, in many cases some general courses (such as Music Appreciation or Introduction to Music History); conducting research in their area of expertise, publishing articles about their research in peer-reviewed journals, authors book chapters, books or textbooks; traveling to conferences to give talks on their research and learn about research in their field; and, if their program includes a graduate school , supervising MA and PhD students, giving them guidance on the preparation of their theses and dissertations. Some musicology professors may take on senior administrative positions in their institution, such as Dean or Chair of the School of Music.

Notable journals [ edit ] 19th-Century Music (1977–present) Acta Musicologica (1928–2014) ( International Musicological Society ) Asian Music (1968–2002) BACH: Journal of the Riemenschneider Bach Institute (1970–present) Black Music Research Journal (1980–2004) Early Music History (1981–2002) Ethnomusicology (1953–2003) ( Society for Ethnomusicology ) Journal of Music Theory (1957–2002) The Journal of Musicology (1982–2004) Journal of the American Musicological Society (1948–present) ( American Musicological Society ) Journal of the Royal Musical Association Journal of the Society for American Music Musica Disciplina (1946–present) Music Educators Journal (1934–2007) Music Theory Spectrum (1979–present) ( Society for Music Theory ) The Musical Quarterly (1915–present) Perspectives of New Music (1962–present) The World of Music (1957−present) Yearbook for Traditional Music (1981–2003) See also: Category:Music theory journals Women in music [ edit ] Rosetta Reitz (1924–2008) was an American jazz historian who established a record label producing 18 albums of the music of the early women of jazz and the blues.

[ 14 ] The vast majority of major musicologists and music historians from past generations have been men, as in the 19th century and early 20th century; women's involvement in teaching music was mainly in elementary and secondary music teaching .

[ 15 ] Nevertheless, some women musicologists have reached the top ranks of the profession.

Carolyn Abbate (born 1956) is an American musicologist who did her PhD at Princeton University . She has been described by the Harvard Gazette as "one of the world's most accomplished and admired music historians".

[ 16 ] Susan McClary (born 1946) is a musicologist associated with new musicology who incorporates feminist music criticism in her work. McClary holds a PhD from Harvard University . One of her best known works is Feminine Endings (1991), which covers musical constructions of gender and sexuality, gendered aspects of traditional music theory, gendered sexuality in musical narrative, music as a gendered discourse and issues affecting women musicians.

[ 17 ] Other notable women scholars include: Eva Badura-Skoda Margaret Bent Adrienne Fried Block Marcia Citron Suzanne Cusick Sandra Jean Graham Ursula Günther Maud Cuney Hare Amelia Ishmael Tammy L. Kernodle Liudmila Kovnatskaya Gundula Kreuzer Elizabeth Eva Leach Ottalie Mark Carol J. Oja Rosetta Reitz Elaine Sisman Hedi Stadlen Rose Rosengard Subotnik Judith Tick Anahit Tsitsikian Sherrie Tucker Helen Walker-Hill See also [ edit ] Music portal Aesthetics of music Choreomusicology Computational musicology List of musicologists List of musicology topics Music and emotion Music and mathematics Musical analysis Musical escapism Musical temperament Musical tuning Prehistoric music Psychoanalysis and music Scale (music) Set theory (music) Sociomusicology Tonality World music Virtual Library of Musicology References [ edit ] ^ "musicology" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ Bader, Rolf (2018).

Spring Handbook of Systematic Musicology . Springer. p. 40.

ISBN 978-3662550045 . Retrieved 5 August 2019 .

^ Beard, David; Gloag, Kenneth (2005).

Musicology: The Key Concepts . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-31692-7 .

^ McClary, Susan (1991).

Feminine Endings: Music, Gender, and Sexuality . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. p. 4.

^ Rosen, Charles (2001). "The New Musicology".

Critical Entertainments: Music Old and New . Harvard University Press. p. 264.

ISBN 978-0-674-00684-3 .

I doubt that anyone, except perhaps the nineteenth-century critic Hanslick , has ever really believed that, although some musicians have been goaded into proclaiming it by the sillier interpretations of music with which we are often assailed.

^ Titon, Jeff Todd (January 2020).

"Ethnomusicology as the Study of People Making Music" .

Musicological Annual .

51 (2): 175– 185.

doi : 10.4312/mz.51.2.175-185 .

ISSN 2350-4242 .

S2CID 191062139 .

^ McCollum, Jonathan; Hebert, David, eds. (2014).

Theory and Method in Historical Ethnomusicology . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

^ Ko, C.K.S. (2011).

An Analysis of Sociomusicology, Its Issues; and the Music and Society in Hong Kong . Hong Kong: Ko Ka Shing.

ISBN 978-9-881-58021-4 .

This book has been selected for inclusion in the Association for Chinese Music Research Bibliography in 2012 .

^ Moore, Allan, ed. (2003).

Analyzing Popular Music . Cambridge University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-521-77120-7 .

'Popular musicology' should be read as the musicological investigation of popular music, rather than the accessible investigation of music!

^ Popular Music - All Issues (journal), Cambridge University Press ^ Moore 2003 , p. 4.

^ Tan, Siu-Lan; Pfordresher, Peter; Harré, Rom (2010).

Psychology of Music: From Sound to Significance . New York: Psychology Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-84169-868-7 .

^ Ockelford, Adam (2009). "Beyond music psychology". In Hallam, Susan; Cross, Ian; Thaut, Michael (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Music Psychology . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 539.

ISBN 978-0-19-929845-7 .

^ Martin, Douglas.

"Rosetta Reitz, Champion of Jazz Women, Dies at 84" , The New York Times , 14 November 2008. Accessed 19 November 2008.

^ Wieland Howe, Sandra (2015). "Women Music Educators in the United States: A History".

GEMS (Gender, Education, Music, and Society) .

8 (4).

[When looking beyond bandleaders and top leaders, women had many music education roles in the] home, community, churches, public schools, and teacher-training institutions [and] as writers, patrons, and through their volunteer work in organizations.

^ "Abbate named University Professor" , The Harvard Gazette , 20 November 2013. Accessed 10 December 2014 ^ "Susan McClary" .

MacArthur Foundation . 1 July 1995 . Retrieved 18 January 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Allen, Warren Dwight (1962).

Philosophies of Music History: a Study of General Histories of Music, 1600–1960 . New ... ed. New York: Dover Publications.

N.B .: First published in 1939; expanded and updated for republication in 1962.

Babich, Babette (2003) " Postmodern Musicology " in Victor E. Taylor and Charles Winquist, eds., Routledge Encyclopedia of Postmodernism , London: Routledge, 2003. pp. 153–159.

ISBN 978-0-415-30886-1 .

Brackett, David (1995).

Interpreting Popular Music .

ISBN 0-520-22541-4 .

Cook, Nicholas , "What is Musicology?", BBC Music Magazine 7 (May 1999), 31–33 Everett, Walter, ed. (2000).

Expression in Pop-Rock Music .

ISBN 0-8153-3160-6 .

McCollum, Jonathan and David Hebert, eds. (2014).

Theory and Method in Historical Ethnomusicology . Lanham, MD: Lexington.

ISBN 978-0-7391-6826-4 .

Honing, Henkjan (2006). " On the growing role of observation, formalization and experimental method in musicology ".

Empirical Musicology Review .

Kerman, Joseph (1985).

Musicology . London: Fontana.

ISBN 0-00-197170-0 .

McClary, Susan , and Robert Walser (1988). "Start Making Sense! Musicology Wrestles with Rock" in On Record ed. by Frith and Goodwin (1990), pp. 277–292.

ISBN 0-394-56475-8 .

McClary, Susan (2000). "Women and Music on the Verge of the New Millennium (Special Issue: Feminists at a Millennium)", Signs 25/4 (Summer): 1283–1286.

Middleton, Richard (1990/2002).

Studying Popular Music . Philadelphia: Open University Press.

ISBN 0-335-15275-9 .

Moore, A. F. (2001).

Rock: The Primary Text , 2nd edition, ISBN 0-7546-0298-2 .

Parncutt, Richard . (2007). " Systematic musicology and the history and future of Western musical scholarship ", Journal of Interdisciplinary Music Studies , 1, 1–32.

Pruett, James W., and Thomas P. Slavens (1985).

Research Guide to Musicology.

Chicago: American Library Association.

ISBN 0-8389-0331-2 .

Randel, Don Michael , ed. (4th edition, 2003).

Harvard Dictionary of Music , pp. 452–454. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-01163-5 .

Sorce Keller, Marcello. "The Emperor's New Clothes: Why Musicologies Do Not Always Wish to Know All They Could Know", in Victoria Lindsay Levine and Philip V. Bohlman.

This Thing Called Music . Essays in Honor of Bruno Nettl. Lanham, MD / Boulder, CO / New York City / London: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015, pp. 366–377.

Tagg, Philip (1979, ed. 2000).

Kojak – 50 Seconds of Television Music: Toward the Analysis of Affect in Popular Music , pp. 38–45. The Mass Media Music Scholar's Press.

ISBN 0-9701684-0-3 .

Tagg, Philip (1982). "Analysing Popular Music: Theory, Method and Practice", Popular Music , vol. 2, Theory and Method, pp. 37–67.

van der Merwe, Peter (1989).

Origins of the Popular Style: The Antecedents of Twentieth Century Popular Music .

ISBN 0-19-816305-3 (1992).

Winkler, Peter (1978). "Toward a theory of pop harmony", In Theory Only , 4, pp. 3–26., cited in Moore 2003 , p. 9.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Musicology Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Wikimedia Commons has media related to Musicology .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Musicology .

International Musicological Society (IMS) The American Musicological Society v t e Music History of music Prehistoric Ancient Dance Martial Religious Biblical Secular Art music Afghan classical music—Klasik Andalusi classical music Arabic music Azerbaijani Mugham Burmese classical music—Mahāgīta Cambodian ceremonial music—Pinpeat Chinese traditional music Indian classical music Byzantine music Indonesian art music—Gamelan Japanese court music—Gagaku Korean court music Lao classical music Mandé art music Ottoman music Persian classical music Philippine art songs—Kundiman Scottish Ceòl Mór Kandyan dance of Sri Lanka Thai classical music—Piphat Vietnam imperial court music—Nhã nhạc Western classical music Vernacular music Circus music Folk music Blues Country music Electronic music Hip hop music Jazz Pop music Progressive music Psychedelic music Soul music Musical instruments Arched Harp Angular harp History of the harpsichord History of lute-family instruments Nafir Evolution of timpani in the 18th and 19th centuries History of the trumpet History of the violin Musician Ensembles Band (rock and pop) Backup band All-female band Rhythm section Big band Concert band Disc jockey Military band Lead vocalist Backing vocalist Theory Composition Form Genre Notation Improvisation Lyrics Singing Song Technique Education and study Bachelor of Music Master of Music Doctor of Musical Arts PhD Method Music archaeology Music history Music psychology Music school Composition Musicology Biomusicology Cognitive musicology Computational musicology Ecomusicology Ethnomusicology New musicology Organology Sociomusicology Zoomusicology Production Single A-side and B-side Extended play Compilation Live Remix Audio engineer Record label Record producer Sampling Music technology (electric) Music technology (electronic and digital) Sound recording and reproduction Cover Remix Cultural and regional genres African Central East North Southern West Asian Central East Middle Eastern South Southeast European Balkan Nordic Latin American Central American South American North American Caribbean Oceanian Melanesian Micronesian Polynesian By sovereign state Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé and Príncipe Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Lists Index Outline Timeline Albums Classical and art music traditions Classical music genres Cultural and regional genres Instruments Jazz and popular music glossary Music genres and styles Songs Terminology related articles Aesthetics of music Album era Fictional music Music and emotion Music and exercise Music and fashion Music industry Music and politics Censorship Environmentalism Warfare Music and sleep Music community Music festival Music technology Music therapy Musical escapism Musical instrument Classification Folk Women in music Music portal Record production portal Category v t e Music theory Aesthetics Analysis Aspects Composition Definition Mathematics Musicology Philosophy Psychology Set theory Tuning List of music theorists v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐t88vs
Cached time: 20250814215313
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.755 seconds
Real time usage: 1.013 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3434/1000000
Revision size: 27596/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 149367/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3894/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 206/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 117835/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.510/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16868214/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  859.182      1 -total
 32.14%  276.112      5 Template:Navbox
 31.19%  268.013      1 Template:Music_topics
 20.05%  172.259      1 Template:Reflist
 16.22%  139.384      1 Template:World_topic
  9.54%   82.002      2 Template:Cite_web
  9.29%   79.847      2 Template:Lang
  9.28%   79.723      1 Template:Cite_Merriam-Webster
  7.20%   61.851      9 Template:Cite_book
  6.04%   51.897      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20458:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215313 and revision id 1303723623. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Musicology&oldid=1303723623 " Categories : Musicology Music history Philosophy of music Humanities occupations Occupations in music Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 18:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Musicology 75 languages Add topic

