Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Orthography and diction 2 Types of particles Toggle Types of particles subsection 2.1 Case markers ( 格助詞 , kakujoshi ) 2.2 Parallel markers ( 並立助詞 , heiritsu-joshi ) 2.3 Sentence ending particles ( 終助詞 , shūjoshi ) 2.4 Interjectory particles ( 間投助詞 , kantō-joshi ) 2.5 Adverbial particles ( 副助詞 , fukujoshi ) 2.6 Binding particles ( 係助詞 , kakarijoshi, keijoshi ) 2.7 Conjunctive particles ( 接続助詞 , setsuzoku-joshi ) 2.8 Phrasal particles ( 準体助詞 , juntai-joshi ) 3 List of particles Toggle List of particles subsection 3.1 Index 3.2 Meaning and usage 4 Contrast Toggle Contrast subsection 4.1 は wa and が ga 4.2 に ni and で de 4.3 に ni and へ e 4.4 が ga and を o 4.5 に ni and と to 4.6 や ya and と to 4.7 Historical particles 5 Differences from English prepositions 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Japanese particles 12 languages Asturianu Deutsch Español Français Հայերեն Jawa 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Particles in Japanese This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Japanese particles , joshi ( 助詞 ) [ a ] or teni(o)ha ( てに（を）は ) , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] are suffixes or short words in Japanese grammar that immediately follow the modified noun, verb, adjective, or sentence. Their grammatical range can indicate various meanings and functions, such as speaker affect and assertiveness.

Orthography and diction [ edit ] Japanese particles are written in hiragana in modern Japanese, though some of them also have kanji forms: ( 弖 or 天 for te て ; 爾 for ni に ; 乎 or 遠 for o を ; and 波 for wa は ). Particles follow the same rules of phonetic transcription as all Japanese words, with the exception of は (written ha , pronounced wa as a particle), へ (written he , pronounced e ) and を (written using a hiragana character with no other use in modern Japanese, originally assigned as wo , now usually pronounced o , though some speakers render it as wo ). These exceptions are a relic of historical kana usage .

Types of particles [ edit ] There are eight types of particles, depending on what function they serve.

Case markers ( 格助詞 , kakujoshi ) [ edit ] が, ga, の, no, を, o, [ b ] に, ni, へ, e, [ b ] と, to, で, de, から, kara, より yori が, の, を, に, へ, と, で, から, より ga, no, o, [ b ] ni, e, [ b ] to, de, kara, yori Parallel markers ( 並立助詞 , heiritsu-joshi ) [ edit ] か, ka, の, no, や, ya, に, ni, と, to, やら, yara, なり, nari, だの dano か, の, や, に, と, やら, なり, だの ka, no, ya, ni, to, yara, nari, dano Sentence ending particles ( 終助詞 , shūjoshi ) [ edit ] か, ka, の, no, や, ya, な, na, わ, wa, とも, tomo, かしら kashira か, の, や, な, わ, とも, かしら ka, no, ya, na, wa, tomo, kashira Interjectory particles ( 間投助詞 , kantō-joshi ) [ edit ] さ, sa, よ, yo, ね ne さ, よ, ね sa, yo, ne Adverbial particles ( 副助詞 , fukujoshi ) [ edit ] ばかり, bakari, まで, made, だけ, dake, ほど, hodo, くらい, kurai, など, nado, なり, nari, やら yara ばかり, まで, だけ, ほど, くらい, など, なり, やら bakari, made, dake, hodo, kurai, nado, nari, yara Binding particles ( 係助詞 , kakarijoshi, keijoshi ) [ edit ] は, wa, [ b ] も, mo, こそ, koso, でも, demo, しか, shika, さえ, sae, だに dani は, も, こそ, でも, しか, さえ, だに wa, [ b ] mo, koso, demo, shika, sae, dani Conjunctive particles ( 接続助詞 , setsuzoku-joshi ) [ edit ] ば, ba, や, ya, が, ga, て, te, のに, noni, ので, node, から, kara, ところが, tokoroga, けれども, keredomo, くせに kuseni ば, や, が, て, のに, ので, から, ところが, けれども, くせに ba, ya, ga, te, noni, node, kara, tokoroga, keredomo, kuseni Phrasal particles ( 準体助詞 , juntai-joshi ) [ edit ] の, no, から kara の, から no, kara Note that some particles appear in two types. For example, kara is called a "case marker" where it describes where something is from or what happens after something; when it describes a cause it is called a "conjunctive particle".

^ Literally "helping words" or "auxiliary words". This term originally referred to "particles", "auxiliary verbs" and "suffixes" in Japanese, the latter two are now respectively termed jodōshi ( 助動詞 ) and setsubigo ( 接尾語 ) .

[ 1 ] It was also used for "auxiliary verbs" ( 助動詞 , jodōshi ) in some European grammars.

[ 2 ] ^ a b c The particles pronounced o , e , and wa are written with the hiragana を ( wo ), へ ( he ), and は ( ha ). See Orthography and diction above.

List of particles [ edit ] Index [ edit ] bakari bakari ka bakashi dake da no de de mo dokoro ka e ga hodo ka kai ka na kara ka shira kedo kiri kke koro/goro koso kurai/gurai made made ni me mo mono/mon mono de mono ka/mon-ka mono nara mono o na and naa nado nanka/nante nara ne ni ni te ni wa no no de nomi no ni o sa/saa sae de sae sae...ba/ra shi shika sura to to ka to mo tte tteba wa ya yara yo yori ze zo zutsu Meaning and usage [ edit ] Preceding syntactic element Example sentence Translation bakari ばかり (許り) Translates to: "just, only, full of" Colloquially: ばっかり bakkari , ばっか bakka Noun Tōkyō wa hito bakari da.

東京は 人ばかり だ。 Tokyo is just full of people .

Verbs ( ta form) Tabeta bakari da.

食べたばかり だ。 I just ate .

Verb ( te form) Kare wa tabete bakari iru.

彼は 食べてばかり いる。 He's always eating .

bakari ka ばかりか (許りか) Translates to: "not only".

Accompanied by さえ sae ("but also") indicates something unusual or unexpected.

Etymology: bakari + ka Nouns Sofu bakari ka , sōsofu sae ikite iru.

祖父ばかりか 、曽祖父さえ生きている。 Not only is my grandfather living, but so is my great-grandfather.

bakashi ばかし (許し) bakashi is another form of bakari .

dake だけ (丈) Translates to: "only"; limit.

Dake functions as a noun.

Kanji form 丈 is less commonly used.

Nouns rōmaji dake no jisho ローマ字だけ の辞書 a rōmaji-only dictionary Verbs (volitional) Netai dake nereba ii.

寝たいだけ 寝ればいい。 You can sleep as much as you want [to sleep] .

da no だの Translates to: "and, things like".

Etymology: da (copula) + no .

This particle is used far less frequently than to ka .

Often has negative connotations.

Nouns, adjectives, verbs Nattō da no , shīfūdo da no , wasabi da no —nihonshoku ga nigate da.

納豆だの 、 シーフードだの 、 わさびだの —日本食が苦手だ。 Natto , seafood , wasabi —Japanese food isn't my thing.

de で Etymology: Originally an alteration of ni te , later treated as a conjugation of the copula da . de can be used as "at" or "by means of".  When serving as the continuative TE form of a subordinate clause, de substitutes for da/desu, carries the meaning "is, and so...", and takes on the tense of the final verb of the sentence.

Nouns: instrument Jitensha de ikimashō.

自転車で 行きましょう。 Let's go by bicycle .

Nouns: location Koko de yasumitai.

ここで 休みたい。 I want to rest here .

Nouns: language Nihongo de tegami o kaita.

日本語で 手紙を書いた。 I wrote the letter in Japanese.

TE form of copula: "is, and so..." kimi ga suki de yokatta 君 が 好き で よかった。 You are loved ( and so ) I am glad. / I am glad that I love you.

de mo でも Translates to: "even; or; but, however; also in" Etymology: de + mo Nouns, particles: "even" Uchū kara de mo Banri-no-Chōjō ga mieru.

宇宙からでも 万里の長城が見える。 Even from space you can see the Great Wall of China.

Noun: "or something" Ocha de mo , ikaga?

お茶でも 、いかが？ Would you like tea or something ?

Noun: "also in" Nihon de mo eigo o benkyō suru 日本でも 英語を勉強する。 In Japan also , we study English.

Beginning of phrase: "but, however, even so" De mo , watashi wa sō omowanai でも 、私はそう思わない。 But I don't think so.

dokoro ka どころか (所か) Translates to: "anything but, far from" Etymology: dokoro ( tokoro : place) + ka Nouns Kare wa keisatsukan dokoro ka , hanzaisha da.

彼は 警察官どころか 、犯罪者だ。 He's anything but a policeman ; he's a criminal.

e へ Translates to: "to, in"; direction E is written with へ rather than え, reflecting old kana usage.

Nouns: direction Nihon e yōkoso!

日本へ ようこそ！ Welcome to Japan !

ga が Functions as: identifier (identifies something unspecified), conjunction ("but"). Not to be confused with the particle は .

Ga (が or ヶ ): Historical possessive used to connect nouns, most often seen in place names as ヶ Nouns: Subject Marker (answers a silent or asked question) Neko ga esa o tabeta.

猫が 餌を食べた。 The cat ate the catfood.

[Answers: "What ate the catfood?"] Inu ga suki.

犬が 好き。 I like dogs .

[Answers: What do you like?] Noun: noun connector wa ga kuni 我が 国 my/our [collective] country Fujimi ga Oka 富士見が 丘 Fuji View Hill Seki ga hara 関が 原 Gateway Plains (site of the Battle of Sekigahara ) Phrases: conjunction (but...) Inu wa suki da ga , neko wa kirai da.

犬は好きだ が 、猫は嫌いだ。 I like dogs but I hate cats.

hodo ほど (程) Translates to: "as much as"; upper limit Nouns Kare hodo nihongo ga umakunai.

彼ほど 日本語がうまくない。 My Japanese isn't as good as his.

Adjectives * Hayai hodo ii.

早いほど いい。 The sooner , the better.

Verb Aitsu o koroshitai hodo kirai da.

あいつを 殺したいほど 嫌いだ。 I hate him enough to want to kill him.

i い A reduced form of ne , yo or ya .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It can follow imperative forms. In most modern dialects, it was fused permanently to the once free imperative form ko ( 来 ) to form koi ( 来い ; come!) . It is still prevalent in western dialects' imperative forms where yo would be used in standard Japanese, such as okii ( 起きい ) and akei/akee ( 開けい・開けえ ) . See ka i and Japanese conjugation § Imperative: Conjugation table .

ka か Functions as: question denominator, alternative item conjunction, quotation expressing doubt; "whether", especially when used with dō ka ("or not").

Nouns, verbs: listing alternatives Kore ka , sore ka , dotchika erande yo.

これか 、 それか 、どっちか選んでよ。 This or that , choose one of them.

Noun, verbs: "whether (or not)" Iku ka [dō ka] wakaranai.

行くか（どうか） 分からない。 I don't know [whether or not / if] he'll go .

Adverbs (interrogative): uncertainty Doko ka de mita koto ga aru.

どこ か で見たことがある。 I think I've seen you somewhere before. (You look familiar) Phrases: question (formal) Wakarimasu ka ?

分かります か ？ Do you understand ? (formal) Phrases: question, rhetorical Eigo nante wakarimasu ka !

英語なんて分かります か !

Why the heck would I understand English ? (formal) Phrases: question, invitation Sate, dekake yō ka ?

さて、出かけよう か ？ Right then, shall we leave ?

Phrase: quotation expressing doubt Iku ka to omoimasu ga...

行くか と思いますが。。。 I think he'll go (but I'm not sure)...

kai かい Ka i is a gentler and masculine variant of the question marker ka . The i could be a reduction of ne or yo .

[ 7 ] ka na かな Translates to: "I wonder"  (Note: "Ka na" implies having mostly made up one's mind. Drawing out the "na" [ka naa] implies less certainty.) Etymology: ka + na Phrases Kare wa ayashii hito ka na .

彼は怪しい人 かな 。 I wonder if he's a suspicious person.

kara から Translates to: "from, after, because" Kara may be followed by no to link two nouns.

Nouns: " from , out of " Tōkyō kara kaetta.

東京から 帰った。 He returned from Tokyo .

zutto mae kara no hanashi ずっと前から の話 a conversation from way back Verb ( te form ): "after" Owatte kara , kite kudasai.

終わってから 、来てください。 Please come by after finishing (after you've finished) .

Adjectives, Verbs: "because" Niku o tabenai kara , raamen wa dame da 肉を 食べないから 、ラーメンはだめだ。 Because he doesn't eat meat, ramen is bad (a bad idea).

ka shira かしら Ka shira is like ka na , but is used more by women. See also Gender differences in spoken Japanese .

Etymology: ka + shira , the irrealis form (i.e.

negative form minus the -nai ) of shiru "to know" Phrases Kare wa ayashii hito ka shira .

彼は怪しい人 かしら 。 I wonder if he's a suspicious person.

kedo けど Translates to: "although, but" Etymology: kedo is a shortened version of formal keredomo .  It also appears semi-abbreviated and semi-formally as keredo or kedomo .

Adjectives, verbs Kanojo wa hen da kedo kirei da.

彼女は 変だけど きれいだ。 She is strange but pretty kiri きり (切り) Translates to: "just, only" Kiri is more rarely used than dake , functions as a noun and may be followed by no .

Nouns futari kiri no o-mise 二人きり のお店 a shop with just two people [who work there] kke っけ Translates to: "Similar to ka but in an attempt to recall forgotten information." Etymology: kke originates from the auxiliary verb of Old Japanese "keri".

Nouns Nani wo iou to shitetan da kke 何を言おうとしてたん だっけ What were you trying to say, again?

koro/goro ごろ (頃) Translates to: "around, about, approximately" Koro functions as a noun and may be followed by no .

Nouns San-ji goro ni aimashō.

三時ごろ に会いましょう。 Let's meet around 3 o'clock .

koso こそ Functions as: Emphasis marker.

There is no direct translation, but roughly analogous to "precisely" or "exactly", as in examples below.

Phrases Kyō koso , yaru zo!

今日こそ 、やるぞ！ Today , I'm going to do it!

Kimi ga suki da kara koso kore dake ganbatte iru n da yo.

君が好きだからこそ これだけがんばっているんだよ。 It's precisely because I like you that I'm working this hard.

Kochira koso , yoroshiku onegai shimasu.

こちらこそ 、よろしくお願いします。 Nice to meet you, too . (Emphasizes this side or me too ) kurai/gurai くらい・ぐらい (位) Translates to: "about, approximately" Kurai functions as a noun and may be followed by no .

Nouns Juppun kurai kakaru 十分くらい かかる。 It takes about 10 minutes .

made まで (迄) Translates to: "up to, until, as far as" Indicates a time or place as a limit.

Nouns (specifically places or times) Kono densha wa, Shimonoseki made ikimasu.

この電車は、 下関まで 行きます。 This train goes as far as Shimonoseki .

Verb Kaeru made matte ru.

帰るまで 待ってる。 I'll wait until you come home .

made ni までに (迄に) Translates to: "by (a certain time)" Etymology: made + ni Nouns, verbs Ku-ji made ni kaeru.

九時までに 帰る。 I'll come back by nine o'clock .

me め (目) me (目 only): ordinal particle me (め only): "Damn..."; abusive/pejorative Classifier nouns: ordinal Amerika wa nikai me desu.

アメリカは 二回目 です。 This is my second time to America.

Noun: abusive "damn..." Orokamono me!

愚か者め！ [You] damn fool!

mo も（亦） Translates to: "also" Mo always replaces wa and ga , but may follow other particles.

Nouns, phrases Watashi ni mo kureta.

私にも くれた。 I was given (something), too .

mono/mon もの・もん Verb + mono (物) : creates a noun from the verb (only applies to certain verbs) もの / もん at the end of a sentence: casual feminine sentence ender like の ; もん is very feminine and a bit cheeky.

With verbs Nomi mono 飲み 物 Drink Tabe mono 食べ 物 Food Iki mono 生き 物 Living thing At the end of a sentence "Doushite konakatta no?" "Jugyō ga attanda mono." 「どうしてこなかったの？」「授業があったんだ もの 。」 "Why didn't you come?"  "I had class." "Doushite konakatta no?" "Jugyō ga attanda mon." 「どうしてこなかったの？」「授業があったんだ もん 。」 "Why didn't you come?"  "I had class, hah ." mono de もので Similar meaning as ので.

mono ka/mon-ka ものか/もんか Put at the end of sentences to strongly decline. (More gently : もの/もんですか) At the end of sentences Makeru- monka !

負ける もんか !

I will not surrender!

Dare ga anna tokoro-ni nido to iku- mondesuka !

誰があんなところに二度と行く もんですか !

Who would dare to go to a place like that for a second time!?

mono nara ものなら (物なら) if (I/we/etc.) could mono o ものを Used in phrases to show deplore feelings about not doing something they should do.

Phrases "Sukida" to hito koto itte kure-sae shi-tara kekkon deki-ta mono o ...

"好きだ"と一言言ってくれさえしたら、結婚できた ものを ...

If you had said "I like you", we would have gotten married...

na and naa な(and なる)・なあ・なぁ Na (な only): used with a class of adjectives which behave grammatically like nouns (see na-adjectives ).  A more archaic form of this na is naru (なる), which is used in the same way.  If na follows a dictionary form verb, it is a negative command ("Don't... ").  However, if used with a verb stem, it implies the opposite: "Do..." as a short form of nasai (なさい).  It is also used to modify general nouns before other particles which cannot directly follow nouns (e.g.

no de ).

Etymology: The na used with nouns (including na-adjectives) is a form of the copula .

Na or naa at the end of a sentence is a variant of ne , implying more reflection.

Verb (plain non-future) Suru- na する な Don't do (something).

Verb (stem) Tabe- na 食べ な (short form of 食べなさい) Do eat / Please eat.

Na-adjectives hen na hito 変な 人 a strange person Phrases Hen da na !

変だ な ！ How strange!

nado など (等) Translates to: "for example, things like, such as, etc., and so on" Functions as a noun and may be followed by no .

Nouns Nattō ya kabuki nado wa Nihon dake ni aru.

納豆や 歌舞伎など は日本だけにある。 Things like natto and kabuki are only in Japan.

nanka/nante なんか・なんて (何か・何て) Functions to: emphasize disgust, contempt, or otherwise negative feelings of the speaker.

Nante is slightly more formal than nanka .

Nouns Jogen nanka iranai.

助言なんか いらない。 I don't need any (damn) advice .

Verb [ 8 ] Oyogu nante dekinai.

泳ぐなんて できない。 I can't swim .

Adjectives [ 9 ] Ōkiku nanka nai kedo, kirei da.

大きくなんか ないけど、きれいだ。 It's not big [or anything] , but it's clean.

nara なら Translates to: "if"; conditional Hypothetical (仮定形) or conditional form of the copula da .  Related to the more formal naraba .

Nouns, adjectives, verbs, phrases Atsui nara , eakon o tsukete 暑いなら 、エアコンを付けて。 If you're hot , turn on the air conditioner.

ne ね Translates to: "eh"; interjection, tag question Similar to English "hey", "eh?", French "non?" and Spanish "¿no?"  Asks or shows agreement and reflection at phrase-end, also used before sentences to catch listener's attention (informal).

Phrases Kimi wa kashikoi yo ne.

君は賢いよね。 You're pretty smart, aren't you.

Kakkō ii desu ne.

格好いいですね。 That's pretty neat, eh?

Ne , ima nanji?

ね 、いま何時？ Hey , what time is it?

ni に Translates to: "to, in, at, by"; indirect object , direction; following a na-adjective, it creates an adverb Noun: location Gakkō ni iru.

学校に いる。 I'm at/in school .

Noun: direction Gakkō ni iku.

学校に 行く。 I'm going to school .

Noun: indirect object Ore ni kaese.

俺に 返せ。 Give it back to me .

Noun: passive agent Ka ni sasareta.

蚊に さされた。 I was bitten by a mosquito .

Noun, verbs (stem only): purpose, intent Eiga o mi ni iku.

映画を 見に 行く。 I'm going to see a movie.

Adjective: forms adverb teinei, teinei ni 丁寧、 丁寧に polite, politely ni te にて Formal version of de , functions in exactly the same way.

Etymology: Case particle ni + conjunctive particle te (cf.

te form of Japanese verbs ) ni wa には Translates to: "for; in, to; in order to"; Etymology: ni + wa (always written は) The wa part is the topic particle.

Serves as emphasis for a negative ending.

Nouns: "for" Shichimi wa, watashi ni wa kara-sugiru.

七味は、 私には 辛すぎる。 Shichimi is too spicy for me .  (i.e., " you might like it, but I'm not touching it.") Noun: "in, to" Kyōto ni wa hana ga aru.

京都には 花がある。 There are flowers in Kyōto .

(Lit.: As for in Kyōto , there are flowers.) Verb: "in order to" Mizu o mitsukeru ni wa みずを みつけるには In order to find water no の Functions as: possession indicator, noun link, topic marker (subordinate clauses), nominalization When nominalizing whole phrases, the no may function either as emphasis or as a question, depending on tone of voice.  Similar to English, a falling tone denotes a statement, and a rising tone a question.  Its use to mark statements tends to be more typical of feminine speech.  See also Gender differences in spoken Japanese .

Nouns: possession ex. a sensei no kuruma 先生の 車 the teacher's car Noun: possession ex. b watashi no konpyuuta 私の コンピューター My computer Noun: possession ex. c anata no shukudai あなたの 宿題 your homework Noun: linking kuruma no Toyota 車の トヨタ Toyota the car [company] Noun: subject marker in subordinate clauses (see also: ga ) Kare no tsukutta kēki wa oishikatta.

彼の 作ったケーキはおいしかった。 The cake that he made was tasty.

i-adjectives : nominalization Yasui no wa, kore.

安いの は、これ。 This is the cheap[er] one .

Verb: nominalization Taberu no ga daisuki.

食べるの が大好き。 I love eating .

Phrases: nominalization, question Mō, tabeta no ?

もう、 食べたの ？ Have you eaten yet ?

Kuruma na no ?

車 なの ？ Is it a car ?

Kare ni mō ageta no yo!

彼にもうあげたの よ！ I already gave it to him!

no de ので Translates to: "because" Etymology: no + de Colloquially, no de is often shortened to n de .

Phrases [ 10 ] Tesuto ga aru no de , ikenai.

テストが あるので 、行けない。 Because I have a test, I can't go.

Gakkō na no de , kin'en da.

学校なので 、禁煙だ。 Because this is a school it's no smoking.

nomi のみ Translates to: "only, just" Nomi is more formal and far less common than dake .  Unlike dake , its only meaning is that of small quantity or singleness of frequency.

Nouns Tō-ten de wa, Nihon en nomi go-riyō itadakemasu.

当店では、 日本円のみ ご利用頂けます。 This store accepts Japanese Yen only .

no ni のに Translates to: "despite, although, even though; would have; in order to" Etymology: no + ni Nouns and na-adjectives must be followed by na before using this particle.

No ni has a stronger meaning than kedo when used to mean "although", and conveys regret when used to mean "would have".

Adjectives, verbs: "although" Benkyō shiten no ni , eigo ga hanasenai.

勉強してんのに 、英語が話せない。 Although I'm studying , I can't speak English.

Adjectives (conditional), verbs (conditional): "would have" Kaette kitara, yokatta no ni .

帰ってきたら、 よかったのに 。 It would have been nice if you had come home.

Verb (plain form): "in order to" Hikkosu no ni torakku ga hitsuyō da.

引っ越すのに トラックが必要だ。 (In order) to move , you need a truck.

o を Functions as: direct object Translates to: "through, from, past (motion verbs only)" This is unrelated to the honorific prefix o , written お or 御.

Nouns: direct object Neko ga esa o tabeta.

猫が 餌を 食べた。 The cat ate the food .

Noun: through, etc. (motion) Sora o tobu 空を 飛ぶ fly through the sky sa/saa さ・さあ・さぁ Functions as: Masculine sentence/phrase final particle, indicating explanation of obvious facts.  It is softer than yo .

Saa : Feminine sentence/phrase final particle, used like ne , but often more frequently as extremely colloquial filler .

Phrases: masculine sa Kanojo ga inai kara, dansu niwa ikanai sa .

彼女がいないから、ダンスには行かない さ 。 I don't have a girlfriend, so I'm not going to the dance.

Phrases: saa Kinō saa , gakkō de saa , sensei ni saa , chūi sarete saa , chō mukatsuita.

昨日 さあ 、学校で さあ 、先生に さあ 、注意されて さあ 、超むかついた。 Like , yesterday, in, like , school, I, like , got fussed at by, like , some teacher, and it totally made me sick.

sae さえ Sae : "even" Note the meaning overlaps with mo .

Sae implies (usually) positive emphasis that the evident extent of something is greater than initially expected.  Can be followed by mo for additional emphasis.  Contrast this with sura .

Nouns Kanji sae kakeru.

漢字さえ 書ける。 He can even write kanji .

de sae でさえ Translates to: "even" Etymology: de + sae De sae replaces wa and ga , like de mo above.

Nouns Sonna koto wa saru de sae dekiru.

そんなことは 猿でさえ できる。 Even a monkey can do that.

sae...ba/ra さえ…ば・ら Function: sae followed by a verb in the conditional means "if only".

Nouns Kore sae nomeba , futsukayoi ga naoru yo.

これさえ飲めば 、二日酔いが直るよ。 If you would just drink this , your hangover would get better.

shi し Translates to: "and what's more" (conjunction) Adjectives, verbs Kirei da shi , hiroi shi , ii ne, kono apaato!

きれいだし 、 広いし 、いいね、このアパート。 It's clean, it's spacious; this apartment is nice, isn't it!

shika しか Translates to: "only, just" Shika must be followed by a negative verb.

Shika may be compounded as dakeshika , kirishika , and nomishika (plus the negative verb) to stress an extremely limited quantity or frequency.

Nouns Ichi en dama shika nai.

一円玉しか ない。 I have just a one-yen coin .

Verb Yūbin-kyoku ni iku shika nai.

郵便局に 行くしか ない。 The only thing [to do] is to go to the post office.

sura すら Translates to: "even" Note the meaning overlaps with mo .

Sura implies (usually) negative emphasis that the evident extent of something is less than initially expected.  Contrast this with sae .

Nouns Kanji sura kakenai.

漢字すら 書けない。 He can't even write kanji .

to と Translates to: "and" (conjunction); "with" or "as with" (preposition); "if"; quotation.

Nouns: conjunction sore to kore それと これ that and this Nouns: conjunction sore to kore to それ と これ と that or this Verbs: transition/state change taiyōkei dasshutsu e to chikazuite itta 太陽系 脱出 へ と 近づいて 行った｡ They were getting close to the point of leaving the Solar System.

Noun: preposition Boku to ikitai?

僕と 行きたい？ Do you want to go with me ?

Verb, adjectives: "if" Benkyō suru to wakaru.

勉強すると 分かる。 If you study , you'll understand.

Any phrase: quotation Umi made! to sakenda.

「海まで！」と 叫んだ。 " To the sea!

" he cried.

to ka とか Functions as: A listing particle used like nado .  Often used with the question word nani (what) in the form nantoka ("something or other").

Etymology: to + ka Nouns Kani to ka, hotate to ka, zenbu tabeta yo.

蟹とか、帆立とか、 全部食べたよ。 We had crab, scallops, [other stuff,] we ate them all.

to mo とも (共) Tomo (共): "both, all of the" To mo (no kanji): "even if, even though; at the ...-est; whether; [emphasis]" If following a noun and used with a negative verb, meaning changes to "none".

Etymology: to + mo Counted nouns Watashi wa, aitsura ga futari tomo kirai da.

私は、あいつらが、 二人とも 嫌いだ。 I hate the both of those guys.

Zannen nagara, sono kuruma wa san dai tomo irimasen.

残念ながら、その車は 三台とも 要りません。 Unfortunately, we need none of those three cars.

Volitional verbs Dō shiyō to mo amari susumanai.

どう しようとも あまり進まない。 No matter how we try [to do something] , we don't make much progress.

Adverbial (continuative) form of i-adjectives Sukunaku to mo go-jū mairu aruite kita.

少なくとも 五十マイル歩いてきた。 We walked at least fifty miles [to get here].

Osoku to mo itte miyō yo.

遅くとも いってみようよ。 Even if it's late , let's go and check it out.

Verb (paired with same verb in negative) Kau to mo kawanai to mo hakkiri shite imasen.

買うとも買わないとも はっきりしていません。 It isn't clear whether they're going to buy or not.

Verb, adjectives This use is similar to the English expression, "as if [something] wouldn't [phrase]." Waratte ii to mo.

笑っていいとも。 [ 11 ] It's okay to laugh.

Ikimasen to mo.

行きませんとも。 As if I would go.

tte って Written as って in hiragana, this is another form of to .  It is a shortened version of toiu (という), the present progressive form of the verb iu (言う), "to say"; it functions as a type of verbal quotation mark . It is sometimes used for a direct quote, sometimes for an indirect quote, and sometimes simply to emphasize a word or concept.

tte is casual, and (because it can be a direct quote) the politeness level of the quoted material does not necessarily reflect on the speaker. If you wish to be assuredly formal, use to iimasu instead of tte .

Any phrase Sugu kimasu tte すぐ来ますって。 Could be, "He said he'll come soon" (more politely) or, "He said, 'I'll come soon.'" (less so).

Arabiago tte, muzukashikunai?

アラビア語って難しくない？ "Arabic─isn't it difficult?" (Emphasizing a word; used instead of というものは or は ) tteba ってば Functions as:'strong emphasis marker, especially when the speaker has grown impatient.

Etymology: te + ba Any phrase: quotation kōhī datteba !

コーヒーだってば ！ I said "coffee"!

wa は は wa is a topic marker . It is written with the hiragana は ha , rather than the hiragana わ , wa . Not to be confused with the particle が .

wa わ わ wa is used at the end of the sentence to establish an emotional connection. It is used by both genders when it is pronounced with a falling intonation especially in dialects of Kansai, Nagoya and elsewhere, but with a rising intonation, it is generally used by females. This also conveys a certain deference to the speaker's wishes and emotions.

ya や Ya is used to make incomplete lists of things (usually nouns).  To make an exhaustive list, the particle to is used instead.

Watashi no suki na tabemono wa okashi ya pan ya mikan nado desu 私の好きな食べ物はお菓子やパンやミカンなどです。 "I like snacks, bread and tangerines." yara やら Denotes either uncertainty or listing.

yo よ Yo comes at the end of the sentence, and is used to make assertions. Compare zo and ze below.

Yo is also sometimes used after nouns, and functions as a vocative marker. This is especially used in older speech, poetry, and songs.

Kaeru yo!

帰るよ！ "I'm going home!" Saraba, tomo yo さらば友よ。 "Farewell, o friend!" yori より Yori can mean "from", and is also used to make comparisons.

Yori is usually written より in hiragana.

Kono densha-wa, Kashiwa-yori saki wa kaku eki-ni tomarimasu この電車は柏より先は各駅に止まります。 "This train will stop at every station after Kashiwa".

Dare-yori-mo kanemochi-ni naritai 誰よりも金持ちになりたい。 "I want to become richer than anyone (else)".

ze ぜ ze indicates assertion. Used mostly by men, it is never considered polite. Compare yo and zo .

zo ぞ zo indicates assertion.  Used mainly by men, it is considered somewhat less forceful and more positive than ze . Compare yo and ze above.

zutsu ずつ Zutsu denotes an equal or gradual distribution of quantity like "at a time" in "one at a time", "by" in "one by one", or "each" in "one each". It usually follows counted nouns, and is written with hiragana as ずつ.

Noun: counted Chokorēto-o ni-ko-zutsu tabemashita チョコレートを二個ずつ食べました。 Either "I ate two pieces of chocolate on each (countable) times." or "Each one ate (=shared) two pieces of chocolate (from larger amount)." Contrast [ edit ] は wa and が ga [ edit ] Main article: Japanese grammar § Topic, theme, and subject: は wa and が ga See also: Topic marker § Japanese: は に ni and で de [ edit ] Ni and de can both be used to show location , corresponding to the prepositions "in" or "at" in English.  Their uses are mutually exclusive.

Ni , when used to show location, is used only with stative verbs such as iru , "to be, exist;" aru , "to be, exist, have;" and sumu , "to live, inhabit." 日本に住んでいる。 ( Nihon-ni sunde iru.

"I live in Japan.") 学校にいる。 ( Gakkō-ni iru.

"I am in school.") De is used with action verbs to convey the place of action, as opposed to location of being.

学校で寝る。 ( Gakkō-de neru.

"I sleep in/at school.") * Gakkō-ni neru.

*"I sleep to school," is not usually used.

に ni and へ e [ edit ] Ni and e can both indicate direction of motion , literally meaning "to" or "at" in English. However, as particles in Japanese directly modify the preceding noun, some Japanese language courses call this the "goal of movement" usage because it marks the goal of the movement. For example, in the sentence 私はうちに帰ります ( Watashi wa uchi ni kaerimasu or "I'm going back home") the goal of the movement is home ( uchi ni ). In this sense, e is perhaps closer to English "towards" in terms of use (see example below).  As long as ni is used directionally, it is possible to substitute e in its place.

Ni used in other senses cannot be replaced by e : 学校に行く。 ( Gakkō ni iku.

"I'm going to school"), where 学校 gakkō , "school," is the destination of 行く iku , "go." Gakkō e iku.

"I'm going to school," where gakkō , "school," is the destination of iku , "go." 学校にいる。 ( Gakkō ni iru.

"I'm at school"), where 学校 gakkō , "school," is the location of いる iru , "be;" not a destination.

Gakkō e iru.

*"I'm to school," is not a possible construction since "be" is not a verb of motion.

友達に会う。 ( Tomodachi ni au "I'll meet my friends") where 友達 tomodachi , "friends,"  is the indirect object of 会う au , "meet;" not a destination.

Tomodachi e au *"I'll meet to my friends," which is impossible because "meet" is not a verb of motion.

本を買いに行った。 ( Hon o kai ni itta "I went to buy a book"), where 買いに kai ni , "to buy," shows purpose or intent, and is a verbal adverb ; not destination.

Hon o kai e itta *"I went towards buying a book," is not possible because kai , "buying," cannot be a destination.

Indicating direction, using e instead of ni is preferred when ni is used non-directionally in proximity: 友達に会いに京都へ行った。 ( Tomodachi ni ai ni Kyōto e itta.

"I went to Kyoto to meet my friends.") Ni can not be replaced by e in all uses. It must be used with days of the week as in 日曜日に京都にいきます ( Nichiyoubi ni Kyoto ni ikimasu "I will go to Kyoto on Sunday".) where ni is used both to mark the day of the week (日曜日) and the goal of the movement (京都). It is also required with numerical times (but not relative times). For example, ni must be used in the sentence 十一時に寝ます ( Juu ichi ji ni nemasu "I will go to sleep at 11 o'clock") to mark the numerical time (十一時) but it is not used with the relative time words like tomorrow (明日), yesterday (昨日), today (今日), last week (先週), next month (来月), etc. For example, in the sentence 私は昨日仕事に行きませんでした ( watashi wa kinou shigoto ni ikimasen deshita "I did not go to work yesterday") no particle is needed for "yesterday" (昨日), but ni is used to mark the goal of movement (仕事に).

が ga and を o [ edit ] In some cases, ga and o are seemingly interchangeable. For example, with the tai form, meaning "want to", it is possible to say either of the following: ご飯が食べたい。 ( Gohan ga tabetai.

"I want to eat rice.") ご飯を食べたい。 ( Gohan o tabetai.

"I want to eat rice.") This is because たい (an adjective indicating desire) can either be a helper adjective attached to a verb or a standalone adjective in conjunction with the previous verb depending on context. If the above sentences were broken down, they could be interpreted as ご飯が[食べたい]。 "Rice [is desired to be eaten]." [ご飯を食べ]たい。 "[Eating rice] is desirable." に ni and と to [ edit ] Ni and to are sometimes interchangeable in forms like になる ni naru and となる to naru . The ni naru form suggests a natural change, whereas to naru suggests change to a final stage.

や ya and と to [ edit ] Ya is used for incomplete lists, whereas to is used for complete ones.

Historical particles [ edit ] い i was used in Old Japanese and kanbun works. Its meaning is still debated, but has traditionally been considered emphatic.

[ 12 ] Differences from English prepositions [ edit ] Although many Japanese particles fill the role of prepositions, there is often no equivalent in Japanese for English prepositions like "on" or "about". Instead, particles are often used along with verbs or nouns to modify another word where English would use a preposition. For example, ue is a noun meaning "top/up", and ni tsuite is a fixed verbal expression meaning "concerning": テーブル の Tēburu- no Table- OF 上に -ue-ni top/up- AT ある。 aru.

exists.

テーブル の 上に ある。 Tēburu- no -ue-ni aru.

Table-OF top/up-AT exists.

"It's on the table." あの Ano That 人は、 hito-wa, person- TOPIC ギター に gitā- ni guitar- TO ついて tsuite concerning 何でも nandemo anything わかる。 wakaru.

knows.

あの 人は、 ギター に ついて 何でも わかる。 Ano hito-wa, gitā- ni tsuite nandemo wakaru.

That person-TOPIC guitar-TO concerning anything knows.

"That person knows everything about guitars." See also [ edit ] Adposition Chinese particles Okinawan particles Korean particles Japanese counter words Japanese grammar: particles Japanese verb conjugations Sentence-final particle Particles of the Kagoshima dialects References [ edit ] ^ "助詞" .

コトバンク .

^ Quackenbos, George Payn.

英文典獨𭓕 (in Japanese). Translated by Toda, Tadaatsu. p. 68.

^ "弖爾乎波" .

コトバンク .

^ "弖爾波" .

コトバンク .

^ Martin (2004) , pp. 919, 934.

^ い .

コトバンク (in Japanese).

^ Martin (2004) , p. 934.

^ Nanka/nante is usually followed by a verb which conveys some kind of undervalue, lacking, or dislike, often in the negative.

^ Can immediately follow i-adjectives , using the adjective's ku form if followed by the negative, or if the adjective is followed by no .

Na-adjectives require the copula da or no before nante or nanka .

^ Phrases ending in a noun or na-adjective require the na form of the copula before the nominalizing no .

^ Title of a Japanese TV programme hosted by Tamori .

^ Frellesvig, Bjark (2010).

A History of the Japanese Language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

131 .

ISBN 9780521653206 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Chino, Naoko (2005).

How to Tell the Difference Between Japanese Particles . Tokyo; New York: Kodansha International.

ISBN 4-7700-2200-X .

Makino, Seiichi; Tsutsui, Michio (1986).

A Dictionary of Basic Japanese Grammar . Tokyo: Japan Times.

ISBN 4-7890-0454-6 .

Makino, Seiichi; Tsutsui, Michio (1997).

A Dictionary of Intermediate Japanese Grammar . Tokyo: Japan Times.

ISBN 4-7890-0775-8 .

Martin, Samuel Elmo (2004).

A Reference Grammar of Japanese . Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.

Matsuoka McClain, Yoko (1981).

A Handbook of Modern Japanese Grammar: Including Lists of Words and Expressions with English Equivalents for Reading Aid . Tokyo: Hokuseido Press.

ISBN 4-590-00570-0 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of Category:Japanese particles at Wiktionary v t e Japanese language Earlier forms Old Early Middle Late Middle Early Modern Dialects Eastern Hokkaidō Tōhoku Northern Nanbu Tsugaru Akita Matagi Southern Kesen Nairiku Kantō Western Gunma Kanagawa Tokyo Eastern Ibaraki Tochigi Northern Izu Islands Tōkai–Tōsan Nagano-Yamanashi-Shizuoka Shizuoka Narada Echigo Nagaoka Gifu-Aichi Nagoya Mikawa Mino Hida Western Hokuriku Kaga Kanazawa Shiramine Kansai Awaji Banshū Kishū Okuyoshino Shikoku Iyo Tosa Sanuki Chūgoku San'yō Bingo East San'in Inshū Umpaku Kyūshū Hōnichi Ōita Hichiku Chikuzen Hakata Kumamoto Nagasaki Saga Tsushima Satsugū Other Amami Japanese Okinawan Japanese Pidgins and creoles Bamboo English Bonin English Hawaiian Creole Kyowa-go Pseudo-Chinese Yilan Creole Japanese Yokohama Pidgin Japanese Japonic languages Eastern Old Japanese Hachijō grammar Ryukyuan Northern Amami Ōshima Southern Amami Ōshima Kikai Kunigami Okinawan Okinoerabu Tokunoshima Yoron Southern Miyako Tarama Yaeyama Yonaguni Writing system Logograms Script reform Kanbun Kanji by stroke count Kanji radicals by frequency by stroke count Kokuji Ryakuji Ateji Kana Hiragana Katakana Furigana Okurigana Gojūon Man'yōgana Hentaigana Sōgana Kana ligature Orthography Braille Kanji Punctuation Kanazukai Historical kana Modern kana Jōdai Tokushu Kanazukai Yotsugana Transcription into Japanese Encoding EUC EUC-JP ISO/IEC 2022 JIS 0201 0208 0211 0212 0213 Shift JIS Unicode Hiragana Kana Extended-A Kana Extended-B Kana Supplement Small Kana Extension Katakana Katakana Phonetic Extensions Other ARIB STD B24 Enclosed EIS Extended shinjitai Half/full Grammar and vocabulary Japanese grammar Verb conjugations Godan and ichidan verbs Irregular verbs Pronouns Adjectives Possessives Particles Topic marker Counter words Numerals Native words ( yamato kotoba ) Sino-Japanese vocabulary Loan words ( gairaigo ) from Dutch from Portuguese Wasei-eigo Wasei-kango Engrish Honorific speech Honorifics Court lady language ( nyōbō kotoba ) Role language ( yakuwarigo ) Gender differences Dictionaries Phonology Pitch accent Rendaku Sound symbolism Kanji pronunciation sources on'yomi go-on kan-on tō-on kun'yomi Transliteration Romanization Hepburn Nihon-shiki Kunrei-shiki JSL Wāpuro rōmaji In Esperanto Cyrillization Polivanov system Literature Books Poetry Writers Speculative fiction writers Classical Japanese texts v t e Adpositions of the world's languages Phonologies Orthographies Grammars Adjectives Adpositions Determiners Nouns Pronouns Verbs English Japanese Korean Latvian Spanish Authority control databases : National Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nkq74
Cached time: 20250817073656
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.786 seconds
Real time usage: 0.948 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9421/1000000
Revision size: 62397/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 196844/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 39632/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 64456/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.426/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18990145/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  736.263      1 -total
 17.65%  129.949      2 Template:Reflist
 16.29%  119.927     17 Template:Nihongo
 12.49%   91.972      4 Template:Cite_web
 11.52%   84.797      1 Template:Short_description
 11.24%   82.744    180 Template:Japanese_particle
 10.54%   77.588      1 Template:Japanese_language
  7.04%   51.851      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.35%   46.741      1 Template:More_footnotes
  5.51%   40.543      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2842974:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817073656 and revision id 1304122135. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Japanese_particles&oldid=1304122135 " Category : Japanese grammar Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese-language text CS1 uses Japanese-language script (ja) CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2008 All articles lacking in-text citations Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2019 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 03:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Japanese particles 12 languages Add topic

