Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Synopsis Toggle Synopsis subsection 2.1 Critique of Marx's reproduction schemas 2.2 Problem of realization and role of non-capitalist strata 2.3 Imperialism as a necessity 3 The Anti-Critique 4 Reception and criticism Toggle Reception and criticism subsection 4.1 Contemporary responses 4.2 Major criticisms 4.2.1 Methodological error and underconsumptionism 4.2.2 Bukharin and the role of investment 4.2.3 Grossman's critique 4.3 Later assessments 5 Legacy and influence 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Works cited 8 External links Toggle the table of contents The Accumulation of Capital 7 languages Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1913 economics book by Rosa Luxemburg This article is about the book by Rosa Luxemburg. For the economic concept, see Accumulation of capital . For the book by Joan Robinson, see Joan Robinson's growth model .

The Accumulation of Capital First edition, 1913 Author Rosa Luxemburg Original title Die Akkumulation des Kapitals Language German Subject Marxian economics , imperialism Published 1913 Publisher Vorwärts Publication place Berlin , Germany Part of a series about Imperialism studies Theories Cultural imperialism Dependency theory Economic imperialism Expansionism Intercommunalism Irredentism Linguistic imperialism Neo-Gramscianism Neocolonialism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Ultra-imperialism World-systems theory Concepts Conquest Great power Hegemony North–South model Unequal exchange Balance of trade Global labor arbitrage Ecological Sphere of influence Superprofit Uneven and combined development War of aggression People Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Paul A. Baran Charles Bettelheim Nikolai Bukharin Arghiri Emmanuel John Bellamy Foster Andre Gunder Frank Michael Hardt Rudolf Hilferding Peter Gowan J. A. Hobson Vladimir Lenin Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev Li Minqi Rosa Luxemburg Antonio Negri Kwame Nkrumah Huey P. Newton Walter Rodney Paul Sweezy Leon Trotsky Immanuel Wallerstein Works The Accumulation of Capital Empire How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Imperialism Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism Monopoly Capital Multitude Naked Imperialism Related Banana republic Economic development Illicit financial flows List of irredentist claims or disputes Global North and Global South Neofunctionalism Prebisch–Singer hypothesis Third-worldism Category:Imperialism studies v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The Accumulation of Capital: A Contribution to an Economic Explanation of Imperialism (German: Die Akkumulation des Kapitals: Ein Beitrag zur ökonomischen Erklärung des Imperialismus ) is a 1913 book by the Marxist theorist Rosa Luxemburg . In it, Luxemburg critiques Karl Marx 's theory of capitalist reproduction, arguing that capitalism requires access to non-capitalist markets and societies to solve the problem of realizing surplus value and to facilitate its expansion.

[ 1 ] She posited that this necessity for external markets drives capitalist imperialism , as advanced capitalist states are forced to conquer and absorb pre-capitalist areas of the world.

[ 2 ] Luxemburg controversially concluded that once this process is complete and the entire globe operates under the capitalist mode of production, the system's internal contradictions will make further accumulation impossible, leading to its collapse.

[ 3 ] The work was written as an intervention in the contemporary Marxist debates on revisionism and imperialism and was intended to provide an economic foundation for the inevitability of capitalist crisis.

[ 4 ] Upon its publication, The Accumulation of Capital generated fierce criticism from across the socialist movement, including from prominent Marxists such as Nikolai Bukharin and Otto Bauer .

[ 5 ] Critics accused Luxemburg of misinterpreting Marx's method, promoting a theory of underconsumptionism , and failing to understand that accumulation could be sustained internally.

[ 6 ] Despite the controversies, the book is considered a foundational text in Marxist theories of imperialism and has influenced later thinkers such as Michał Kalecki and Henryk Grossman .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Background [ edit ] Rosa Luxemburg wrote The Accumulation of Capital while teaching economics at the party school of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) between 1907 and 1914.

[ 9 ] The work grew out of a chapter on imperialism she was preparing for a popular textbook, Introduction to Political Economy .

[ 10 ] [ 9 ] In the course of this work, she encountered what she believed was an unresolved problem in Karl Marx's analysis of capitalist accumulation in Volume 2 of Das Kapital .

[ 10 ] The book was written in the context of intense debates within the Second International concerning revisionism , imperialism, and the future of capitalism.

[ 11 ] Thinkers like Eduard Bernstein had argued that capitalism had overcome its tendency toward crisis, while the so-called "Legal Marxists" in Russia, such as Mikhail Tugan-Baranovsky , used Marx's own reproduction schemas to argue that continuous, stable capitalist development was possible, independent of consumption.

[ 12 ] Luxemburg's work was a direct challenge to these "neo-harmonist" interpretations, aiming to re-establish the idea that capitalism had absolute economic limits and was headed for an inevitable breakdown.

[ 11 ] She felt that a proper understanding of the accumulation process was essential for grounding the socialist movement's opposition to militarism and imperialism, which she saw as direct consequences of capital's drive to expand.

[ 10 ] Synopsis [ edit ] The Accumulation of Capital is primarily a theoretical work that seeks to explain the economic laws governing the expansion of the capitalist system as a whole. Luxemburg's central thesis is that capitalist accumulation cannot proceed in a "closed" system consisting only of capitalists and workers, but requires continuous interaction with non-capitalist social and economic formations.

[ 13 ] Critique of Marx's reproduction schemas [ edit ] Luxemburg begins her analysis with a critique of Marx's schemas of expanded reproduction in Volume 2 of Capital .

[ 14 ] Marx's schemas model the circulation of capital within a purely capitalist society, showing how the total output can be divided between means of production (Department I) and consumer goods (Department II) to allow for both simple replacement and expanded investment.

[ 15 ] Luxemburg argues that while these schemas correctly identify the material proportions required for growth, they fail to solve the problem of "realization"—that is, how the surplus value embodied in commodities is converted into money to be reinvested as new capital.

[ 14 ] She points out that in a society composed solely of capitalists and workers, there is no identifiable source of demand for the portion of the social product that represents capitalized surplus value.

[ 13 ] The consumption of workers is limited to the value of their variable capital (wages) and can only realize the portion of the social product corresponding to that value.

[ 13 ] The consumption of capitalists can realize a portion of the surplus value, but to the extent that this surplus is consumed unproductively, it leads to simple, not expanded, reproduction.

[ 13 ] Investment by capitalists in new means of production (constant capital) appears to be a source of demand, but Luxemburg argues this merely postpones the problem. The capitalists in Department I (means of production) can sell to capitalists in Department II (consumer goods), but this only shifts the problem, as Department II must then find buyers for its own expanded output.

[ 16 ] For Luxemburg, this creates a logical impasse in Marx's model: "Where is this continually increasing demand to come from...?" [ 16 ] In her view, capitalists producing for other capitalists in an endless spiral represented "production for the sake of production," an "utter absurdity" from the standpoint of capital, which ultimately seeks to turn a profit in the form of money.

[ 17 ] Problem of realization and role of non-capitalist strata [ edit ] To solve this problem of realization, Luxemburg posits that capitalism must have access to an "outside" market composed of non-capitalist social strata and economies.

[ 13 ] These external buyers provide the effective monetary demand necessary to realize the surplus value that cannot be absorbed within the capitalist system itself. This "third market" includes peasants, artisans, and colonial societies still operating under modes of simple commodity production or natural economy .

[ 3 ] Luxemburg argues that the relationship between the capitalist core and the non-capitalist periphery is twofold: The non-capitalist world serves as a market for the surplus commodities of the capitalist core, allowing surplus value to be realized in money form.

[ 13 ] It simultaneously acts as a source of supply for essential inputs, such as raw materials and cheap labour power.

[ 13 ] This interaction is not a peaceful exchange between equals. Capitalism, in its drive to expand, actively and violently destroys these non-capitalist formations to subordinate them to its own needs.

[ 18 ] Imperialism as a necessity [ edit ] Luxemburg directly links the economic necessity for external markets to the historical phenomenon of imperialism. She defines imperialism as "the political expression of the accumulation of capital in its competitive struggle for what remains still open of the non-capitalist environment".

[ 3 ] The "stern laws of the economic process" are carried out through "force, fraud, oppression, [and] looting".

[ 19 ] This process takes several forms: International loans: Advanced capitalist countries provide loans to non-capitalist states, which are then used to purchase industrial goods (e.g., for railway construction) from the lending countries. This creates a market for surplus capital goods while simultaneously indebting the non-capitalist state, leading to its financial and political dependence.

[ 20 ] Colonial policy and militarism: Military conquest and the imposition of colonial rule are used to forcibly open markets, seize land, and extract resources. State power, through militarism and war, becomes a primary vehicle for the economic process of accumulation.

[ 19 ] Destruction of natural economy: Capitalism systematically undermines and destroys pre-capitalist modes of production, such as peasant agriculture and artisan crafts, to replace them with commodity production and create a market for its own goods.

[ 18 ] Luxemburg concludes that imperialism is not merely one policy among others but is the essential final stage of capitalism. However, this process is inherently contradictory. As capitalism expands to encompass the entire globe, it progressively eliminates the very non-capitalist formations it needs for its survival. Once the world is fully capitalized, there will be no "outside" left to absorb surplus value, and the system will face its final, terminal crisis.

[ 13 ] The Anti-Critique [ edit ] Title page of Luxemburg's Anti-Critique (1921, written 1915) In 1915, while in prison, Luxemburg wrote a response to her critics titled The Accumulation of Capital, or, What the Epigones Have Made of Marx's Theory — An Anti-Critique ( Die Akkumulation des Kapitals oder Was die Epigonen aus der Marxschen Theorie gemacht haben. Eine Antikritik ).

[ 21 ] In this work, published posthumously in 1921, she defended her thesis and sharpened her arguments, framing her analysis in what has been described as a "macro-monetary" perspective.

[ 22 ] She stressed that accumulation is not merely about producing more commodities but about converting them into "money capital". She posed the central question: "how can the total amount of money grow if its component parts are always circulating from one pocket to another?" [ 23 ] She argued that within a closed capitalist system, any money advanced by capitalists to purchase goods (whether constant capital, luxury goods, or labour power) ultimately returns to the capitalist class as a whole. This internal circulation cannot generate the new money capital needed to realize a growing mass of surplus value.

[ 24 ] This reinforced her original conclusion that a source of demand and money external to the capitalist circuit—namely, non-capitalist producers—is indispensable for accumulation.

[ 25 ] Reception and criticism [ edit ] The Accumulation of Capital was met with fierce and immediate criticism from nearly all factions of the Marxist movement.

[ 6 ] The book was denounced by theorists of the SPD, the Austro-Marxists , and the Bolsheviks , including Vladimir Lenin and Nikolai Bukharin .

[ 26 ] [ 11 ] Contemporary responses [ edit ] Critics from the orthodox wing of the SPD, such as Otto Bauer , rejected Luxemburg's breakdown theory, arguing that Marx's schemas demonstrated the theoretical possibility of balanced growth.

[ 4 ] Nikolai Bukharin , in his Imperialism and the Accumulation of Capital (1924), produced one of the most extensive early critiques. He defended an orthodox interpretation of Marx's schemas, arguing that Luxemburg had fundamentally misunderstood the nature of expanded reproduction.

[ 27 ] The Bolsheviks generally dismissed her work, with Lenin's rejection lending significant weight to the negative consensus.

[ 26 ] Her theory was often portrayed as a kind of Narodnik or Sismondian argument that capitalism was impossible without external markets, a view Marx himself had criticized.

[ 28 ] Major criticisms [ edit ] Methodological error and underconsumptionism [ edit ] A central criticism, articulated most forcefully by Henryk Grossman , is that Luxemburg made a fundamental methodological error. Grossman argued that she mistook Marx's abstract theoretical model in the reproduction schemas for a direct representation of empirical reality.

[ 29 ] For Grossman and other critics, the schemas were designed only to prove the possibility of reconciling value and material constraints under accumulation, not to depict the actual historical process. They were an abstraction from which the complexities of price, credit, and crisis were deliberately excluded.

[ 30 ] Luxemburg was also widely accused of advancing a crude theory of underconsumptionism .

[ 31 ] Critics argued she failed to see that investment demand from capitalists themselves could fill the realization gap. According to this view, production of means of production is not for the "absurd" sake of production itself, but because it is the necessary means for the valorization and accumulation of capital.

[ 32 ] Bukharin and the role of investment [ edit ] Bukharin argued that Luxemburg's entire problem was based on a misunderstanding of capitalist motivation. He contended that the consumption of workers is, for capital, nothing more than part of the production of labour-power, which is itself a precondition for accumulation.

[ 32 ] The demand for the expanded product comes from the investment process itself: additional constant capital is demand for the means of production, and additional variable capital (wages for newly employed workers) is demand for consumer goods.

[ 33 ] In her Anti-Critique , Luxemburg scornfully referred to this as "the roundabout that revolves around itself in empty space".

[ 17 ] Bukharin also famously attacked what he called her "atrocious conception" of accumulation as merely the amassing of money capital, rather than the expansion of productive capacity.

[ 17 ] Grossman's critique [ edit ] While sympathetic to Luxemburg's aim of proving the existence of objective limits to capitalism, Henryk Grossman rejected her explanation. He argued that the true barrier to accumulation was not a lack of effective demand (a realization problem) but the tendency of the rate of profit to fall (a production problem).

[ 29 ] Grossman praised Luxemburg for seeing that capitalism had absolute limits but maintained that she had located them in the sphere of circulation rather than production, where Marx had placed them.

[ 11 ] Later assessments [ edit ] Later scholars have offered more nuanced interpretations of Luxemburg's work. Riccardo Bellofiore argues that her critics failed to appreciate the "macro-monetary" nature of her analysis, particularly her focus on the necessity of realizing value as money and the role of finance in the accumulation process.

[ 33 ] Andrew Trigg suggests that, despite its flaws, her work performed a "great service to political economy by emphasizing the importance of demand" and by questioning the purpose of accumulation in Marx's abstract models.

[ 34 ] Jan Toporowski positions Luxemburg as a "pioneer of critical finance," arguing that her analysis of international loans anticipated later theories of financial instability and the exploitative relationship between financial centers and developing nations.

[ 35 ] Legacy and influence [ edit ] Despite its controversial reception, The Accumulation of Capital has had a significant and lasting influence on Marxist thought. Her insistence on the necessity of external markets was taken up by later dependency theorists and analysts of the relationship between the capitalist " core " and " periphery ".

The book was an important stimulus for Henryk Grossman's own work on capitalist breakdown theory.

[ 8 ] It also had a notable influence on the Polish economist Michał Kalecki .

[ 7 ] Kalecki adapted Luxemburg's concept of an "external market" to analyse the role of government deficit spending, particularly on armaments, in solving the problem of effective demand in advanced capitalist countries. He saw this as a modern, internal equivalent to the external, non-capitalist markets that Luxemburg had identified.

[ 7 ] Luxemburg's theory of imperialism, while distinct from Lenin's more influential Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism , continues to be a key reference point in debates on globalization, neocolonialism, and the dynamics of the world capitalist system.

[ 36 ] Joseph Halevi argues that while her specific model does not fit the trajectory of post-war US imperialism , her underlying framework for understanding the violent and expansionist nature of capital remains relevant.

[ 37 ] See also [ edit ] The Wealth of Nations Capital , Volume II Capital accumulation Commodity Imperialism International loan Protectionism References [ edit ] ^ Bellofiore 2009a , pp. 1–2.

^ Bellofiore 2009a , pp. 2, 18.

^ a b c Ping 2009 , p. 145.

^ a b Mattick 2009 , p. 94.

^ Mattick 2009 , pp. 92, 94.

^ a b Bellofiore 2009a , p. 4.

^ a b c Kowalik 2009 , p. 108.

^ a b Mattick 2009 , p. 19.

^ a b Krätke 2009 , p. 159.

^ a b c Kowalik 2009 , p. 103.

^ a b c d Mattick 2009 , p. 92.

^ Mattick 2009 , pp. 92–93.

^ a b c d e f g h Bellofiore 2009a , p. 2.

^ a b Bellofiore 2009a , p. 1.

^ Trigg 2009 , p. 37.

^ a b Trigg 2009 , p. 38.

^ a b c Zarembka 2009 , p. 72.

^ a b Ping 2009 , p. 146.

^ a b Kowalik 2009 , p. 107.

^ Toporowski 2009 , p. 81.

^ Bellofiore 2009b , pp. 59, 80.

^ Bellofiore 2009b , p. 53.

^ Bellofiore 2009b , p. 55.

^ Bellofiore 2009b , pp. 55–56.

^ Bellofiore 2009b , p. 59.

^ a b Zarembka 2009 , p. 70.

^ Mattick 2009 , pp. 94–95.

^ Mattick 2009 , p. 93.

^ a b Mattick 2009 , p. 98.

^ Mattick 2009 , p. 97.

^ Trigg 2009 , p. 34.

^ a b Zarembka 2009 , p. 71.

^ a b Bellofiore 2009a , p. 5.

^ Trigg 2009 , pp. 18, 35.

^ Toporowski 2009 , pp. 81, 90.

^ Halevi 2009 , p. 117.

^ Halevi 2009 , p. 119.

Works cited [ edit ] Bellofiore, Riccardo (2009a), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "General introduction: Rosa Luxemburg on capitalist dynamics, distribution and effective demand crises", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

1– 23, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Bellofiore, Riccardo (2009b), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "The monetary circuit of capital in the Anti-Critique", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

53– 63, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Halevi, Joseph (2009), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "Imperialism today", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

117– 129, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Kowalik, Tadeusz (2009), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "Luxemburg's and Kalecki's theories and visions of capitalist dynamics", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

102– 116, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Krätke, Michael R. (2009), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "A very political political economist: Rosa Luxemburg's theory of wages", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

159– 174, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Mattick, Paul (2009), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "Economics, politics and crisis theory: Luxemburg, Bukharin and Grossmann on the limits of capital", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

92– 101, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Ping, He (2009), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "Rosa Luxemburg's The Accumulation of Capital : East and West", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

144– 158, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Toporowski, Jan (2009), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "Rosa Luxemburg and finance", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

81– 91, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Trigg, Andrew B. (2009), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "Where does the money and demand come from? Rosa Luxemburg and the Marxian reproduction schema", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

34– 52, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 Zarembka, Paul (2009), Bellofiore, Riccardo (ed.), "Late Marx and Luxemburg: opening a development within political economy", Rosa Luxemburg and the Critique of Political Economy , London: Routledge, pp.

64– 80, ISBN 978-0-415-40570-6 External links [ edit ] The Accumulation of Capital at the Marxists Internet Archive v t e Rosa Luxemburg Works The Industrial Development of Poland (1898) In Defence of Nationality (1900) Social Reform or Revolution?

(1900) The Socialist Crisis in France (1901) Organizational Questions of the Russian Social Democracy (1904) The Mass Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions (1906) The National Question (1909) Theory and Practice (1910) The Accumulation of Capital (1913) An Anti-Critique (1915) The Junius Pamphlet (1915) The Russian Revolution (1918) Related Karl Liebknecht Spartacus League Spartacist uprising Rosa Luxemburg (film) Rosa-Luxemburg-Platz Rosa Luxemburg Foundation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Accumulation_of_Capital&oldid=1299704870 " Categories : 1913 non-fiction books Books about capitalism Marxist books Books about imperialism Works by Rosa Luxemburg Imperialism studies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 23:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Accumulation of Capital 7 languages Add topic

