Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Programmes and schools 2 The sociology of mathematical knowledge 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Sociology of scientific knowledge 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 עברית Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of science as a social activity A hands-on activity at the 2014 Cambridge Science Festival , Cambridge , United Kingdom . Use of balloons to explore fundamental mathematics .

Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Part of a series on Science General History Literature Method Philosophy Branches Formal Natural Physical Life Social Behavioural Cognitive Applied In society Communication Community Education Funding Policy Pseudoscience Scientist Science fiction Science portal Outline Category Article indexes Glossaries v t e The sociology of scientific knowledge ( SSK ) is the study of science as a social activity, especially dealing with "the social conditions and effects of science, and with the social structures and processes of scientific activity." [ 1 ] The sociology of scientific ignorance (SSI) is complementary to the sociology of scientific knowledge.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] For comparison, the sociology of knowledge studies the impact of human knowledge and the prevailing ideas on societies and relations between knowledge and the social context within which it arises.

Sociologists of scientific knowledge study the development of a scientific field and attempt to identify points of contingency or interpretative flexibility where ambiguities are present.

[ 4 ] Such variations may be linked to a variety of political , historical , cultural or economic factors. Crucially, the field does not set out to promote relativism or to attack the scientific project; the objective of the researcher is to explain why one interpretation rather than another succeeds due to external social and historical circumstances.

The field emerged in the late 1960s and early 1970s and at first was an almost exclusively British practice. Other early centers for the development of the field were in France, Germany, and the United States (notably at Cornell University ).

[ 5 ] Major theorists include Barry Barnes , David Bloor , Sal Restivo , Randall Collins , Gaston Bachelard , Harry Collins , Karin Knorr Cetina , Paul Feyerabend , Steve Fuller , Martin Kusch , Bruno Latour , Mike Mulkay , Derek J. de Solla Price , Lucy Suchman and Anselm Strauss .

Programmes and schools [ edit ] The sociology of scientific knowledge in its Anglophone versions emerged in the 1970s in self-conscious opposition to the sociology of science associated with the American Robert K. Merton , generally considered one of the seminal authors in the sociology of science.  Merton's was a kind of "sociology of scientists," which left the cognitive content of science out of sociological account; SSK by contrast aimed at providing sociological explanations of scientific ideas themselves, taking its lead from aspects of the work of Ludwik Fleck , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Thomas S. Kuhn , [ 8 ] but especially from established traditions in cultural anthropology (Durkheim, Mauss) as well as the late Wittgenstein .

David Bloor , one of SSK's early champions, has contrasted the so-called 'weak programme' (or 'program'—either spelling is used) which merely gives social explanations for erroneous beliefs, with what he called the ' strong programme ', which considers sociological factors as influencing all beliefs.

[ 9 ] The weak programme is more of a description of an approach than an organised movement. The term is applied to historians, sociologists and philosophers of science who merely cite sociological factors as being responsible for those beliefs that went wrong.

Imre Lakatos and (in some moods) Thomas S. Kuhn might be said to adhere to it.  The strong programme is particularly associated with the work of two groups: the ' Edinburgh School' ( David Bloor , Barry Barnes , and their colleagues at the Science Studies Unit at the University of Edinburgh ) in the 1970s and '80s, and the ' Bath School' ( Harry Collins and others at the University of Bath ) in the same period. "Edinburgh sociologists" and "Bath sociologists" promoted, respectively, the Strong Programme and Empirical Programme of Relativism (EPOR).

[ 10 ] Also associated with SSK in the 1980s was discourse analysis as applied to science (associated with Michael Mulkay at the University of York), as well as a concern with issues of reflexivity arising from paradoxes relating to SSK's relativist stance towards science and the status of its own knowledge-claims (Steve Woolgar, Malcolm Ashmore).

[ 11 ] The sociology of scientific knowledge has major international networks through its principal associations, 4S and EASST, with recently established groups in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and Latin America. It has made major contributions in recent years to a critical analysis of the biosciences and informatics.

The sociology of mathematical knowledge [ edit ] Studies of mathematical practice and quasi-empiricism in mathematics are also rightly part of the sociology of knowledge since they focus on the community of those who practice mathematics .  Since Eugene Wigner raised the issue in 1960 and Hilary Putnam made it more rigorous in 1975, the question of why fields such as physics and mathematics should agree so well has been debated. Proposed solutions point out that the fundamental constituents of mathematical thought, space, form-structure, and number-proportion are also the fundamental constituents of physics. It is also worthwhile to note that physics is more than merely modeling of reality and the objective basis is upon observational demonstration. Another approach is to suggest that there is no deep problem, that the division of human scientific thinking through using words such as 'mathematics' and 'physics' is only useful in their practical everyday function to categorize and distinguish.

Fundamental contributions to the sociology of mathematical knowledge have been made by Sal Restivo and David Bloor . Restivo draws upon the work of scholars such as Oswald Spengler ( The Decline of the West , 1918), Raymond Louis Wilder [ 12 ] and Leslie Alvin White , as well as contemporary sociologists of knowledge and science studies scholars. David Bloor draws upon Ludwig Wittgenstein and other contemporary thinkers. They both claim that mathematical knowledge is socially constructed and has irreducible contingent and historical factors woven into it. More recently Paul Ernest has proposed a social constructivist account of mathematical knowledge, drawing on the works of both of these sociologists.

Criticism [ edit ] SSK has received criticism from theorists of the actor-network theory (ANT) school of science and technology studies . These theorists criticise SSK for sociological reductionism and a human centered universe. SSK, they say, relies too heavily on human actors and social rules and conventions settling scientific controversies. The debate is discussed in an article titled Epistemological Chicken .

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Academic careerism – Tendency of academics to put career over truth Cliodynamics – Mathematical modeling of historical processes Economics of scientific knowledge Historiography of science – History of the history of science Paradigm shift – Fundamental change in ideas and practices within a scientific discipline Philosophy of social science – Study of the logic, methods, and foundations of social sciences Public awareness of science – Aspect of education and communication Science studies – Research area analyzing scientific expertise Science and technology studies – Academic field Scientific community metaphor Social constructionism – Sociological theory regarding shared understandings Social construction of technology – Theory in science and technology studies Sociology of knowledge – Field of study Sociology of quantification Sociology of scientific ignorance – Study of ignorance in science Sociology of the history of science Technology and society Disputes: Bogdanov affair – 2002 French academic dispute Sokal affair – 1996 scholarly publishing sting accepted by an academic journal Notes [ edit ] ^ Ben-David, Joseph; Teresa A. Sullivan (1975).

"Sociology of Science" .

Annual Review of Sociology .

1 (1): 203– 222.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.so.01.080175.001223 . Retrieved 2006-11-29 .

^ Stocking, Holly (1998). "On Drawing Attention to Ignorance".

Science Communication .

20 (1): 165– 178.

doi : 10.1177/1075547098020001019 .

S2CID 145791904 .

^ Wehling, Peter (2001).

"Beyond knowledge? Scientific ignorance from a sociological point of view" .

Zeitschrift für Soziologie [ de ] .

30 (6): 465– 484 . Retrieved 2013-01-19 .

^ Baber, Zaheer (1992). Ashmore, Malcolm; Bhaskar, Roy; Mukerji, Chandra; Woolgar, Steve; Yearley, Steven (eds.).

"Sociology of Scientific Knowledge: Lost in the Reflexive Funhouse?" .

Theory and Society .

21 (1): 105– 119.

doi : 10.1007/BF00993464 .

ISSN 0304-2421 .

JSTOR 657625 .

S2CID 145211615 .

^ "Department of Sociology | Department of Sociology Cornell Arts & Sciences" .

sociology.cornell.edu . Retrieved 2021-09-05 .

^ Fleck 1935 .

^ Fleck 1979 .

^ KUHN, THOMAS (2021-06-08), "The Structure of Scientific Revolutions" , Philosophy after Darwin , Princeton University Press, pp.

176– 177, doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1jk0jrs.26 , S2CID 236228428 , retrieved 2021-09-05 ^ Eriksson, Lena (2007). "Scientific Knowledge, Sociology of".

The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology .

doi : 10.1002/9781405165518.wbeoss048 .

ISBN 9781405165518 .

^ Collins, H. M. (1981). "Introduction: Stages in the Empirical Programme of Relativism".

Social Studies of Science .

11 (1). Sage Publications, Ltd.: 3– 10.

ISSN 0306-3127 .

^ Mulkay, Michael; Gilbert, G. Nigel (1982).

"What is the Ultimate Question? Some Remarks in Defence of the Analysis of Scientific Discourse" .

Social Studies of Science .

12 (2): 309– 319.

doi : 10.1177/030631282012002006 .

ISSN 0306-3127 .

S2CID 144024114 .

^ Raymond Wilder (1981) Mathematics as a Cultural System .

ISBN 0-08-025796-8 ^ Collins, H. M. and S. Yearley (1992). "Epistemological Chicken". In A. Pickering (Ed.) Science as Practice and Culture . Chicago, Chicago University Press: 301-326. Referenced at ANT resource list University of Lancaster, with the summary "Argues against the generalised symmetry of actor-network, preferring in the interpretive sociology tradition to treat humans as ontologically distinct language carriers". Website accessed 8 February 2011.

References [ edit ] Kusch, Martin (1998).

"Sociology of scientific knowledge – research guide" . Retrieved February 23, 2012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Baez, John (2010).

"The Bogdanoff Affair" .

Bloor, David (1976) Knowledge and social imagery . London: Routledge.

Bloor, David (1999) "Anti-Latour" .

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A Volume 30, Issue 1, March 1999, Pages 81–112.

Chu, Dominique (2013), The Science Myth---God, society, the self and what we will never know , ISBN 1782790470 Collins, H.M. (1975) The seven sexes: A study in the sociology of a phenomenon, or the replication of experiments in physics, Sociology , 9, 205-24.

Collins, H.M. (1985).

Changing order: Replication and induction in scientific practice . London: Sage.

Collins, Harry and Steven Yearley . (1992). "Epistemological Chicken" in Science as Practice and Culture ,  A. Pickering (ed.). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 301-326.

Edwards, D., Ashmore, M. & Potter, J. (1995).

Death and furniture: The rhetoric, politics, and theology of bottom line arguments against relativism .

History of the Human Sciences , 8, 25-49.

Fleck, Ludwik (1935).

Entstehung und Entwicklung einer wissenschaftlichen Tatsache. Einführung in die Lehre vom Denkstil und Denkkollektiv [ Emergence and development of a scientific fact: Introduction to the study of thinking style and thinking collectives ] (in German). Verlagsbuchhandlung, Basel: Schwabe.

Fleck, Ludwik (1979).

Genesis and development of a scientific fact . Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

Gilbert, G. N. & Mulkay, M. (1984).

Opening Pandora's box: A sociological analysis of scientists' discourse .  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Latour, B. & Woolgar, S. (1986).

Laboratory life: The construction of scientific facts .  2nd Edition.  Princeton:  Princeton University Press. (not an SSK-book, but has a similar approach to science studies) Latour, B. (1987).

Science in action : how to follow scientists and engineers through society .  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (not an SSK-book, but has a similar approach to science studies) Pickering, A. (1984).

Constructing Quarks: A sociological history of particle physics .  Chicago; University of Chicago Press.

Schantz, Richard and Markus Seidel (2011).

The Problem of Relativism in the Sociology of (Scientific) Knowledge . Frankfurt: ontos.

Shapin, S. & Schaffer, S. (1985).

Leviathan and the Air-Pump .  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Williams, R. & Edge, D. (1996).

The Social Shaping of Technology . Research Policy, vol. 25, pp. 856–899 [1] Willard, Charles Arthur. (1996).

Liberalism and the Problem of Knowledge: A New Rhetoric for Modern Democracy , University of Chicago Press.

Zuckerman, Harriet. (1988). "The sociology of science." In NJ Smelser (Ed.), Handbook of sociology (p. 511–574). London: Sage.

Jasanoff , S. Markle, G. Pinch T. & Petersen, J. (Eds)(2002), Handbook of science, technology and society , Rev Ed.. London: Sage.

Other relevant materials Becker, Ernest (1968).

The structure of evil; an essay on the unification of the science of man . New York: G. Braziller.

Shapin, Steven (1995).

"Here and Everywhere: Sociology of Scientific Knowledge" (PDF) .

Annual Review of Sociology .

21 . Annual Reviews: 289– 321.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.so.21.080195.001445 .

S2CID 3395517 .

Historical sociologist Simon Schaffer and Steven Shapin are interviewed on SSK The Sociology of Ignorance website featuring the sociology of scientific ignorance Strong Programme in Sociology of Knowledge and Actor-Network Theory: The Debate within Science Studies (includes questions posed to David Bloor and Bruno Latour related to their dispute, in Appendix) External links [ edit ] Sociology of Science at PhilPapers v t e Sociology Outline History Timeline Index General aspects Public sociology Social research Social theory Sociological theory Sociological practice Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Related fields and subfields Anthropology Comparative sociology Criminology Cultural anthropology Demography Historical sociology Industrial society Marxist sociology Political sociology Rural sociology Social anthropology Social movements Social psychology Sociolinguistics Urban sociology Sociology of art body consciousness culture death deviance disaster economics education emotions environment family food gender health immigration Internet knowledge language law leisure literature medicine military music peace, war, and social conflict philosophy punishment race and ethnicity religion sociology space sport science small groups space stratification technology terrorism visual work Major theorists Sieyès Comte Martineau Tocqueville Marx Spencer Le Bon Ward Pareto Tönnies Veblen Simmel Durkheim Addams Mead Weber Du Bois Mannheim Elias Fromm Adorno Gehlen Aron Merton Nisbet Mills Bell Schoeck Goffman Bauman Foucault Luhmann Habermas Baudrillard Bourdieu Giddens Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Categories lists Journals Commons WikiProject Society portal v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sociology_of_scientific_knowledge&oldid=1292112131 " Categories : Sociology of scientific knowledge Social constructionism Sociology of science Hidden categories: CS1:Vancouver names with accept markup Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 07:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sociology of scientific knowledge 15 languages Add topic

