Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Soviet legal theory 2 Characteristic traits 3 Socialist rule of law 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 General 4.2 China 4.3 Cuba 4.4 Soviet Union 5 Notes 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Socialist law 16 languages العربية Български Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Lietuvių 日本語 Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of legal system This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Socialist law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In this courtroom in Havana , Cuba , the professional judge sits in the chair at the center of the bench with the two lay judges at either side. Cuba is one of several states with a socialist law system.

Socialist law or Soviet law are terms used in comparative legal studies for the general type of legal system which has been (and continues to be) used in socialist and formerly socialist states . It is based on the civil law system, with major modifications and additions from Marxist–Leninist ideology. There is controversy as to whether socialist law ever constituted a separate legal system or not.

[ 1 ] If so, prior to the end of the Cold War , socialist law would be ranked among the major legal systems of the world.

While civil law systems have traditionally put great pains in defining the notion of private property , how it may be acquired, transferred, or lost, socialist law systems provide for most property to be owned by the state or by agricultural co-operatives , and having special courts and laws for state enterprises.

[ 2 ] Many scholars argue that socialist law was not a separate legal classification.

[ 3 ] Although the command economy approach of the communist states meant that most types of property could not be owned, the Soviet Union always had a civil code, courts that interpreted this civil code, and a civil law approach to legal reasoning (thus, both legal process and legal reasoning were largely analogous to the French or German civil code system). Legal systems in all socialist states preserved the formal criteria of the Romano-Germanic civil law; for this reason, law theorists in post-socialist states usually consider the socialist law as a particular case of the Romano-Germanic civil law. Cases of development of common law into socialist law are unknown because of incompatibility of basic principles of these two systems (common law presumes the influential rule-making role of courts while courts in socialist states play a dependent role).

[ 4 ] An article published in 2016 suggests that socialist law, at least from the perspective of public law and constitutional design, is a useful category. In the NYU Journal of International Law and Policy , William Partlett and Eric Ip argue that socialist law helps to understand the "Russo-Leninist transplants" that currently operate in China's socialist law system. This helps to understand the "distinctive public law institutions and approaches in China that have been ignored by many scholars".

[ 5 ] Soviet legal theory [ edit ] Soviet law displayed many special characteristics that derived from the socialist nature of the Soviet state and reflected Marxist–Leninist ideology.

Vladimir Lenin accepted the Marxist conception of the law and the state as instruments of coercion in the hands of the bourgeoisie and postulated the creation of popular, informal tribunals to administer revolutionary justice. One of the main theoreticians of Soviet socialist legality and proletarian law in this early phase was Pēteris Stučka . Other proponents of proletarian law included Dmitry Kursky and Nikolai Krylenko .

[ 6 ] Alongside this trend was one more critical of the concept of "proletarian justice", represented by Evgeny Pashukanis . A dictatorial trend developed that advocated the use of law and legal institutions to suppress all opposition to the regime. This trend reached its zenith under Joseph Stalin with the ascendancy of Andrey Vyshinsky , when the administration of justice was carried out mainly by the security police in special tribunals .

[ citation needed ] During the de-Stalinization of the Nikita Khrushchev era, a new trend developed, based on socialist legality, that stressed the need to protect the procedural and statutory rights of citizens, while still calling for obedience to the state. New legal codes, introduced in 1960, were part of the effort to establish legal norms in administering laws. Although socialist legality remained in force after 1960, the dictatorial and utopian trends continued to influence the legal process. Persecution of political and religious dissenters continued, but at the same time there was a tendency to decriminalize lesser offenses by handing them over to people's courts and administrative agencies and dealing with them by education rather than by incarceration.

[ 7 ] By late 1986, the Mikhail Gorbachev era was stressing anew the importance of individual rights in relation to the state and criticizing those who violated procedural law in implementing Soviet justice. This signaled a resurgence of socialist legality as the dominant trend. Socialist legality itself still lacked features associated with Western jurisprudence.

[ clarification needed ] Characteristic traits [ edit ] Socialist law is similar to the civil law but with a greatly increased public law sector and decreased private law sector.

[ 8 ] extensive social warrants of the state (the rights to a job, free education, free healthcare, retirement at 60 for men and 55 for women, maternity leave, free disability benefits and sick leave compensation, subsidies to multichildren families, ...) in return for a high degree of social mobilization.

the judicial process lacks an adversarial character; public prosecution is considered as "provider of justice." partial or total expulsion of the former ruling classes from the public life at early stages of existence of each socialist state; however, in all socialist states this policy gradually changed into the policy of "one socialist nation without classes" diversity of political views directly discouraged.

the ruling Communist party was eventually subject to prosecution through party committees in first place.

abolition of private property , thus near total collectivization and nationalization of the means of production; subordination of the judiciary to the Communist Party low respect for intellectual property as knowledge and culture was considered a right for human kind, and not a privilege as in the free market economies.

A specific institution characteristic to Socialist law was the so-called burlaw court (or, verbally, "court of comrades", Russian товарищеский суд) which decided on minor offences.

[ 9 ] Socialist rule of law [ edit ] After China's Reform and Opening Up , the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) emphasized the rule of law as a basic strategy and method for state management of society.

[ 10 ] : 110 Jiang Zemin first called for establishing a socialist rule of law at the Fifteenth Party Congress in 1997.

[ 10 ] : 110 In 2014, the CCP formally adopted a policy of constructing a "socialist rule of law with Chinese characteristics." [ 11 ] In his writings on socialist rule of law, Xi Jinping has emphasized traditional Chinese concepts including people as the root of the state ( mingben ), "the ideal of no lawsuit" ( tianxia wusong ), "respecting rite and stressing law" ( longli zhongfa ), "virtue first, penalty second" ( dezhu xingfu ), and "promoting virtue and being prudent in punishment" ( mingde shenfa ).

[ 12 ] : 110–111 Xi states that the two fundamental aspects of the socialist rule of law are: (1) that the political and legal organs (including courts, the police, and the procuratorate) must believe in the law and uphold the law, and (2) all political and legal officials must follow the CCP.

[ 12 ] : 115 See also [ edit ] General [ edit ] Legal systems of the world China [ edit ] Law of the People's Republic of China Legal history of China Chinese law Cuba [ edit ] Cuban legal system Cuban law Soviet Union [ edit ] Law of the Soviet Union Ministry of Justice of the USSR Procurator General of the USSR Review of Central and East European Law , formerly known as the Review of Socialist Law Notes [ edit ] ^ Quigley, J. (1989). "Socialist Law and the Civil Law Tradition".

The American Journal of Comparative Law .

37 (4): 781– 808.

doi : 10.2307/840224 .

JSTOR 840224 .

^ "Soviet law" . Retrieved September 10, 2016 .

^ Markovits, I. (December 2007). "The Death of Socialist Law?".

Annual Review of Law and Social Science .

3 : 233– 253.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.lawsocsci.3.081806.112849 .

^ "Soviet law" . Retrieved September 10, 2016 .

^ Partlett, William; Ip, Eric C. (September 14, 2015), Is Socialist Law Really Dead?

, SSRN 2660098 ^ Дмитриевна, Максимова Ольга (2014).

"Роль Д. И. Курского в формировании идей советского права и в законотворчестве" .

Правоведение .

4 (315): 225– 236.

ISSN 2658-6037 .

^ Elie, Marc (2013).

"Khrushchev's Gulag: the Soviet Penitentiary System after Stalin's death, 1953-1964" . In Kozlov, Denis; Gilburd, Eleonory (eds.).

The Thaw: Soviet Society and Culture during the 1950s and 1960s . Toronto University Press. pp.

109– 142.

ISBN 978-1442644601 . HAL 00859338 . Retrieved October 30, 2017 .

^ Glenn, H. Patrick (2010).

Legal Traditions of the World: Sustainable Diversity in Law (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-958080-4 .

OCLC 650838256 .

^ Berman, Harold J.; Spindler, James W. (1973).

"Soviet Criminal Law and Procedure: The RFSR Codes" .

Stanford Law Review .

25 (2): 842.

doi : 10.2307/1227986 .

ISSN 0038-9765 .

JSTOR 1227986 .

^ a b Fang, Qiang (2024). "Understanding the Rule of Law in Xi's China". In Fang, Qiang; Li, Xiaobing (eds.).

China under Xi Jinping: A New Assessment .

Leiden University Press .

ISBN 9789087284411 .

^ Tiffert, Glenn (July 5, 2018), Fu, Hualing; Gillespie, John; Nicholson, Pip; Partlett, William Edmund (eds.), "Socialist Rule of Law with Chinese Characteristics: A New Genealogy", Socialist Law in Socialist East Asia (1 ed.), Cambridge University Press , pp.

72– 96, doi : 10.1017/9781108347822.004 , ISBN 978-1-108-34782-2 ^ a b Fang, Qiang (2024). "Understanding the Rule of Law in Xi's China". In Fang, Qiang; Li, Xiaobing (eds.).

China under Xi Jinping: A New Assessment .

Leiden University Press .

ISBN 9789087284411 .

Further reading [ edit ] Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr (1973).

The Gulag Archipelago . Available at: https://archive.org/details/TheGulagArchipelago-Threevolumes/The-Gulag-Archipelago__vol1__I-II__Solzhenitsyn/ Stuchka, P.I.

(1988).

Selected Writings on Soviet Law and Marxism . Robert Sharlet, Peter B. Maggs, and Piers Beirne (eds.). Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0-87332-473-1 .

OCLC 17353762 .

Evenson, Debra (2003).

Law and Society in Contemporary Cuba (2nd ed.). The Hague: Kluwer Law International.

ISBN 978-90-411-2165-3 .

OCLC 52976800 .

Partlett, W & E. Ip, Is Socialist Law Really Dead? 48 NYU Journal of International Law and Politics 463 (2016).  Available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2660098 .

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Socialist_law&oldid=1292200604 " Categories : Socialist law Legal codes Legal systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from January 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2019 Articles needing additional references from June 2007 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2019 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 18:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Socialist law 16 languages Add topic

