Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characters 2 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 2.1 Education and the value of military training 2.1.1 Has military education a place in higher education? [178a–180a] 2.1.2 Laches introduces Socrates to the discussion [180a–181d] 2.1.3 Nicias on the advantages of fighting in armour [181e–182d] 2.1.4 Laches on the futility of fighting in armour [182e–184c] 2.1.5 The need for expert advice: are the generals qualified to speak about education? [184d–187d] 2.1.6 The generals agree to cooperate with Socrates and put their expertise to the test [187e–189d] 2.2 An inquiry into the nature of bravery 2.2.1 The need to define bravery [189d–190d] 2.2.2 Laches' first definition: to be brave is to stand and fight [190e–192b] 2.2.3 Laches' second definition: bravery is endurance [192b–193d] 2.2.4 Impasse: Nicias is asked to help [193e–194c] 2.2.5 Nicias' definition: bravery is a special kind of knowledge [194d–196c] 2.2.6 Implications of Nicias' definition: can animals and children be brave? [196d–197e] 2.2.7 Nicias has defined goodness, not bravery [198a–199e] 2.2.8 The discussion breaks up: Socrates suggests they all have much to learn [200a–201a] 3 Critical commentary 4 Texts and translations 5 See also 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Laches (dialogue) 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socratic dialogue written by Plato Part of a series on Platonism Life Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e The Laches ( / ˈ l æ k iː z / ; Greek : Λάχης) is a Socratic dialogue written by Plato .  Participants in the discourse present competing definitions of the concept of courage or "manliness", ἀνδρεία in Greek.

Laches Characters [ edit ] Socrates Lysimachus – Son of the Athenian general and statesman, Aristides .

Melesias – A friend of Lysimachus.

Nicias – Athenian general and statesman, son of Niceratus.

Laches - Athenian general and statesman, son of Melanopus.

Aristides – Son of Lysimachus and grandson of the eponymous general and statesman.

Summary [ edit ] Education and the value of military training [ edit ] Has military education a place in higher education? [178a–180a] [ edit ] Lysimachus, son of Aristides , and Melesias, son of Thucydides (not the historian Thucydides ), request advice from Laches and Nicias on whether or not they should have their sons (who are named after their famous grandfathers) trained to fight in armour.  After each gives their opinion, Nicias for and Laches against, they seek Socrates for counsel.

Laches introduces Socrates to the discussion [180a–181d] [ edit ] Socrates questions what the initial purpose of the training is meant to instill in the children. Once they determine that the purpose is to instill virtue , and more specifically courage , Socrates discusses with Laches and Nicias what exactly courage is. The bulk of the dialogue is then the three men (Laches, Nicias and Socrates) debating various definitions of courage.

Nicias on the advantages of fighting in armour [181e–182d] [ edit ] Nicias argues in favor of an education in fighting in armour for young men. He mentions that it promotes physical fitness, prepares a man for military duties, gives an advantage over untrained opponents, helps one understand military strategy, makes one braver, and gives one a martial appearance.

Laches on the futility of fighting in armour [182e–184c] [ edit ] Laches argues against the need for fighting in armour by claiming that the Spartans do not practice it; the instructors that Laches has seen are not brave soldiers and so have not benefitted from this knowledge; and it causes cowards to take foolish and damaging military risks.

The need for expert advice: are the generals qualified to speak about education? [184d–187d] [ edit ] Melesias and Lysimachus ask Socrates to decide which side is correct. Socrates begins by trying to clarify what the actual topic is. He determines that the issue is the care of young men's character and asks if there are qualified teachers for this. Socrates confesses not to be skilled in this and assumes that Laches and Nicias are either versed in character building or else know of experts in that field. Socrates proposes to question them about this to see if they have qualified expertise.

The generals agree to cooperate with Socrates and put their expertise to the test [187e–189d] [ edit ] Nicias warns about Socrates' philosophical methods of getting the interlocutor to examine their own conscience. Laches states that he likes to hear discussions that are "musical", when a person's discourse is in tune with their actions. Paraphrasing Solon , Laches agrees to participate in Socrates' inquiry because he likes to learn from good men.

An inquiry into the nature of bravery [ edit ] The need to define bravery [189d–190d] [ edit ] Socrates uses a medical analogy to help define goodness: If eyes can be improved by adding sight to them, then a boy's character can be improved by adding goodness to it. As one must know what sight is before one can consider it an improvement, so too it is necessary to have knowledge of what good is before it is used to improve a character.  Rather than try to define what the whole of goodness is, Socrates thinks it would be easier to define an aspect of goodness that is relevant to the question: bravery.

Laches' first definition: to be brave is to stand and fight [190e–192b] [ edit ] Laches advances that to be brave is to be a soldier who can hold his position in combat without running away. Socrates explains that his definition is very specific to military infantry and what he was really looking for is a notion of bravery that pertains to all military situations and extends to all situations in life.

Laches' second definition: bravery is endurance [192b–193d] [ edit ] Laches offers an opinion that courage is "a certain perseverance of the soul". However, Socrates challenges this idea by arguing that there are many instances in battle when the prudent thing to do is to withdraw or flee. Since courage is a virtue, Socrates argues, it cannot contradict prudence, and therefore the idea that courage always demands perseverance must be false. Laches is forced to admit this contradiction.

Impasse: Nicias is asked to help [193e–194c] [ edit ] Socrates expresses his perplexity in trying to account for bravery. Laches wishes to pursue the conversation, saying that he has a sense of what bravery is, but is not able to express it properly.  Socrates states that like a good huntsman pursuing a trail, they must persevere in the search for their quarry. They invite Nicias to give his definition of bravery.

Nicias' definition: bravery is a special kind of knowledge [194d–196c] [ edit ] Nicias then offers another definition. He suggests that courage is "knowledge of what is to be feared and hoped for both in war and in all other matters".

Implications of Nicias' definition: can animals and children be brave? [196d–197e] [ edit ] Since bravery is the knowledge of what is fearful and encouraging, Socrates asks if a pig could be brave. Nicias denies that animals can be brave as he believes that a certain amount of wisdom is necessary for bravery and that very few people can be considered brave. Socrates playfully suggests that Nicias is being influenced by a sophist named Damon and offers to respond to Nicias' assertion.

Nicias has defined goodness, not bravery [198a–199e] [ edit ] Nicias agrees that something 'fearful' is the expectation of a future evil and something 'hopeful' is the expectation of a future good.  Socrates then argues that full knowledge of any subject involves an understanding not only of future matters, but also of past and present. Thus if courage is the knowledge of future evils and goods, it must also necessarily be the knowledge of those of the present and past too.  He then asserts that Nicias' definition actually amounts to a definition of all virtue (since it implies knowledge of all good and evil) and therefore, since courage is in fact only a part of virtue, a contradiction arises and the definition must be false.

The discussion breaks up: Socrates suggests they all have much to learn [200a–201a] [ edit ] And so, in the end, Socrates finds both his companions' theories to be unsatisfactory, and the dialogue ends in aporia , an English term derived from the ancient Greek ἀπορία meaning "philosophical confusion".

Critical commentary [ edit ] There are many different interpretations as to why the dialogue ends in aporia . Certain commentators, such as Iain Lane, view the Socratic method of elenchus as an end in itself; that debate is the central premise and function of the dialogue [ citation needed ] . Others, such as Gregory Vlastos , see the dialogue ending because of the specific deficiencies of the characters' definitions.

Some of the characters in this dialogue were famous military statesman who died in battle. Nicias was a prominent Athenian politician and general who died during the Sicilian expedition . Laches was also a general and died at the Battle of Mantinea in the Peloponnesian war . It is not surprising that Socrates would question them on the importance of military training and the definition of courage. This gives the dialogue's place in ancient Greek history a clearer importance.

Texts and translations [ edit ] Plato: Laches, Protagoras, Meno, Euthydemus.

Greek with translation by W. R. M. Lamb. Loeb Classical Library 165. Harvard Univ. Press (originally published 1924).

ISBN 978-0674991835 HUP listing Lamb translation at Perseus Benjamin Jowett 's 1892 translation Plato.

Opera , volume III. Oxford Classical Texts.

ISBN 978-0198145424 Plato.

Complete Works.

Ed. J. M. Cooper and D. S. Hutchinson. Hackett, 1997.

ISBN 978-0872203495 See also [ edit ] Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 228 Further reading [ edit ] Walter T. Schmid, On Manly Courage: A Study of Plato's Laches , SIU Press, 1992.

Linda R. Rabieh, Plato and the Virtue of Courage , JHU Press, 2006.

J.P. Mahaffy, An Ancient Papyrus Fragment of the Laches of Plato Hermathena vol. VIII, 1893, p. 310-321.

Curtolo Maria Vittoria, La tradizione testuale del Lachete di Platone. Rapporti stemmatici fra i manoscritti della terza famiglia , Graeco-Latina Brunensia 26/2 (2021), publisher: Masarykova univerzita, Filozofická fakulta, Brno, pp. 41-53.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Laches Laches , in a collection of Plato's Dialogues at Standard Ebooks Greek text at Perseus Approaching Plato: A Guide to the Early and Middle Dialogues Laches public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Laches_(dialogue)&oldid=1290610914 " Categories : Dialogues of Plato Courage Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 21:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Laches (dialogue) 23 languages Add topic

