Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political parties 2 History 3 See also 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Honduras Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism in Honduras" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Liberalism in Honduras is a form of Latin American liberalism. It was influenced by French revolutionaries from 1789 to 1799, when the door was open for ideas of positivism . During this time the populace were exposed to liberal ideas such as: liberty, equality, and popular sovereignty, causing enthusiasm for them to be increased.

Political parties [ edit ] The Liberal Party of Honduras (Partido Liberal de Honduras, or PLH) was founded in 1890 and has both conservative and progressive wings. It is a member of Liberal International and is seen as a traditional center-liberal party. The diversity of the party is reflected in the existence of factions within it.

In contrast to most others in Latin America, the Honduran liberals remained united in one party for much of the movement's history; however, after the 2009 Honduran coup d'état former president Manuel Zelaya , who had been a member of the Liberal Party, and his supporters, many of them former Liberal Party members, split away and formed a new party, Liberty and Refoundation , also known as Libre.

History [ edit ] In the early years after the region achieved independence from Spain, Honduras was a constituent of the United Provinces of Central America , but its cohesion was undermined by friction between liberals and conservatives. The liberal position was in favor of republicanism , free trade, less centralized government, and above all: the removal of the political and economic powers of the Catholic Church .

The Honduran liberal, Francisco Morazán , became president of the United Provinces in 1830. Morazán enacted many reforms, including freedom of speech, the press, and religion; trial by jury; and others intended to improve equality of socioeconomic status. The reforms were objected to by conservative elements of society, while the separation of Church and State, which allowed for secular marriage, divorce, and an end to government-enforced tithing, made many of the clergy enemies of Morazán and the liberals. This caused the breakup of the Provinces.

Independent Honduras was initially under the control of conservative leaders, this dominance lasting until the liberal Marco Aurelio Soto assumed the presidency on 27 August 1876. He and his Secretary General Ramón Rosa were the principal proponents of liberal reformism in Honduras. In the following period, liberals dominated the country and encouraged foreign investment and economic growth. Soto and his successors were responsible for the reform of the powers of judiciary and church, Professionalization of the armed forces, as well as modernization of communications and education. In this way, they paved the way for Honduras to become a state capable of taking a place on the global stage.

Various liberals held the presidency through to 1903, namely Luis Bográn (1883-1891), Ponciano Leiva (1891-1893), José Policarpo Bonilla Vásquez (1895-1899) and Terencio Esteban Sierra Romero (1899-1903). After this period, liberals ruled the country from 1907-1911 ( Miguel Rafael Dávila Cuéllar ), 1920-1924 ( Rafael López Gutiérrez ), and 1929 to 1933 ( Vicente Mejía ).

After 1933, a period of conservative dictatorial rule started. It was not until 1957 that the liberals would regain power with the democratic election of Ramón Villeda to the presidency. He was deposed by a bloody military coup in 1963 , which led to another long period of military rule. This ended with the creation of a constituent assembly and the writing of a new constitution in 1982, elections held in 1981, and the approval of the constitution and democratic election of the liberal Roberto Suazo as president in 1982, all of which restored Honduras as a presidential democracy. Liberals were also elected president in 1985 ( José Azcona ), 1993 ( Carlos Roberto Reina ) and 1998 ( Carlos Roberto Flores ).

See also [ edit ] History of Honduras Politics of Honduras Further reading [ edit ] Zaldivar Guzman, Raúl: Liberalismo en Honduras (Tegucigalpa, 1964) v t e Liberalism in Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda Aruba Bahamas Barbados Cuba Curaçao Dominica Dominican Republic Grenada Haiti Jamaica Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Maarten Trinidad and Tobago Central America Belize Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama North America Mexico South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies not included.

Semi-autonomous territories are in italics.

v t e Liberalism in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Honduras&oldid=1235655592 " Categories : Liberalism by country Political movements in Honduras Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from May 2021 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 20 July 2024, at 13:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Honduras Add languages Add topic

