Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Habermas and Derrida (2005) 3 McCormick (2010) 4 European Union 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents European values 16 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Ελληνικά Hrvatski Italiano Magyar Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Norms and values that Europeans have in common European values are the norms and values that Europeans are said to have in common, and which transcend national or state identities.

[ 1 ] In addition to helping promote European integration , this doctrine also provides the basis for analyses that characterise European politics, economics, and society as reflecting a shared identity; it is often associated with human rights , electoral democracy , and rule of law .

Overview [ edit ] Especially in France, "the European idea" ( l'idée d'Europe ) is associated with political values derived from the Age of Enlightenment and the republicanism growing out of the French Revolution and the Revolutions of 1848 rather than with personal or individual identity formed by culture or ethnicity (let alone a "pan-European" construct including those areas of the continent never affected by 18th-century rationalism or Republicanism).

[ 2 ] The phrase "European values" arises as a political neologism in the 1980s in the context of the project of European integration and the future formation of the European Union . The phrase was popularised by the European Values Study , a long-term research program started in 1981, aiming to document the outlook on "basic human values"  in European populations. The project had grown out of a study group on "values and social change in Europe" initiated by Jan Kerkhofs , and Ruud de Moor ( Catholic University in Tilburg ).

[ 3 ] The claim that the people of Europe have a distinctive set of political, economic and social norms and values that are gradually replacing national values has also been named "Europeanism" by McCormick (2010).

[ 4 ] "European values" were contrasted to non-European values in international relations, especially in the East–West dichotomy , "European values" encompassing individualism and the idea of human rights in contrast to Eastern tendencies of collectivism. However, "European values" were also viewed critically, their "darker" side not necessarily leading to more peaceful outcomes in international relations.

[ 5 ] The association of "European values" with European integration as pursued by the European Union came to the fore with the eastern enlargement of the EU in the aftermath of the Cold War .

[ 6 ] The Treaty of Lisbon (2007) in article 1A lists a number of "values of the Union", 
including "respect for human dignity , freedom , democracy , equality , the rule of law and respect for human rights including the rights of persons belonging to minorities ", invoking "a society in which pluralism , non-discrimination , tolerance , justice , solidarity and equality between women and men prevail".

[ 7 ] The 2012 Eurobarometer survey reported that 49% of those surveyed described the EU member states as "close" in terms of "shared values" (down from 54% in 2008), 42% described them as "different" (up from 34% in 2008).

[ 8 ] Habermas and Derrida (2005) [ edit ] The philosophers Jürgen Habermas and Jacques Derrida wrote an article for the newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in which they claimed the birth of a 'European public sphere'. 
They argued that new values and habits had given contemporary Europe 'its own face', and saw an opportunity for the construction of a 'core Europe' (excluding Britain and Eastern Europe) that might be a counterweight to the United States.

Attempting to explain what Europe represented, the two philosophers listed six facets of what they described as a common European 'political mentality': Secularisation .

Trust in the state and scepticism about the achievements of markets.

Realistic expectations about technological progress.

Welfarism .

A low threshold of tolerance for the use of force.

Multilateralism within the framework of a reformed United Nations .

[ 9 ] McCormick (2010) [ edit ] Political scientist John McCormick [ 10 ] expands on these ideas, and identifies the following as core attributes of Europeanism: Secularism is probably the one quality most clearly associated with Europe: while religion continues to grow in most of the rest of the world, in virtually every European country, its role is declining, and it plays an increasingly marginal role in politics and public life, while heavily influencing Europeanist attitudes towards science and towards public policies in which religious belief plays a role.

A rethinking of the meaning of citizenship and patriotism . In regard to the latter, pride in country is being replaced with pride in ideas, otherwise known as constitutional patriotism . Identification with nations or states is being increasingly joined with identification with Europe.

Cosmopolitanism , or an association with universal ideas, and a belief that all Europeans, and possibly even all humans, belong to a single moral community that transcends state boundaries or national identities. The local and the global cannot be separated or divorced.

Communitarianism , which - in contrast to the liberal emphasis on individual rights - supports a balance between individual and community interests, emphasizing the responsibilities of government to all those who live under its jurisdiction. Europeanism argues that society may sometimes be a better judge of what is good for individuals rather than vice versa.

The collective society . Europeanism emphasizes the view that societal divisions will occur in spite of attempts to ensure equal opportunity, and accepts the role of the state as an economic manager and as a guarantor of societal welfare.

Welfarism , or a reference to Europeanist ideas that while individual endeavor is to be welcomed, applauded and rewarded, the community has a responsibility for working to ensure that the playing field is as level as possible, and that opportunity and wealth are equitably distributed. Europeanism emphasizes equality of results over equality of opportunity.

Sustainable development , or the belief that development should be sustainable, meeting the needs of the present without compromising the needs of future generations.

Redefining the family . The place of the European family is changing, with fewer Europeans opting to marry, their ages at marriage rising, their divorce rates growing, their fertility rates declining, more children are being born outside marriage, and single-parent and single-person households becoming more usual.

Working to live.

Post-material Europeans are working fewer hours, are doing more with those hours, and have developed family-friendly laws and policies.

Criminal rights. In matters of criminal justice , Europeanism means a greater emphasis on individual rights, and a preference for resolving disputes through negotiation rather than confrontation through the law.

Opposition to capital punishment . In league with above named criminal rights. State sponsored executions are prohibited in all European Union and Council of Europe member states, and European governments have worked to achieve a global moratorium as a first step towards its worldwide abolition.

Multiculturalism , in which Europe has a long and often overlooked tradition arising from the diversity of European societies, and a Europeanist habit of integrating core values and features from new groups with which its dominant cultures have come into contact.

Perpetual peace . Where once Europe was a region of near constant war, conflict and political violence, it is today a region of generalised peace, and one which has made much progress along the path to achieving the Kantian condition of perpetual peace. Inter-state war in the region is alleged to be unthinkable and impossible, even during the worst economic or financial troubles.

Multilateralism . Europeanism has eschewed national self-interest in favour of cooperation and consensus, of the promotion of values rather than interests, of reliance on international rules and agreements, and of building coalitions and working through international organisations to resolve problems.

European Union [ edit ] The European Union declares the fundamental EU values to be the ones "common to the Member States in a society in which pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail".

[ 11 ] They are: human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, rule of law, and human rights. These fundamental values are defined in the Treaty of Lisbon .

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Western values (West) Americanism (ideology) Asian values Christendom Europhile Pan-European identity Pro-Europeanism References [ edit ] ^ IVIC, Sanja (2019).

"The Concept of European Values" .

Cultura .

16 (1): 103– 117.

doi : 10.3726/CUL012019.0007 .

^ Marita Gilli, L'idée d'Europe, vecteur des aspirations démocratiques: les idéaux républicains depuis 1848 : actes du colloque international organisé à l'Université de Franche-Comté les 14, 15 et 16 mai 1992 (1994).

^ Serendipities 2.2017 (1): 50–68 | doi : 10.25364/11.2:2017.1.4 50ARTICLE Kristoffer Kropp, The cases of the European Values Study and the European Social Survey—European constellations of social science knowledge production Archived 2018-04-21 at the Wayback Machine , Serendipities 2.2017 (1): 50–68, doi : 10.25364/11.2:2017.1.4 .

^ John McCormick, Europeanism (Oxford University Press, 2010) ^ Vilho Harle, European Values in International Relations , 1990, i–x (preface).

^ Adrian G. V. Hyde-Price, The International Politics of East Central Europe , Manchester University Press, 1996, p. 60 . "The new nationalist myth in Eastern Europe thus attempts to define contemporary national identity in terms of European values and a European cultural heritage. The desire to return to Europe and embrace European values has led to a growing acceptance in much of East Central Europe of liberal democracy, human rights, multilateral cooperation and European integration." ^ Treaty on the European Union, Title I: Common Provisions .

^ LES VALEURS DES EUROPÉENS , Eurobaromètre Standard 77 (2012), p. 4.

^ Jürgen Habermas and Jacques Derrida, ‘February 15, or What Binds Europe Together: Plea for a Common Foreign Policy, Beginning in Core Europe’, in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , 31 May 2003. Reproduced in Daniel Levy , Max Pensky and John Torpey (eds), Old Europe, New Europe, Core Europe (London: Verso, 2005).

^ John McCormick, Europeanism (Oxford University Press, 2010) ^ "Consolidated version of the Treaty on European Union" .

EUR-Lex . Publications Office of the European Union . Retrieved 2022-02-15 .

^ "European Union gateway - Aims and values" .

european-union.europa.eu . European Commission, Directorate-General for Communication . Retrieved 2022-02-15 .

External links [ edit ] dialogueanduniversalism.eu v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization v t e Treaty of Lisbon topics Convention on the Future of Europe European Constitution Berlin Declaration Amato Group Signing Ratification Irish referendum I Irish referendum II European values European Union portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_values&oldid=1291430873 " Categories : Concepts in political philosophy Culture of Europe Democracy Enlightenment philosophy European Union society European integration History of the European Union Human rights in the European Union Philosophy of law Political philosophy Pro-Europeanism Separation of powers Social philosophy Society of Europe Treaty of Lisbon Value (ethics) Western culture Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 05:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European values 16 languages Add topic

