Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Core principles 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Founders 2.2 Books and articles 3 Culture and events Toggle Culture and events subsection 3.1 Bed push 3.2 Psychiatric Patient-Built Wall Tours 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mad pride 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית Nederlands Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Movement encouraging pride in people with mental illnesses Mad Pride parade in Salvador , Brazil , in 2009.

Mad pride is a mass movement of current and former users of mental health services, as well as those who have never used mental health services but are aligned with the mad pride framework. The movement advocates that individuals with mental illness should be proud of their 'mad' identity.

[ 1 ] In recent years, mad pride has increasingly aligned with the neurodiversity movement , recognizing the interconnected nature of mental health advocacy and neurodivergent experiences.

[ 2 ] Core principles [ edit ] Mad pride activists seek to reclaim terms such as " mad ", " nutter ", and " psycho " from misuse, such as in tabloid newspapers, and to transform them from negative to positive descriptors.

[ 3 ] Through mass media campaigns, mad pride activists seek to re-educate the general public on the causes of mental disorders and the experiences of those using the mental health system.

Mad pride was formed in 1993 in response to local community prejudices towards people with a psychiatric history living in boarding homes in the Parkdale area of Toronto, Ontario , Canada; since then, an event has been held in Toronto every year (except for 1996).

[ 4 ] A similar movement began around the same time in the United Kingdom, and by the late 1990s, mad pride events were organized around the globe, including in Australia , Brazil , France , Ireland , Portugal , Madagascar , South Africa , South Korea , and the United States . Events draw thousands of participants, according to MindFreedom International , a United States mental health advocacy organization that promotes and tracks events spawned by the movement.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Mad studies grew out of mad pride and the psychiatric survivor framework, and focuses on developing scholarly thinking around "mental health" by academics who self-identify as mad. As noted in Mad matters: a critical reader in Canadian mad studies , [ 5 ] "Mad Studies can be defined in general terms as a project of inquiry, knowledge production, and political action devoted to the critique and transcendence of psy-centred ways of thinking, behaving, relating, and being".

[ 5 ] The first known event, held on 18 September 1993, was called "Psychiatric Survivor Pride Day", and was organized by and for people who identified as survivors, consumers, or ex-patients of psychiatric practices.

[ 6 ] Founders [ edit ] Mad pride's founding activists in the UK include Simon Barnett, [ 7 ] Pete Shaughnessy , and Robert Dellar .

Books and articles [ edit ] Mad Pride: A celebration of mad culture records the early mad pride movement.

On Our Own: Patient-Controlled Alternatives to the Mental Health System , published in 1978 by Judi Chamberlin , is a foundational text in the mad pride movement, although it was published before the movement was launched.

Mad pride was launched shortly before a book of the same name, Mad Pride: A celebration of mad culture , published in 2000. On May 11, 2008, Gabrielle Glaser documented mad pride in The New York Times . Glaser stated, "Just as gay-rights activists reclaimed the word queer as a badge of honor rather than a slur, these advocates proudly call themselves mad; they say their conditions do not preclude them from productive lives." Culture and events [ edit ] Bed Push at Mad Pride parade in Cologne, Germany , 2016.

Mad pride and disability pride are both celebrated in July in many countries, including Canada, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. There is a connection to Bastille Day , a French national holiday which occurs annually on July 14 to commemorate the Storming of the Bastille on July 14, 1789. This event was adopted a symbol of mad pride, representing liberation and freedom.

[ 8 ] The mad pride movement has spawned recurring cultural events in Toronto , London , Dublin , and other cities around the world. These events often include live music, poetry readings , film screenings , and street theatre . "Bed push" protests are one form of street threatre unique to mad pride events; their aim is to raise awareness about the barriers that prevent people from accessing quality treatment – which disproportionately affect people who are oppressed for other aspects such as race or class – as well as the widespread use of force in psychiatric hospitals . Past events have included British journalist Jonathan Freedland [ 7 ] and novelist Clare Allan.

[ 9 ] Mad pride cultural events take a variety of forms, such as the South London collective Creative Routes, the Chipmunka Publishing enterprise, and the many works of Dolly Sen.

[ 10 ] Bed push [ edit ] A flyer for a mad pride event in London , 2003. Featured performers include Pete Shaughnessy , Alternative TV , Nikki Sudden , The Fish Brothers, Ceramic Hobs, Melanie Clifford, and Caesar Reel.

A Bed Push is a method of activism employed by multiple mental health agencies and advocates as a method of raising awareness about psychiatric care. Activists wheel a gurney through public spaces to provoke discussion about mental health care.

MindFreedom has a recipe for a successful Bed Push on their website, urging participants to remain peaceful but also ensure they are seen, using attention-grabbing tactics such as blowing horns, mild traffic disruptions, and loud music.

[ 11 ] Often patients in psychiatric care feel silenced and powerless, so the act of intentionally securing visibility and showing off resilience is one method of regaining dignity.

[ 12 ] Mad Pride Week in Toronto is recognized by the city itself.

[ 13 ] The festivities surrounding this week are highlighted by the mad pride Bed Push, which typically takes place on the 14th of July. The event is staged at Toronto's Queen Street West "to raise public awareness about the use of force and lack of choice for people ensnared in the Ontario mental health system".

[ 5 ] This week is officially run by Toronto Mad Pride which partners a number of mental health agencies in the city. In recent years, some advocates have pushed for Parkdale, Toronto to be renamed MAD! Village, to reclaim pride in its surrounding communities' long history of struggle with mental health and addictions.

[ 13 ] A series of bed push events take place around London each year.

Psychiatric Patient-Built Wall Tours [ edit ] The Psychiatric Patient-Built Wall Tours take place in Toronto, at the CAMH facility on Queen St West. The tours show the patient-built walls from the 19th century that are located at present day CAMH. The purpose of the tours is to give a history on the lives of the patients who built the walls, and bring attention to the harsh realities of psychiatry.

Geoffrey Reaume and Heinz Klein first came up with the idea of walking tours as part of a mad pride event in 2000. The first wall tour occurred on what is now known as Mad Pride Day, on July 14, 2000, with an attendance of about fifty people. Reaume solely leads the tours, and they have grown from annual events for mad pride, to occurring several times throughout the year in all non-winter months.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Psychiatry portal Anti-psychiatry Autistic Pride Day Brazilian anti-asylum movement Clifford Whittingham Beers David Reville Disability rights movement Disability flag Elizabeth Packard Functional diversity Icarus Project Involuntary commitment Judi Chamberlin Kate Millett Leonard Roy Frank Linda Andre Lyn Duff Mentalism (discrimination) National Empowerment Center Neurodiversity Outline of the psychiatric survivors movement Psychiatric survivors movement Ted Chabasinski World Network of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry References [ edit ] ^ Cohen, Oryx (9 March 2017).

"The Power of 'Healing Voices' " . The Mighty . Retrieved 12 September 2018 .

^ Heed, Cydney (2024-05-29).

"Our brains are not broken: Mad Pride, neurodiversity and how diversity becomes disease" .

The Michigan Daily . Retrieved 2024-08-30 .

^ a b Gabrielle Glaser (May 11, 2008).

" 'Mad Pride' Fights a Stigma" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 11, 2008 .

^ Reaume, Geoffrey (July 14, 2008).

"A History of Psychiatric Survivor Pride Day during the 1990s" . The Consumer/Survivor Information Resource Centre Bulletin, No. 374.

^ a b c Brenda LeFrançois, Robert Menzies and Geoffrey Reaume, eds (2013) Mad matters: a critical reader in Canadian mad studies , Toronto, Canadian Scholars' Press Inc.

ISBN 978-1-55130-534-9 ^ "History" .

Toronto Mad Pride . Toronto Mad Pride . Retrieved July 13, 2025 .

^ a b Brand, Jo (2007-05-08).

"Glad to be 'mad'?" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on November 4, 2007.

^ "Mad Pride Day" .

Advocacy Monitor . 2011-07-01 . Retrieved 2022-12-11 .

^ Allan, Clare (2006-11-27).

"Misplaced pride" .

Guardian Unlimited . Archived from the original on January 9, 2008.

^ Dolly Sen (October 2002) World Is Full of Laughter:  1 Million People Commit Suicide Every Year , Chipmunka Publishing ISBN 978-0-95422-181-2 ^ "Bed Push Tips — MFIPortal" . 19 January 2008 . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

^ "MindFreedom Journal — MFIPortal" . 16 April 2008 . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

^ a b "MAD! Pride Breaks the Stigma of Mental Illness" .

www.blogto.com . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

^ "Psychiatric Patient Built Wall Tours at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), Toronto, 2000 – 2010" .

ActiveHistory.ca . 2011-04-19 . Retrieved 2017-03-13 .

External links [ edit ] Mad pride at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Mad Pride Toronto MAD Pride Australia Mad Pride & Disability Pride Month Are Both in July Mad in America Mad Pride Resources v t e Anti-psychiatry Topics Biopsychiatry controversy Controversies about psychiatry Critical psychiatry Hearing Voices Movement History of mental disorders Involuntary commitment Involuntary treatment Martha Mitchell effect Medical ethics Medicalization of sexuality medical model Nouthetic counseling Outline of the psychiatric survivors movement Political abuse of psychiatry Positive disintegration Psychiatric survivors movement Psychoanalytic theory Recovery model Rhetoric of therapy Rosenhan experiment Self-help groups for mental health Therapeutic community Organizations American Association for the Abolition of Involuntary Mental Hospitalization Aspies For Freedom Autism Network International Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law Citizens Commission on Human Rights Critical Psychiatry Network Disability Rights International Hearing Voices Network Icarus Project International Disability Alliance Learning Disability Coalition Mad Pride MindFreedom International National Empowerment Center Radical Psychology Network Rehabilitation International Royal Association for Disability Rights Paranoia Network Soteria Socialist Patients' Collective World Network of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry People Linda Andre Giorgio Antonucci Franco Basaglia Ernest Becker Lauretta Bender Richard Bentall Peter Breggin Paula Caplan Ted Chabasinski Judi Chamberlin David Cooper Lyn Duff Michel Foucault Leonard Roy Frank Erving Goffman James Gottstein Peter C. Gøtzsche Jacques Lacan R. D. Laing Peter Lehmann Kate Millett Loren Mosher Joanna Moncrieff David Oaks Elizabeth Packard Sascha Scatter David Smail Thomas Szasz Stephen Ticktin Robert Whitaker Publications Against Therapy Anatomy of an Epidemic Anti-Oedipus Asylums Crazy Therapies Doctoring the Mind Interpretation of Schizophrenia Liberation by Oppression Mad in America Madness and Civilization Radical Psychology The Gene Illusion The Myth of Mental Illness The Politics of Experience and The Bird of Paradise The Protest Psychosis The Radical Therapist We've Had a Hundred Years of Psychotherapy – and the World's Getting Worse Psychiatry portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mad_pride&oldid=1305240416 " Categories : Anti-psychiatry Health movements History of mental health Identity politics Mental health organizations Psychiatric survivor activists 1993 introductions Disability pride July 1993 establishments in Ontario Movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 22:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mad pride 11 languages Add topic

