Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Myths 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cōātlīcue 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Nāhuatl Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Scots Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Coatlicue ) Aztec mother goddess For the statue, see Coatlicue statue . For the star, see Coatlicue (star) .

Coatlicue Mother of the Gods Goddess of Earth, Nature, Fertility, Life and Death Statue of Coatlicue displayed in the National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City Other names Tēteoh īnnan , "the deities, their mother"; Ilamatēuctli , "old mistress"; Tonāntzin , "our mother"; Tocih , "our grandmother"; Cōzcamiyāuh , "corn tassel necklace"; Cihuācōātl , "snake woman"; Cōātlāntonān , "our mother of Coatlan" Gender Female Region Mesoamerica Ethnic group Aztec ( Mexica ) Genealogy Parents Tlaltecuhtli and Tlalcihuatl [ 4 ] Siblings Chimalma and Xochitlicue (Codex Ríos) [ 3 ] Consort Mixcoatl (Codex Florentine) Children • With Mixcoatl: Huitzilopochtli , Coyolxauhqui and the Centzon Huitznahuac (Codex Florentine) [ 1 ] • With Camaxtle-Mixcoatl or Tonatiuh: the Centzon Mimixcoa (Codex Ramirez) [ 2 ] Coatlicue ( / k w ɑː t ˈ l iː k w eɪ / ; Classical Nahuatl : cōātl īcue , Nahuatl pronunciation: [koː(w)aːˈt͡ɬiːkʷeː] ⓘ , "skirt of snakes"), wife of Mixcōhuātl , also known as Tēteoh īnnān ( pronounced [teːˈtéoʔˈíːnːaːn̥] , "mother of the gods") is the Aztec goddess who gave birth to the moon, stars, and Huītzilōpōchtli , the god of the sun and war. The goddesses Toci "our grandmother" and Cihuacōātl "snake woman", the patron of women who die in childbirth, were also seen as aspects of Cōātlīcue.

Etymology [ edit ] The goddess' Classical Nahuatl name can be rendered both Cōātlīcue and Cōātl īcue , from cōātl "snake" and īcue "her skirt", roughly meaning "[she who has] the skirt of snakes". The name Tēteoh īnnān , from tēteoh , plural of teōtl "god", + īnnān "their mother", refers directly to her maternal role.

Myths [ edit ] Coatlicue is represented as a woman wearing a skirt of writhing snakes and a necklace made of human hearts, hands, and skulls. Her feet and hands are adorned with claws and her breasts are depicted as hanging flaccid from pregnancy . Her face is formed by two facing serpents, which represent blood spurting from her neck after she was decapitated.

[ 5 ] According to Aztec mythology, the goddess Coatlicue became miraculously pregnant when a ball of feathers fell on her while she was sweeping a temple—an event that symbolizes divine conception and cosmic destiny. She was to give birth to Huitzilopochtli , the future god of war and the sun. Interpreting this as dishonor, her daughter Coyolxauhqui , along with her 400 brothers, plotted to kill her. Just as the attack began, Huitzilopochtli emerged fully armed from his mother, defeated his siblings, and cast Coyolxauhqui into the sky, where she became the moon. This myth represents the triumph of cosmic order over chaos and the daily rebirth of the sun.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Cecelia Klein argues that the famous Coatlicue statue in the National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico , and several other complete and fragmentary versions, may represent a personified snake skirt.

[ 6 ] The reference is to one version of the creation of the present Sun. The myth relates that the present Sun began after the deities gathered at Teotihuacan and sacrificed themselves. The best-known version states that Tezzictecatl and Nanahuatzin immolated themselves, becoming the moon and the sun. However, other versions add a group of women to those who sacrificed themselves, including Coatlicue. Afterward, the Aztecs were said to have worshiped the skirts of these women, which came back to life. Coatlicue thus has creative aspects, which may balance the skulls, hearts, hands, and claws that connect her to the earth deity Tlaltecuhtli. The earth both consumes and regenerates life.

References [ edit ] ^ Cecilio A. Robelo (1905).

Diccionario de Mitología Nahoa (in Spanish). Editorial Porrúa. pp. 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202.

ISBN 970-07-3149-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Guilhem Olivier (2015).

Cacería, Sacrificio y Poder en Mesoamérica: Tras las Huellas de Mixcóatl, 'Serpiente de Nube' (in Spanish). Fondo de Cultura Económica.

ISBN 978-607-16-3216-6 .

^ Susan D. Gillespie (1989).

Los Reyes Aztecas: La Construcción del Gobierno en la Historia Mexica (in Spanish). Siglo XXI Editores. p. 192.

ISBN 968-23-1874-2 .

^ Otilia Meza (1981).

El Mundo Mágico de los Dioses del Anáhuac (in Spanish). Editorial Universo.

ISBN 968-35-0093-5 .

^ Mythology – Aztec gods Archived 14 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Elise Nalbandian, AllExperts , 13 February 2006 ^ a b Klein, Cecelia F.

(1 April 2008).

"A New Interpretation of the Aztec Statue Called Coatlicue, "Snakes-Her-Skirt" " .

Ethnohistory .

55 (2): 229– 250.

doi : 10.1215/00141801-2007-062 .

ISSN 0014-1801 – via ResearchGate.

^ Perez Amezcua, Luis Alberto (1 January 2017).

"Tecnopoïesis azteca: el mito de Coatlicue y la "nueva mexicanidad" " .

ICONO14 .

15 .

Further reading [ edit ] Vistas Project at Smith College. Edited by Dana Liebsohn and Barbara Mundy.

Boone, Elizabeth H. "The Coatlicues at the Templo Mayor." Ancient Mesoamerica (1999), 10: 189–206 Cambridge University Press.

Carbonell, Ana Maria. "From Llorona to Gritona: Coatlicue in Feminist Tales by Viramontes and Cisneros." MELUS 24(2) Summer 1999:53–74 Cisneros, Sandra. "It occurs to me I am the creative/destructive goddess Coatlicue." The Massachusetts Review 36(4):599. Winter 1995.

De Leon, Ann. "Coatlicue or How to Write the Dismembered Body." ' 'MLN Hispanic Notes Volume 125, Number 2: 259–286 March 2010.

Dorsfuhrer, C. "Quetzalcoatl and Coatlicue in Mexican Mythology." Cuadernos Hispanoamericanos (449):6–28 November 1987.

Fernández, Justino .

Coatlicue. Estética del arte indígena antiguo . Centro de Estudios Filosoficos, U.N.A.M., Mexico, 1954.

Franco, Jean. "The Return of Coatlicue: Mexican Nationalism and the Aztec Past." Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies 13(2) August 2004: 205–219.

Granziera, Patrizia. "From Coatlicue to Guadalupe: The Image of the Great Mother in Mexico." Studies in World Christianity 10(2):250–273. 2005.

León y Gama, Antonio de.

Descripción histórica y cronológica de las dos piedras: que con ocasión del empedrado que se está formando en la plaza Principal de México, se hallaron en ella el año de 1790.

Impr. de F. de Zúñiga y Ontiveros, 1792; reprint Nabu Press (2011; Spanish), ISBN 1-173-35713-0 . An expanded edition, with descriptions of additional sculptures (like the Stone of Tizoc), edited by Carlos Maria Bustamante, published in 1832. There have been a couple of facsimile editions, published in the 1980s and 1990s. Library of Congress digital edition of Leon y Gama's 1792 work on the Calendar Stone [1] López Luján, Leonardo. "La Coatlicue." Escultura Monumental Mexica :115–230. 2012.

López Luján, Leonardo.

El ídolo sin pies ni cabeza: la Coatlicue a fines del México virreinal.

El Colegio Nacional, Mexico City, 2020.

Pimentel, Luz A. "Ekphrasis and Cultural Discourse: Coatlicue in Descriptive and Analytic Texts (Representations of the Aztec earth mother goddess).

NEOHELICON 30(1):61–75. 2003.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Coatlicue at Wikimedia Commons “Making Sense of the Pre-Columbian,” Vistas: Visual Culture in Spanish America, 1520–1820.

v t e Aztec mythology Primordials Ōmeteōtl : Ometēcuthli and Omecihuātl (or Tōnacātēcuhtli and Tōnacācihuātl ) Creator gods (Four Tezcatlipocas) Huītzilōpōchtli Quetzalcoatl Tezcatlipoca Xipe Totec (or Camaxtle ) Deities Lords of the Night Centeōtl Chalchiuhtlicue Cinteotl Mictlāntēcutli Piltzintecuhtli Tepēyōllōtl Tezcatlipoca (see Creator gods ) Tláloc Tlazōlteōtl Xiuhtecuhtli Lords of the Day Citlālicue Mictēcacihuātl Nanahuatzin Tlāhuizcalpantecuhtli Tlaltecuhtli Tōnatiuh Acolnahuacatl Acuecueyotl (see Chalchiuhtlicue ) Atlahua Atlacoya Chalchiuhtotolin Chantico Chicomecōātl Chīmalmā Cihuacōātl Cihuatecayotl Cipactonal Cōātlīcue Coyolxāuhqui Ehecatl Huēhuecoyōtl Huitztlampaehecatl Huixtocihuatl Ilamatecuhtli Ītzpāpālōtl Itzpapalotlcihuatl Itzpapalotltotec Itztlacoliuhqui Ixtlilton Macuiltochtli Macuilxochitl Malinalxochitl Mayahuel Metztli Mictlanpachecatl Mixcoatl Opochtli Oxomoco Painal Patecatl Tēcciztēcatl Temazcalteci Tepoztēcatl Tlacotzontli Tlalocayotl Tlilhua Toci Toltecatl Tonantzin Xilonen Xōchipilli Xōchiquetzal Xochitlicue Xocotl Xolotl Yacatecuhtli Zacatzontli Groups Ahuiateteo Centzonmīmixcōa Centzonhuītznāhua Centzon Tōtōchtin Cintēteo Cihuateteo Civateteo Ehecatotontli Tiānquiztli Tzitzimitl Xiuhtotontli Places Anahuac Aztlán Cemanahuac Chicomoztoc Huēyi Teōcalli Mictlān (The Underworld ) Tamoanchan Teotihuacan Thirteen Heavens Tlālōcān Tlillan-Tlapallan Tōllān Beliefs and practice Five Suns The Stinking Corpse Use of entheogens Codices Aubin Codex Aubin Manuscript no. 20 Aubin Tonalamatl Codex Azcatitlan Codices Azoyú I & II Badianus Manuscript Codices Becker I & II Boban Aztec Calendar Wheel Codex Bodley Codex Borbonicus Codex Borgia Codex Boturini Mapas de Cuauhtinchan 1-4 Codex Chimalpahin Codex Chimalpopoca Codex Colombino Codex Cospi Codex Cozcatzin Codex Dresden Codex Durán Codex Fejérváry-Mayer Codex Florentine Codex Huamantla Códice de Huichapan Codex Huexotzinco Humboldt fragment 1 Codex Ixtlilxochitl Codex Laud Lienzo Antonio de León Lienzo de Coixtlahuaca I & II Lienzo de Santa María Nativitas Lienzo de Santiago Ihuitlan Lienzo de Zacatepec I & II Codex Madrid Codex Magliabechiano Matrícula de Tributos Codex Mexicanus Crónica Mexicayotl Códice Maya de México Codex Osuna Oztoticpac Lands Map of Texcoco Paris Codex Plano en papel de maguey Primeros Memoriales Codex Porfirio Díaz Mapa Quinatzin Codex Ramírez Codex Reese Relación de Michoacán Codex Ríos Romances de los señores de Nueva España Codex Santa Maria Asunción Selden Roll Mapa Sigüenza Codex Telleriano-Remensis Tira de Tepechpan Anales de Tlatelolco Codex Tlatelolco Mapa Tloztin Historia Tolteca-Chichimeca Codex Totomixtlahuaca Codex Tudela Anales de Tula Codex Vaticanus B Codex Vindobonensis Mexicanus I Codex Xolotl Codex Zouche-Nuttall Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cōātlīcue&oldid=1292292745 " Categories : Aztec goddesses Mother goddesses Snake goddesses Fertility goddesses Health goddesses Death goddesses Life-death-rebirth goddesses Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2022 Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Classical Nahuatl-language text Pages with Nahuatl languages IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 06:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cōātlīcue 31 languages Add topic

