Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Meta-philosophy Toggle Meta-philosophy subsection 2.1 Objection to absolutism and relativism 2.2 Humanizing modernity 3 Argumentation Toggle Argumentation subsection 3.1 Toulmin model of argument 4 Ethics Toggle Ethics subsection 4.1 Good reasons approach 4.2 Revival of casuistry 5 Philosophy of science Toggle Philosophy of science subsection 5.1 Evolutionary model 6 Pantheon of skeptics 7 Works 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Stephen Toulmin 24 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Кыргызча Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English philosopher (1922–2009) Stephen Toulmin Born Stephen Edelston Toulmin 25 March 1922 London , England Died 4 December 2009 (aged 87) Los Angeles , California, U.S.

Education Alma mater King's College, Cambridge Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Main interests Meta-philosophy , argumentation , ethics, rhetoric , modernity Notable ideas Toulmin model (Toulmin method) Good reasons approach Stephen Edelston Toulmin ( / ˈ t uː l m ɪ n / ; 25 March 1922 – 4 December 2009) was a British philosopher, author, and educator. Influenced by Ludwig Wittgenstein , Toulmin devoted his works to the analysis of moral reasoning . Throughout his writings, he sought to develop practical arguments which can be used effectively in evaluating the ethics behind moral issues . His works were later found useful in the field of rhetoric for analyzing rhetorical arguments. The Toulmin model of argumentation, a diagram containing six interrelated components used for analyzing arguments , and published in his 1958 book The Uses of Argument , was considered his most influential work, particularly in the field of rhetoric and communication, and in computer science .

Biography [ edit ] Stephen Toulmin was born in London, UK, on 25 March 1922 to Geoffrey Edelson Toulmin and Doris Holman Toulmin.

[ 2 ] He earned his Bachelor of Arts degree from King's College, Cambridge , in 1943, where he was a Cambridge Apostle . Soon after, Toulmin was hired by the Ministry of Aircraft Production as a junior scientific officer, first at the Malvern Radar Research and Development Station and later at the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Germany. At the end of World War II , he returned to England to earn a Master of Arts degree in 1947 and a PhD in philosophy from Cambridge University , subsequently publishing his dissertation as An Examination of the Place of Reason in Ethics (1950). While at Cambridge, Toulmin came into contact with the Austrian philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein , whose examination of the relationship between the uses and the meanings of language shaped much of Toulmin's own work.

After graduating from Cambridge, he was appointed University Lecturer in Philosophy of Science at Oxford University from 1949 to 1954, during which period he wrote a second book, The Philosophy of Science: an Introduction (1953). Soon after, he was appointed to the position of Visiting Professor of History and Philosophy of Science at Melbourne University in Australia from 1954 to 1955, after which he returned to England, and served as Professor and Head of the Department of Philosophy at the University of Leeds from 1955 to 1959. While at Leeds, he published one of his most influential books in the field of rhetoric, The Uses of Argument (1958), which investigated the flaws of traditional logic . Although it was poorly received in England and satirized as "Toulmin's anti-logic book" by Toulmin's fellow philosophers at Leeds, the book was applauded by the rhetoricians in the United States, where Toulmin served as a visiting professor at New York , Stanford , and Columbia Universities in 1959.

[ 3 ] While in the States, Wayne Brockriede and Douglas Ehninger introduced Toulmin's work to communication scholars, as they recognized that his work provided a good structural model useful for the analysis and criticism of rhetorical arguments. In 1960, Toulmin returned to London to hold the position of director of the Unit for History of Ideas of the Nuffield Foundation .

In 1965, Toulmin returned to the United States, where he held positions at various universities. In 1967, Toulmin served as literary executor for close friend N.R. Hanson , helping in the posthumous publication of several volumes. While at the University of California, Santa Cruz , Toulmin published Human Understanding: The Collective Use and Evolution of Concepts (1972), which examines the causes and the processes of conceptual change. In this book, Toulmin uses a novel comparison between conceptual change and Charles Darwin 's model of biological evolution to analyse the process of conceptual change as an evolutionary process. The book confronts major philosophical questions as well.

[ 4 ] In 1973, while a professor in the Committee on Social Thought at the University of Chicago, he collaborated with Allan Janik , a philosophy professor at La Salle University , on the book Wittgenstein's Vienna , which advanced a thesis that underscores the significance of history to human reasoning: Contrary to philosophers who believe the absolute truth advocated in Plato 's idealized formal logic , Toulmin argues that truth can be a relative quality, dependent on historical and cultural contexts (what other authors have termed "conceptual schemata").

From 1975 to 1978, he worked with the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, established by the United States Congress . During this time, he collaborated with Albert R. Jonsen to write The Abuse of Casuistry : A History of Moral Reasoning (1988), which demonstrates the procedures for resolving moral cases. One of his most recent works, Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity (1990), written while Toulmin held the position of the Avalon Foundation Professor of the Humanities at Northwestern University , specifically criticizes the practical use and the thinning morality underlying modern science.

Toulmin held distinguished professorships at a number of different universities, including Columbia , Dartmouth College , Michigan State , Northwestern , Stanford , the University of Chicago , and the University of Southern California School of International Relations .

In 1997 the National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) selected Toulmin for the Jefferson Lecture , the U.S. federal government's highest honor for achievement in the humanities .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] His lecture, "A Dissenter's Story" (alternatively entitled "A Dissenter's Life"), discussed the roots of modernity in rationalism and humanism , the "contrast of the reasonable and the rational", and warned of the "abstractions that may still tempt us back into the dogmatism, chauvinism and sectarianism our needs have outgrown".

[ 7 ] The NEH report of the speech further quoted Toulmin on the need to "make the technical and the humanistic strands in modern thought work together more effectively than they have in the past".

[ 8 ] On 2 March 2006 Toulmin received the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art .

[ 9 ] He was married four times, once to June Goodfield , [ 10 ] with whom he collaborated on a series of books on the history of science . His children are Greg, of McLean, Va., Polly Macinnes of Skye, Scotland, Camilla Toulmin in the UK and Matthew Toulmin of Melbourne, Australia.

On 4 December 2009 Toulmin died of a heart failure at the age of 87 in Los Angeles, California.

[ 11 ] Meta-philosophy [ edit ] Objection to absolutism and relativism [ edit ] Throughout many of his works, Toulmin pointed out that absolutism (represented by theoretical or analytic arguments) has limited practical value. Absolutism is derived from Plato 's idealized formal logic , which advocates universal truth; accordingly, absolutists believe that moral issues can be resolved by adhering to a standard set of moral principles, regardless of context. By contrast, Toulmin contends that many of these so-called standard principles are irrelevant to real situations encountered by human beings in daily life.

To develop his contention, Toulmin introduced the concept of argument fields. In The Uses of Argument (1958), Toulmin claims that some aspects of arguments vary from field to field, and are hence called "field-dependent", while other aspects of argument are the same throughout all fields, and are hence called "field-invariant". The flaw of absolutism, Toulmin believes, lies in its unawareness of the field-dependent aspect of argument; absolutism assumes that all aspects of argument are field invariant.

In Human Understanding (1972), Toulmin suggests that anthropologists have been tempted to side with relativists because they have noticed the influence of cultural variations on rational arguments. In other words, the anthropologist or relativist overemphasizes the importance of the "field-dependent" aspect of arguments, and neglects or is unaware of the "field-invariant" elements. In order to provide solutions to the problems of absolutism and relativism, Toulmin attempts throughout his work to develop standards that are neither absolutist nor relativist for assessing the worth of ideas.

In Cosmopolis (1990), he traces philosophers' "quest for certainty" back to René Descartes and Thomas Hobbes , and lauds John Dewey , Wittgenstein, Martin Heidegger , and Richard Rorty for abandoning that tradition.

Humanizing modernity [ edit ] In Cosmopolis Toulmin seeks the origins of the modern emphasis on universality (philosophers' "quest for certainty"), and criticizes both modern science and philosophers for having ignored practical issues in preference for abstract and theoretical issues. The pursuit of absolutism and theoretical arguments lacking practicality, for example, is, in his view, one of the main defects of modern philosophy. Similarly, Toulmin sensed a thinning of morality in the field of sciences, which has diverted its attention from practical issues concerning ecology to the production of the atomic bomb . To solve this problem, Toulmin advocated a return to humanism consisting of four returns: a return to oral communication and discourse, a plea which has been rejected by modern philosophers, whose scholarly focus is on the printed page; a return to the particular or individual cases that deal with practical moral issues occurring in daily life (as opposed to theoretical principles that have limited practicality); a return to the local, or to concrete cultural and historical contexts; and, finally, a return to the timely, from timeless problems to things whose rational significance depends on the time lines of our solutions. He follows up on this critique in Return to Reason (2001), where he seeks to illuminate the ills that, in his view, universalism has caused in the social sphere, discussing, among other things, the discrepancy between mainstream ethical theory and real-life ethical quandaries.

Argumentation [ edit ] Toulmin model of argument [ edit ] Toulmin argumentation can be diagrammed as a conclusion established, more or less, on the basis of a fact supported by a warrant (with backing), and a possible rebuttal.

Further information: Practical arguments Arguing that absolutism lacks practical value, Toulmin aimed to develop a different type of argument, called practical arguments (also known as substantial arguments). In contrast to absolutists' theoretical arguments, Toulmin's practical argument is intended to focus on the justificatory function of argumentation, as opposed to the inferential function of theoretical arguments. Whereas theoretical arguments make inferences based on a set of principles to arrive at a claim, practical arguments first find a claim of interest, and then provide justification for it. Toulmin believed that reasoning is less an activity of inference, involving the discovering of new ideas, and more a process of testing and sifting already existing ideas—an act achievable through the process of justification .

Toulmin believed that for a good argument to succeed, it needs to provide good justification for a claim. This, he believed, will ensure it stands up to criticism and earns a favourable verdict. In The Uses of Argument (1958), Toulmin proposed a layout containing six interrelated components for analyzing arguments: Claim (Conclusion) A conclusion whose merit must be established. In argumentative essays, it may be called the thesis.

[ 12 ] For example, if a person tries to convince a listener that he is a British citizen, the claim would be "I am a British citizen" (1).

Ground (Fact, Evidence, Data) A fact one appeals to as a foundation for the claim. For example, the person introduced in 1 can support his claim with the supporting data "I was born in Bermuda" (2).

Warrant A statement authorizing movement from the ground to the claim. In order to move from the ground established in 2, "I was born in Bermuda", to the claim in 1, "I am a British citizen", the person must supply a warrant to bridge the gap between 1 and 2 with the statement "A man born in Bermuda will legally be a British citizen" (3).

Backing Credentials designed to certify the statement expressed in the warrant; backing must be introduced when the warrant itself is not convincing enough to the readers or the listeners. For example, if the listener does not deem the warrant in 3 as credible, the speaker will supply the legal provisions: "I trained as a barrister in London, specialising in citizenship, so I know that a man born in Bermuda will legally be a British citizen".

Rebuttal (Reservation) Statements recognizing the restrictions which may legitimately be applied to the claim. It is exemplified as follows: "A man born in Bermuda will legally be a British citizen, unless he has betrayed Britain and has become a spy for another country".

Qualifier Words or phrases expressing the speaker's degree of force or certainty concerning the claim. Such words or phrases include "probably", "possible", "impossible", "certainly", "presumably", "as far as the evidence goes", and "necessarily". The claim "I am definitely a British citizen" has a greater degree of force than the claim "I am a British citizen, presumably". (See also: Defeasible reasoning .) The first three elements, claim , ground , and warrant , are considered as the essential components of practical arguments, while the second triad, qualifier , backing , and rebuttal , may not be needed in some arguments.

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e When Toulmin first proposed it, this layout of argumentation was based on legal arguments and intended to be used to analyze the rationality of arguments typically found in the courtroom. Toulmin did not realize that this layout could be applicable to the field of rhetoric and communication until his works were introduced to rhetoricians by Wayne Brockriede and Douglas Ehninger. Their Decision by Debate (1963) streamlined Toulmin's terminology and broadly introduced his model to the field of debate.

[ 13 ] Only after Toulmin published Introduction to Reasoning (1979) were the rhetorical applications of this layout mentioned in his works.

One criticism of the Toulmin model is that it does not fully consider the use of questions in argumentation.

[ 14 ] The Toulmin model assumes that an argument starts with a fact or claim and ends with a conclusion, but ignores an argument's underlying questions. In the example "Harry was born in Bermuda, so Harry must be a British subject", the question "Is Harry a British subject?" is ignored, which also neglects to analyze why particular questions are asked and others are not. (See Issue mapping for an example of an argument-mapping method that emphasizes questions.) Toulmin's argument model has inspired research on, for example, goal structuring notation (GSN), widely used for developing safety cases , [ 15 ] and argument maps and associated software.

[ 16 ] Ethics [ edit ] Good reasons approach [ edit ] In Reason in Ethics (1950), his doctoral dissertation, Toulmin sets out a Good Reasons approach of ethics, and criticizes what he considers to be the subjectivism and emotivism of philosophers such as A. J. Ayer because, in his view, they fail to do justice to ethical reasoning.

Revival of casuistry [ edit ] By reviving casuistry (also known as case ethics), Toulmin sought to find the middle ground between the extremes of absolutism and relativism . Casuistry was practiced widely during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance to resolve moral issues. Although casuistry largely fell silent during the modern period, in The Abuse of Casuistry: A History of Moral Reasoning (1988), Toulmin collaborated with Albert R. Jonsen to demonstrate the effectiveness of casuistry in practical argumentation during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, effectively reviving it as a permissible method of argument.

Casuistry employs absolutist principles, called "type cases" or " paradigm cases", without resorting to absolutism. It uses the standard principles (for example, sanctity of life ) as referential markers in moral arguments. An individual case is then compared and contrasted with the type case. Given an individual case that is completely identical to the type case, moral judgments can be made immediately using the standard moral principles advocated in the type case. If the individual case differs from the type case, the differences will be critically assessed in order to arrive at a rational claim.

Through the procedure of casuistry, Toulmin and Jonsen identified three problematic situations in moral reasoning: first, the type case fits the individual case only ambiguously; second, two type cases apply to the same individual case in conflicting ways; third, an unprecedented individual case occurs, which cannot be compared or contrasted to any type case. Through the use of casuistry, Toulmin demonstrated and reinforced his previous emphasis on the significance of comparison to moral arguments, a significance not addressed in theories of absolutism or relativism.

Philosophy of science [ edit ] Evolutionary model [ edit ] In 1972, Toulmin published Human Understanding , in which he asserts that conceptual change is an evolutionary process. In this book, Toulmin attacks Thomas Kuhn 's account of conceptual change in his seminal work The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962). Kuhn believed that conceptual change is a revolutionary process (as opposed to an evolutionary process), during which mutually exclusive paradigms compete to replace one another. Toulmin criticized the relativist elements in Kuhn's thesis, arguing that mutually exclusive paradigms provide no ground for comparison, and that Kuhn made the relativists' error of overemphasizing the "field variant" while ignoring the "field invariant" or commonality shared by all argumentation or scientific paradigms .

In contrast to Kuhn's revolutionary model, Toulmin proposed an evolutionary model of conceptual change comparable to Darwin's model of biological evolution . Toulmin states that conceptual change involves the process of innovation and selection. Innovation accounts for the appearance of conceptual variations, while selection accounts for the survival and perpetuation of the soundest conceptions. Innovation occurs when the professionals of a particular discipline come to view things differently from their predecessors; selection subjects the innovative concepts to a process of debate and inquiry in what Toulmin considers as a "forum of competitions". The soundest concepts will survive the forum of competition as replacements or revisions of the traditional conceptions.

From the absolutists ' point of view, concepts are either valid or invalid regardless of contexts. From the relativists' perspective, one concept is neither better nor worse than a rival concept from a different cultural context. From Toulmin's perspective, the evaluation depends on a process of comparison, which determines whether or not one concept will improve explanatory power more than its rival concepts.

Pantheon of skeptics [ edit ] At a meeting of the executive council of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSI) in Denver , Colorado in April 2011, Toulmin was selected for inclusion in CSI's Pantheon of Skeptics.  The Pantheon of Skeptics was created by CSI to remember the legacy of deceased fellows of CSI and their contributions to the cause of scientific skepticism.

[ 17 ] Works [ edit ] An Examination of the Place of Reason in Ethics (1950) ISBN 0-226-80843-2 The Philosophy of Science: An Introduction (1953) The Uses of Argument (1958) 2nd edition 2003: ISBN 0-521-53483-6 Metaphysical Beliefs, Three Essays (1957) with Ronald W. Hepburn and Alasdair MacIntyre The Riviera (1961) Seventeenth century science and the arts (1961) Foresight and Understanding: An Enquiry into the Aims of Science (1961) ISBN 0-313-23345-4 The Fabric of the Heavens (The Ancestry of Science, volume 1) (1961) with June Goodfield ISBN 0-226-80848-3 The Architecture of Matter (The Ancestry of Science, volume 2) (1962) with June Goodfield ISBN 0-226-80840-8 Night Sky at Rhodes (1963) The Discovery of Time (The Ancestry of Science, volume 3) (1965) with June Goodfield ISBN 0-226-80842-4 Physical Reality (1970) Human Understanding: The Collective Use and Evolution of Concepts (1972) ISBN 0-691-01996-7 Wittgenstein's Vienna (1973) with Allan Janik On the Nature of the Physician's Understanding (1976) [ 18 ] Knowing and Acting: An Invitation to Philosophy (1976) ISBN 0-02-421020-X An Introduction to Reasoning with Allan Janik and Richard D. Rieke (1979), 2nd ed. 1984; 3rd edition 1997: ISBN 0-02-421160-5 The Return to Cosmology: Postmodern Science and the Theology of Nature (1985) ISBN 0-520-05465-2 The Abuse of Casuistry: A History of Moral Reasoning (1988) with Albert R. Jonsen ISBN 0-520-06960-9 Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity (1990) ISBN 0-226-80838-6 Social Impact of AIDS in the United States (1993) with Albert R. Jonsen Beyond theory – changing organizations through participation (1996) with Björn Gustavsen (editors) Return to Reason (2001) ISBN 0-674-01235-6 See also [ edit ] Argumentation theory Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club References [ edit ] ^ Sonja K. Foss, Karen A. Foss, Robert Trapp, Contemporary Perspectives on Rhetoric: 30th Anniversary Edition , Waveland Press, 2014, p. 116.

^ "Toulmin, Stephen Edelston (1922–2009), philosopher and historian of ideas" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/102307 .

ISBN 978-0-19-861411-1 . Retrieved 8 January 2025 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Loui, Ronald P. (2006).

"A Citation-Based Reflection on Toulmin and Argument" . In Hitchcock, David; Verheij, Bart (eds.).

Arguing on the Toulmin Model: New Essays in Argument Analysis and Evaluation . Springer Netherlands. pp.

31– 38.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-4938-5_3 .

ISBN 978-1-4020-4937-8 . Retrieved 25 June 2010 .

Toulmin's 1958 work is essential in the field of argumentation ^ Westfall, Richard. "Review: Toulmin and Human Understanding".

The Journal of Modern History .

47 (4): 691– 8.

doi : 10.1086/241374 .

S2CID 147375119 .

^ Jefferson Lecturers Archived 20 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine at NEH Website (retrieved 22 January 2009).

^ "California Scholar Wins Government Honor" , The New York Times , 12 February 1997.

^ Stephen Toulmin, "A Dissenter's Life" Archived 27 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine (text of Toulmin's Jefferson Lecture) at USC website.

^ "The Jefferson Lecture" Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , report on 1997 lecture, at NEH website.

^ "Reply to a parliamentary question" (PDF) (in German). p. 1761 . Retrieved 24 November 2012 .

^ The Discovery of Time . Penguin. 1967.

^ Grimes, William (11 December 2009).

"Stephen Toulmin, a Philosopher and Educator, Dies at 87" .

The New York Times .

^ Wheeler, Kip (19 October 2010).

"Toulmin Model of Argument" (PDF) .

cn.edu . Retrieved 12 October 2018 .

^ Book description of Decision by Debate at Google Books : "The most lasting legacy of the work is its break with formal, deductive logic and its introduction of Stephen Toulmin's model of argument to undergraduate student debaters, which, since then, has become a mainstay of what many have called the Renaissance of argumentation studies. Without the work presented in Decision by Debate , contemporary interdisciplinary views of argumentation that now dominate many disciplines might have never have taken place or at least have been severely delayed." ^ Eruduran, Sibel; Aleixandre, Marilar, eds. (2007).

Argumentation in Science Education: Perspectives from Classroom-Based Research . Science & Technology Education Library. Vol. 35. New York: Springer-Verlag . pp.

15– 16.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-6670-2 .

ISBN 9781402066696 .

OCLC 171556540 .

^ Spriggs, John (2012).

GSN—The Goal Structuring Notation: A Structured Approach to Presenting Arguments . London; New York: Springer-Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4471-2312-5 .

ISBN 9781447123118 .

OCLC 792775478 .

^ Reed, Chris; Walton, Douglas N.

; Macagno, Fabrizio (March 2007).

"Argument diagramming in logic, law and artificial intelligence" .

The Knowledge Engineering Review .

22 (1): 87– 109.

doi : 10.1017/S0269888907001051 .

S2CID 26294789 .

^ "The Pantheon of Skeptics" .

CSI .

Committee for Skeptical Inquiry .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2017 . Retrieved 30 April 2017 .

^ The Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 1976, vol. 1, no. 1 Further reading [ edit ] Hitchcock, David; Verheij, Bart, eds. (2006).

Arguing on the Toulmin Model: New Essays in Argument Analysis and Evaluation .

Springer-Verlag Netherlands.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-4938-5_3 .

ISBN 978-1-4020-4937-8 .

OCLC 82229075 .

External links [ edit ] Stephen Toulmin: An Intellectual Odyssey at the Wayback Machine (archived 15 February 2006) Stephen Toulmin Interview with Stephen Toulmin in JAC Obituary in The Guardian v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii DBLP MathSciNet People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stephen_Toulmin&oldid=1286165427 " Categories : 1922 births 2009 deaths 20th-century English philosophers English rhetoricians English philosophers of science Wittgensteinian philosophers Academics of the University of Leeds Alumni of King's College, Cambridge Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club New York University faculty Stanford University faculty Columbia University faculty University of Massachusetts Dartmouth faculty Michigan State University faculty University of Chicago faculty Northwestern University faculty University of Southern California faculty English sceptics Recipients of the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art English expatriates in the United States Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2024 Use British English from September 2012 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 03:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stephen Toulmin 24 languages Add topic

