Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Function 2 History 3 IDAN 4 DAN America 5 DAN Asia-Pacific Toggle DAN Asia-Pacific subsection 5.1 Services 5.1.1 Medical hotlines 5.1.2 Medical advice 5.1.3 Insurance cover 5.1.4 Training 5.2 Membership 5.3 Research 6 DAN Brasil 7 DAN Europe Toggle DAN Europe subsection 7.1 Services 7.1.1 Medical hotline 7.1.2 Medical advice 7.1.3 Insurance cover 7.1.4 Technical 7.1.5 Training 7.2 Membership 7.3 Research 8 DAN Japan 9 DAN Southern Africa Toggle DAN Southern Africa subsection 9.1 Timeline 9.2 Services 9.2.1 Medical hotline 9.2.2 Medical advice 9.2.3 Legal advice 9.2.4 Insurance cover 9.2.5 Technical 9.2.6 Training 9.3 Membership 9.4 Research 9.5 Alert diver (SA edition) 10 DAN World 11 Research Toggle Research subsection 11.1 Completed programs 11.2 Ongoing programs 11.3 Publications 12 Conferences Toggle Conferences subsection 12.1 Rebreather Forum 3 13 In media 14 See also 15 References 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Divers Alert Network 6 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά فارسی Français Italiano Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group for improving diving safety International Divers Alert Network Abbreviation IDAN Purpose Scuba diving safety Headquarters Durham, North Carolina Location 6 West Colony Place Durham, NC 27705 United States Region served Worldwide, in cooperation with associates.

DAN Asia Pacific DAN Brasil DAN Europe DAN Japan DAN Southern Africa Divers Alert Network (DAN) is a group of not-for-profit organizations dedicated to improving diving safety for all divers. It was founded in Durham, North Carolina, United States, in 1980 at Duke University providing 24/7 telephonic hot-line diving medical assistance. Since then the organization has expanded globally and now has independent regional organizations in North America , Europe , Japan , Asia-Pacific and Southern Africa .

[ 1 ] The DAN group of organizations provide similar services, some only to members, and others to any person on request. Member services usually include a diving accident hot-line, and diving accident and travel insurance. Services to the general public usually include diving medical advice and training in first aid for diving accidents. DAN America and DAN Europe maintain databases on diving accidents, treatment and fatalities, and crowd-sourced databases on dive profiles uploaded by volunteers which are used for ongoing research programmes. They publish research results and collaborate with other organizations on projects of common interest.

Function [ edit ] DAN has an international network of emergency call centers which operate 24 hours a day to provide members with specialized assistance for diving emergencies from a group of experts in Diving and Hyperbaric Medicine [ 2 ] History [ edit ] In 1977, Undersea Medical Society (later the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society ) introduced the concept of a national organization (to replace LEO-FAST at Brooks Air Force Base , directed by Colonel Jefferson Davis, M.D.) where a diving medicine specialist could be contacted by telephone 24 hours a day.

Peter B. Bennett received a two-year grant from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in September 1980 to form the "National Diving Accident Network" at the Frank G. Hall Hyperbaric Center at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, North Carolina .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In 1981, DAN published its "Underwater Diving Accident Manual".

[ 5 ] The Hyperbaric Center received 305 calls for information and assistance. DAN implemented a medical/safety advisory telephone line to handle questions from recreational divers with non-emergency questions in 1982.

[ 3 ] This change was followed by a name change from "Diving Accident Network" to "Divers Alert Network" and hosted the first annual Diving Accident and Hyperbaric Treatment continuing medical education course at the Duke University Medical Center.

[ 3 ] In 1983 International Diving Assistance, later to become DAN Europe, was founded by Alessandro Marroni as a 24-hour per day diving emergency assistance service, set up as a membership organization, with specific insurance benefits since the start.

[ 6 ] In 1984, federal grant monies were decreased (50 percent in 1982 and then by 25 percent in 1983) and support now comes exclusively from divers and the diving industry.

[ 3 ] In 1985 DAN started a 'sponsor program' for clubs, stores and corporations, [ 3 ] In 1987 the Civil Alert Network (CAN) began assisting diving emergencies in Japan, under the guidance of prof. Yoshihiro Mano of the University of Tokyo Medical School.

[ 6 ] This would become DAN Japan. Also in 1987, DAN started the first dive accident insurance program for members. After the introduction of this program the membership numbers doubled to 32,000 in 1988.

[ 3 ] The IRS granted DAN its 501(c)(3) non-profit status in 1990.

[ 3 ] The organization continues to be associated with Duke University Medical Center, but moved its offices from the Frank G. Hall Labs to off campus office space. In 1991 DAN introduced its first training course 'Oxygen First aid Training Program' and DAN Travel Assist. In the same year the 'Flying After Diving' research trials began.

The need for an international organisation that would be available to all divers, wherever they dived around the world, became increasingly apparent and, during a meeting at DAN Headquarters in Durham, N.C., US, in February 1991, the process to form an International DAN was started. The four existing organisations decided to adopt the common name of DAN.

[ 6 ] and International DAN – also known as IDAN – was established to support the regional IDAN members -  DAN America, DAN Europe, DAN Japan, and DAN Asia-Pacific.

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] In 1992 Emergency medical evacuation, was added as a member benefit, and DAN was awarded the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society's Craig Hoffman Diving Safety Award in June of that year for its significant contributions to the health and safety of recreational divers.

[ 3 ] In September the first DAN Instructor Training Workshop was held, and the Oxygen First Aid Training program was introduced to Europe.

1993 saw DAN open an insurance company 'Accident General Insurance'.

Dan Asia Pacific was founded in 1994 under the name DAN Australia by Australian diver, John Lippmann OAM , after dual approaches from DAN America and John Williamson of the Australian Diver Emergency Service to "establish a DAN entity in the Asia-Pacific." [ 8 ] [ 9 ] DAN Southern Africa joined the IDAN in 1996 with Frans Cronjé, M.D. as CEO [ 6 ] By 1996 Oxygen First Aid Training was being taught in seven continents.

[ 3 ] DAN introduced other diving related first aid training courses – 'Oxygen first aid for aquatic emergencies' (1998), 'Remote Oxygen (REMO2) (1999), Hazardous Marine Life Injuries (2000), Automatic External Difibrillation (2001) and Advanced Oxygen Provider (2002).

[ 3 ] DAN moved to its new, permanent headquarters, the Peter B. Bennett Center.

[ 3 ] Bennett received the 2002 Diving Equipment and Marketing Association Reaching Out Award for his contribution to the dive industry and the Carolinas' Ernst and Young Entrepreneur of the Year 2002 award for contributions to business in the life sciences.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] He announced his retirement as DAN President effective June 30, 2003 [ 10 ] After Bennett resigned as DAN President and CEO, DAN Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer Dan Orr, MS was named acting president and CEO.

[ 3 ] DAN established the Peter B. Bennett Research Fund, within the Endowment Fund to support research initiatives, enhancing dive safety into the future.

[ 11 ] In 2004, Michael D. Curley, Ph.D. was named DAN America President and CEO.

[ 12 ] In 2006, Curley stepped down and Mr. Orr was named as the DAN President and CEO. In February 2009, DAN launched a web site for their bi-monthly magazine " Alert Diver Online".

[ 13 ] DAN reported  membership numbers worldwide for 2019 as: DAN US/Canada, 274,708; DAN Europe, 123,680; DAN Japan, 18,137; DAN World Asia Pacific, 12,163; DAN World Latin America/Brazil, 8,008; DAN Southern Africa, 5,894.

[ 14 ] IDAN [ edit ] International DAN (IDAN) comprises independently administered nonprofit DAN organizations based around the world that provide expert emergency medical and referral services to regional diving communities. Each DAN depends on the support of the divers of its region to provide its safety and educational services, and may provide locally appropriate insurance options. They operate under protocol standards set by the IDAN Headquarters.

[ 7 ] DAN (America) serves as the headquarters for IDAN.

[ 7 ] DAN America [ edit ] Divers Alert Network America Abbreviation DAN America Formation 1980 ( 1980 ) Type NGO Legal status 501(c)(3) association Purpose Scuba diving safety Headquarters Durham, North Carolina Location 6 West Colony Place Durham, NC 27705 United States Region served United States & Canada Membership > 230,000 (Feb. 2016) President/CEO Bill Ziefle Main organ Board Of Directors Subsidiaries DAN Asia Pacific DAN Europe DAN Japan DAN Southern Africa Website www .dan .org Formerly called National Diving Accident Network Divers Alert Network America , DAN America , or just DAN is a non-profit 501(c)(3) organization devoted to assisting divers in need. It is supported by donations , grants , and membership dues. Its research department conducts medical research on recreational scuba diving safety while its medical department helps divers to find answers to their diving medical questions.
Regions of coverage include the United States and Canada.

[ 7 ] DAN Asia-Pacific [ edit ] Divers Alert Network Asia-Pacific Abbreviation DAN Asia-Pacific Purpose Scuba diving safety Headquarters 49A Karnak Road, Ashburton, 3147 Location Victoria, Australia Region served Australia, China, India, Korea, New Zealand, the South Pacific, Southeast Asia and Taiwan Membership 10,561 (June 2014) Divers Alert Network Asia Pacific Limited (DAN Asia Pacific) is a diving safety organization founded in 1994 and has not-for-profit incorporation in Australia as a public company limited by guarantee .

[ 15 ] The address for legal, operational and administrative purposes is 49A Karnak Road, Ashburton, Victoria , 3147, Australia.

[ 16 ] It previously traded under the following names - Divers Alert Network (DAN) S.E. Asia-Pacific Limited and DAN Australasia Limited.

[ 17 ] It is funded by membership subscriptions, insurance commissions, training courses, product sales and other undisclosed sources.

[ 18 ] Membership as of June 2014 totalled 10,561.

[ 18 ] Its region of operation includes Australia, China , India , Korea , New Zealand , the South Pacific , Southeast Asia and Taiwan .

[ 7 ] Services [ edit ] Medical hotlines [ edit ] DAN Asia Pacific promotes the use of 24-hour emergency hotline services in Australia, New Zealand and Korea.  It fully funds the operation of the Australian hotline, the Diving Emergency Service, which is based in the Hyperbaric Medical Unit at the Royal Adelaide Hospital in South Australia and which provides medical consultancy service for diving-related emergencies on a 24-hour basis within and outside of Australia.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Medical advice [ edit ] Insurance cover [ edit ] As of 2016, DAN Asia Pacific provides insurance cover for its members in Australia underwritten by Honan Insurance Group Pty Ltd and cover for its members residing outside of Australia underwritten by Accident & General Insurance Company, Ltd.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Training [ edit ] DAN Asia Pacific provides training and certification for divers, professional rescuers and the general public in respect to diving and general first aid.  It also trains and qualifies instructors to provide this training.  It has status in Australia as a registered provider of vocational education under the Australian government's Australian Qualifications Framework .

[ 24 ] As of 2016, it offers the following training courses including some which have national recognition in Australia: [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Oxygen for dive accidents Basic oxygen administration First aid programs Automated external defibrillators Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Anaphylaxis Advanced oxygen provision First aid for hazardous marine life injuries On-site neurological assessment Instructor training Membership [ edit ] DAN Asia Pacific offers the following membership classes: [ 28 ] individuals family Research [ edit ] Examples of DAN Asia Pacific research projects: [ 29 ] Reports on Australian diving deaths for the years 1972 to 2002 DAN Brasil [ edit ] Region of coverage is Brazil.

[ 7 ] DAN Europe [ edit ] Divers Alert Network Europe Abbreviation DAN Europe Formation 1983 ( 1983 ) Type NGO Legal status Not for profit European Foundation Purpose Scuba diving safety Headquarters C. da Padune 11, Location 64026 Roseto Italy Region served Europe, Mediterranean, Middle East, Red Sea, Persian Gulf, north-east Africa Membership > 100,000 President and Chief Executive Prof. Alessandro Marroni. M.D.

Affiliations Founding member of International DAN Website www .daneurope .org /web /guest /home Formerly called International Diving Assistance (IDA) Divers Alert Network Europe (DAN Europe) is an international non-profit medical and research organization founded in 1983.

[ 30 ] The legal address is 26, Triq Fidiel Zarb, Gharghur NXR07, Malta, but the operational and administrative address is C. da Padune 11, 64026 Roseto Italy [ 31 ] The Foundation is primarily funded through the membership fees paid annually by individual supporters, and also through contributions by public or private individuals or organisations, through the sale of goods and services related to its statutory activities, and fund raising schemes, subsidies or sponsorships in order to finance specific projects such as medical and scientific research.

[ 31 ] Membership (Feb. 2016) exceeds 100,000.

[ 30 ] Region of coverage includes geographical Europe, other countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea, the countries on the shores of the Red Sea, the Middle East including the Persian Gulf, the countries on the shores of the Indian Ocean north of the equator and west of (not including) India and Sri Lanka, and their overseas territories, districts and protectorates.

[ 7 ] Services [ edit ] DAN Europe provides expert information and advice for the benefit of its members and the diving public, including: [ 30 ] emergency medical advice and assistance for underwater diving injuries.

promoting diving safety underwater diving research and education providing information on issues of common concern to the diving public Medical hotline [ edit ] DAN Europe provides its members with medical assistance in case of a diving emergency, 24/7 and from anywhere in the world.

[ 32 ] There is an international line for use when the member is abroad, and each country has a national emergency number.

[ 32 ] When the emergency is in the diver's country of residence, the national hotline is used and the case is managed locally from the national center, according to Standard DAN Europe protocol.

[ 32 ] When the emergency occurs outside of the diver's country of residence. the  central DAN Europe hotline is used. A diver who calls from abroad is normally put into contact with a DAN specialist of the same language as the victim, so that the case may be evaluated without language difficulties.

[ 32 ] If the accident occurred in an area where a national DAN centre exists, the local centre will manage the emergency in coordination with the Rome centre and the specialist from the victim's home country.

[ 32 ] If the accident occurred in a country without a national DAN centre, the intervention will be managed directly by the central DAN Europe hotline.

[ 32 ] Medical advice [ edit ] For non-urgent diving medical information DAN Europe has a number of articles on the website, an FAQ page, and if the information needed was not available from those resources, there is an email form to request information. Specialised medical advice is reserved to active DAN Members.

[ 33 ] Insurance cover [ edit ] DAN Europe provides insurance cover for members underwritten by International Diving Assurance.

[ 34 ] Technical [ edit ] Since 1997 the Recompression Chamber Assistance and Partnership Program has been available to provide recompression chambers operators with equipment, training and emergency assistance, to help ensure that they are available, in good condition and safe when needed.

[ 35 ] Training [ edit ] DAN Europe provides training and certification for divers professional rescuers and the general public and in aspects of first aid, and trains instructors to provide this training.

[ 36 ] Courses available include: [ 36 ] Oxygen First Aid for Scuba Diving Injuries Advanced Oxygen First Aid for Scuba Diving Injuries First Aid for Hazardous Marine Life Injures Automated External Defibrillation Basic Life Support First Aid Oxygen first aid for aquatic emergencies On-Site Neurological Assessment for Divers Medical Oxygen Rebreather Dive Medicine for Divers Paediatric Basic Life Support Diving Medical Technician Instructor Qualification Course Membership [ edit ] Membership classes of DAN Europe include: [ 31 ] ordinary members supporting members promoting members honorary members Research [ edit ] Examples of DAN Europe research projects: [ 37 ] Gathering data on circulating gas bubbles and analysing the data.

"The economy of decompression": Optimization of ascent profiles.

Investigating the causes of unexplained diving incidents.

Stress in recreational diving.

Risk of decompression illness relating to patent foramen ovale.

Managing asthma and diabetes in diving.

Physiology and pathophysiology of breath-hold in adults and children.

Hypothermia and diving.

Headache and diving.

Blood changes associated with diving.

Decompression sickness risk when travelling by air after diving.

Physiological effects of rebreather diving.

Effects of decompression stress on endothelial stem cells and blood cells.

Early biomarkers for decompression stress.

The effects of normobaric oxygen on blood and in first aid for decompression illness.

DAN Japan [ edit ] Region of coverage includes Japan, Japanese islands and related territories, with regional IDAN responsibility for Northeast Asia-Pacific.

[ 7 ] DAN Southern Africa [ edit ] Divers Alert Network Southern Africa Abbreviation DAN SA Formation 17 January 1997 ( 1997-01-17 ) Type NGO Legal status Section 21 not for profit company Purpose Scuba diving safety Headquarters Midrand , Gauteng, South Africa Location Rosen Office Park, DAN Building, Halfway Gardens, Midrand 1685 Region served Africa south of the equator and Indian Ocean islands Membership >5000 (October 2018) CEO Mr Morne Christou Main organ Board Of Directors Staff Five full time staff, twelve on-call diving doctors Website www .dansa .org Divers Alert Network Southern Africa is a Public Benefit Organization with the primary purpose to provide emergency medical advice and assistance for underwater diving injuries, to work to prevent injuries and to promote dive safety.

DAN SA also promotes and supports research and education relating to the improvement of dive safety, medical treatment and first aid, and provides information on dive safety, diving physiology and diving medical issues of common concern to the diving public. Legal advice relating to diving matters is also available. The organisation is funded by membership fees, training fees, donations and the sale of branded first aid, safety and promotional products.

[ citation needed ] Regions of coverage include South Africa, Angola, Botswana, Comoros, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Seychelles, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zaire, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

[ 7 ] Timeline [ edit ] 1996: DAN SA was founded and recognized as a valid membership organisation by International Divers Alert Network.

[ 38 ] 1997: DAN SA was registered as a Section 21 not for profit organisation .

[ 38 ] Services [ edit ] Medical hotline [ edit ] DAN South Africa provides emergency hotline for diving and evacuation emergencies. Response staff and diving medicine specialists are on call 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, to provide information and assist with care coordination and evacuation assistance. A toll-free 0800 number is available for calls from within South Africa, and an international number for calls from outside South Africa which is not toll-free.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Medical advice [ edit ] DAN SA also provides a diving medical information service. During business hours this can be accessed by telephone or e-mail. Other related information is available from a FAQ and articles on the website. They are linked to the South African Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Association (SAUHMA) diving medical practitioner database, and maintain an international list of diving medical practitioners for referral.

[ 39 ] Legal advice [ edit ] DAN has access to legal professionals with an interest in diving and who are experienced in local, regional and international law. Members who are in need of legal assistance can contact DAN via email. DAN staff will consider requests and, if appropriate, refer the member to an appropriate legal expert within the network, who will make appropriate suggestions to the member on how best to represent or defend their interests.

[ 42 ] Insurance cover [ edit ] DAN SA is not an insurance company. It has a group insurance policy from AIG South Africa which allows it to extend emergency cover to members for specific diving, travel and medical emergencies. Cover is limited according to membership level.

[ 38 ] Cover includes: [ 38 ] Medical expenses for treatment of injuries which occur in the water and are a direct consequence of diving or snorkelling activities.

Emergency medical expenses while travelling outside country of residence.

Evacuation costs to nearest appropriate medical treatment facilities for incidents in categories above.

Technical [ edit ] A joint project of DAN SA and Subaquatic Safety Services (SSS) Network established the Zanzibar Hyperbaric Chamber, which is the only publicly available hyperbaric facility in East Africa.

[ 43 ] Training [ edit ] DAN SA provides training and certification for divers in aspects of diving first aid, and trains instructors to provide this training.

Courses available include: [ 44 ] Oxygen First Aid for Scuba Diving Injuries Advanced Oxygen First Aid for Scuba Diving Injuries First Aid for Hazardous Marine Life Injures Automated External Defibrillators for Scuba Diving Basic Life Support DAN First Aid On-Site Neurological Assessment for Divers Diving Medicine for Divers Diving Emergency Management Provider (DEMP) Programme: This is a package of: Oxygen First Aid for Scuba Diving Injuries Advanced Oxygen First Aid for Scuba Diving Injuries Automated External Defibrillators for Scuba Diving First Aid for Hazardous Marine Life Injuries The Diving Emergency Specialist Instructor Qualification Course Instructor Trainer Workshop Membership [ edit ] Several options for membership of DAN SA are available: [ 45 ] Annual membership for individual divers and immediate family members Temporary membership for short duration trips Student membership for entry-level students Commercial membership for commercial divers and diving contractors Industry partner for dive businesses Diving safety partners for dive businesses Research [ edit ] DAN SA cooperates with DAN Europe and the University of Stellenbosch in gathering crowdsourced data for decompression and other diving physiology and medicine, and diving accident research projects. Most of these are long term projects, but annual statistical reports are published, and contributing divers can get immediate feedback on relative risk of their uploaded dive profiles.

[ 46 ] Alert diver (SA edition) [ edit ] The Alert Diver is a magazine containing information on dive medicine, the latest DAN statistics, and research, safety and training advice by DAN staff. It is published twice-yearly in paper and digital versions. Non-members can download the digital version of the Alert Diver for a nominal fee.

[ 47 ] DAN World [ edit ] Regions of coverage include the Bahamas, British and U.S. Virgin Islands, Caribbean, Central and South America, Guam, Micronesia and Melanesia (except Fiji), Puerto Rico, and any other places not covered by the regional organisations.

[ 7 ] Research [ edit ] Completed programs [ edit ] Flying After Recompression Treatment Study. Online survey of divers in 2003 who were recompressed for decompression illness within the previous five years and then flew in an airplane. The study was published in the Management of Mild or Marginal Decompression Illness in Remote Locations Workshop Proceedings.

[ 48 ] Diabetes & Diving. Two studies were made on recreational diving by persons with diabetes who showed good general blood glucose control prior to entry to the study. The first followed adults with diabetes who were previously certified to dive and the second studied teenagers with diabetes immediately following their certification training.

[ 48 ] US Navy Survey. DAN conducted a survey of recreational divers to obtain information about diver demographics, dive experience and diving habits on behalf of the US Navy in early 1998.

[ 48 ] Live-aboard Doppler. Researchers assessed the effects of age, gender and dive profiles on post-dive vascular bubble presence in volunteer participants during 1988/9 using Doppler monitoring devices.

[ 48 ] Aging Diver Study. Preliminary evaluation of the effects of age and associated medical conditions on dive style and dive outcome using PDE methodology.

[ 48 ] Breath-Hold Study. The effects of hyperventilation, work, breathing mixture and dive depth on immersed breath-hold duration were investigated to allow an increase in breath-hold time to a maximum safe level without excessive risk of loss of consciousness or functional incapacity due to hypocapnia, hypoxia or hypercapnia.

[ 48 ] Flying After Diving. DAN conducted human trials from 1993 to 1999 to investigate how long to wait after diving before flying for recreational divers with support from the US Navy.

[ 48 ] First Aid Oxygen Rebreather. Performance studies made on first- and second-generation closed-circuit oxygen rebreathing circuits developed for remote duty first aid applications confirmed effective performance in the second-generation device.

[ 48 ] Cialis™/Viagra™ and the Risk of Oxygen Toxicity. A rat model produced positive results of increased risk of oxygen toxicity risk using these drugs.

[ 48 ] Ongoing programs [ edit ] Flying After Diving Calibration Study. To find out how exercise affects the minimum safe waiting period before flying after diving.

[ 49 ] Risk/Benefit of PFO Closure. To find out if divers with PFO who underwent the closure procedure are better off than divers with PFO who continue diving without the closure.

[ 49 ] Sudafed and Risk of Oxygen Toxicity. This study uses an animal model to find out whether Sudafed increases the risk of oxygen toxicity.

[ 49 ] Extreme Diving Field Study. To analyse aspects of safety including decompression safety, physical fitness requirements and cardiovascular effects of extreme diving.

[ 49 ] Incidents and Accidents in Compressed Air Diving. DAN compiles case reports of diving incidents, injuries and fatalities in air, nitrox and mixed-gas diving and includes data from these reports in the DAN Annual Diving Report.

[ 49 ] Incidents and Accidents in Breath-Hold Diving. Both fatal and nonfatal cases are collected to identify risks and aid in public education. Data from case reports is included in the DAN Annual Diving Report.

[ 49 ] Project Dive Exploration (PDE). Dive profiles, diver characteristics and diver behaviour are uploaded by volunteers using the dive computer's dive log software and recorded for statistically accurate analysis. This is a prospective observational study of the demographics, medical history, depth-time exposure and medical outcome of a sample of the recreational diving population, with the intention of finding the incidence of decompression sickness in population subgroups and the relationship of DCS probability to depth-time profile and dive and diver characteristics. The data also provides an injury-free control population for comparison with DAN's injury and fatality data to identify possible risk factors associated with injury and death. The results of this study are likely to be useful in the development of future decompression models.

[ 49 ] Divers using one of many compatible dive computers may contribute their electronic dive log data to PDE.

DAN Membership Health Survey. To establish the prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors, diabetes and asthma, access to primary health care and the diving practices of DAN Members to help the diving community decide on preventive measures for injuries and fatalities.

[ 49 ] Database of Dive Exposure and Dive Outcomes. Data from the US Navy, Duke University, PDE, DAN Europe's Dive Safety Lab and the Institute of Nautical Archaeology are converted to a format which can be used as a reference database for calibration and evaluation of decompression algorithms.

[ 49 ] Diver Physical Fitness Study. Physical fitness of divers and the physical fitness required for typical diving activities will be assessed.

[ 49 ] Fatality Database. DAN collects data on diving fatalities of recreational divers in the US, Canada and diving destinations frequented by US and Canadian divers, compiles case reports, and includes the data in the DAN Annual Diving Report.

[ 49 ] Publications [ edit ] Further information: List of Divers Alert Network publications DAN publishes research results on a wide range of matters relating to diving safety and medicine and diving accident analysis, including annual reports on decompression illness and diving fatalities. Many are freely available on the internet.

[ citation needed ] The magazine "Alert Diver" is published by some of the regional branches, including the US, Europe, and Southern Africa, in paper and electronic formats. Although the different publications may occasionally reprint material from each other, they generally contain different content. Article topics generally include diving physiology, medicine, safety, and diving destinations.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Conferences [ edit ] Rebreather Forum 3 [ edit ] In May 2012, DAN along with the American Academy of Underwater Sciences and the Professional Association of Diving Instructors hosted the Rebreather Forum 3 (RF3) which was organised by Rosemary E Lunn. This three-day safety symposium was convened to address major issues surrounding rebreather technology, and its application in commercial, media, military, scientific, recreational and technical diving. Experts, manufactures, instructor trainers, training agencies and divers from all over the world discussed this technology and shared information. Associate Professor Simon J Mitchell chaired the final session at RF3 and, as a result, 16 key consensus statements were agreed and ratified by the global rebreather community.

[ 53 ] In media [ edit ] "The Mystery of the Bends," a 1992 episode of the PBS television series Return to the Sea , includes a profile of the Divers Alert Network.

See also [ edit ] Diving Diseases Research Centre Diving Medical Advisory Council – Independent organisation of diving medical specialists from Northern Europe European Underwater and Baromedical Society – Source of information for diving and hyperbaric medicine Rubicon Foundation – Non-profit organization for promoting research and information access for underwater diving Southern African Underwater and Hyperbaric Medical Association South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society – Publisher for diving and hyperbaric medicine and physiology References [ edit ] ^ Edmonds, Carl; Thomas, Bob; McKenzie, Bart; Pennefather, John (2015).

"Divers Alert Network" (PDF) .

Diving Medicine for Scuba Divers . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Emergency procedures" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe . Retrieved 21 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n "History of DAN" .

Divers Alert Network . Retrieved 10 August 2013 .

^ a b Bennett, PB (2008).

To the Very Depths: A Memoir of Professor Peter B Bennett, Ph.D . Best Publishing Company. p. 229 pages.

ISBN 978-1-930536-47-0 .

^ Vann, Richard D. (2007).

"The History of Divers Alert Network (DAN) and DAN Research" .

In: Moon RE, Piantadosi CA, Camporesi EM (Eds.). Dr. Peter Bennett Symposium Proceedings. Held May 1, 2004. Durham, N.C . Divers Alert Network. Archived from the original on 13 January 2013 . Retrieved 15 January 2011 .

^ a b c d Staff.

"History of DAN" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe. Archived from the original on 25 January 2012 . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "International DAN" . DAN, Inc.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2016 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ Cefai, Mel (2013). "Celebrating John Lippmann".

Alert Diver Asia Pacific (September - December 2013): 34.

^ "Medal (OAM) of The Order of Australia in the General Division (Mr John Maxwell LIPPMANN)" (PDF) . Office of the Official Secretary to the Governor-General. 2007. p. 281 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "DAN Founder Retires amid controversy...and serious questions" . Undercurrent. January 2003 . Retrieved 31 March 2007 .

^ "DAN Establishes the Peter B. Bennett Research Fund" . Divers Alert Network. 27 January 2003 . Retrieved 24 September 2008 .

^ "DAN Announces New Board of Directors for 2004-2005" . Divers Alert Network. 16 July 2004 . Retrieved 24 September 2008 .

^ " Alert Diver Online" . Divers Alert Network . Retrieved 19 March 2009 .

^ Sadler, Charlotte; Alvarez Villela, Miguel; Van Hoesen, Karen; Grover, Ian; Lang, Michael; Neuman, Tom; Lindholm, Peter (30 September 2020).

"Diving after SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) infection: Fitness to dive assessment and medical guidance" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

50 (3): 278– 287.

doi : 10.28920/dhm50.3.278-287 .

PMC 7755459 .

PMID 32957131 .

^ "Divers Alert Network (DAN) Asia-Pacific Limited ACN 066 827 129" . Australian Securities & Investments Commission . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "Contact DAN Asia-Pacific" . DAN Asia-Pacific . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "Historical details for ABN 67 066 827 129" . Australian Business Register, Australian Government . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ a b "DAN Asia-Pacific Financials" . DAN Asia-Pacific . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "Divers Emergency Service" .

Royal Adelaide Hospital . Archived from the original on 11 March 2004 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "DAN 24-hour emergency hotline numbers" . DAN Asia Pacific . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ "The DAN AP Diving Emergency Service (DES) Hotline" . DAN Asia-Pacific . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ "DAN dive injury insurance - (for residents of Australia)" . DAN Asia Pacific . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ "DAN – Asia Pacific diving accident insurance plans" (PDF) . DAN Asia Pacific . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ "4659 - Divers Alert Network (DAN) Asia-Pacific Limited" . National Register on Vocational Education and Training, Australian government . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "DAN Asia-Pacific nationally recognised courses" . DAN Asia-Pacific. Archived from the original on 2 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "Other DAN courses – not nationally recognised" . DAN Asia-Pacific. Archived from the original on 2 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "DAN instructor courses" . DAN Asia-Pacific. Archived from the original on 2 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 February 2016 .

^ "Application for DAN Membership" . DAN Asia-Pacific. Archived from the original on 2 March 2016 . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ "DAN Research" . DAN Asia Pacific . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

^ a b c Staff.

"Mission and vision" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ a b c Staff.

"Statute and By-laws" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network, Europe . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e f Staff.

"Emergencies" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Send DAN an e-mail" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Membership Benefits" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"RCAPP" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ a b Staff.

"Training Programs" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Our Projects" .

DAN Europe website . Divers Alert Network Europe. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016 . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

^ a b c d Staff (2006).

DAN Southern Africa newsletter (1st quarter ed.). DAN Southern Africa.

^ a b Staff.

"DAN Medical Information" . Divers Alert Network Southern Africa . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Diving (SCUBA) Emergency Contacts" .

emedicinehealth . emedicinehealth.com . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Johnson, Chris; Anderson, Sarah R.; Dallimore, Jon; Winser, Shane; Warrell, David; Imray, Chris; Moore, James (21 May 2015). "24 - Underwater".

Oxford Handbook of Expedition and Wilderness Medicine (revised second ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 742.

ISBN 9780191066825 .

^ Staff.

"Legal Network" .

DAN-SA website . Diving Alert Network Southern Africa . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Chambers and Medical Clinics - Zanzibar, Tanzania" .

Subaquatic Safety Services Network website . Subaquatic Safety Services . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Training - Courses" .

DAN SA website . Divers Alart Network Southern Africa . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Membership" .

DAN SA website . Divers Alert Network Southern Africa . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Research - Partnering with the University of Stellenbosch" .

DAN SA Website . Divers Alert Network Southern Africa . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Alert Diver" .

DAN SA website . Diving Accident Network Southern Africa . Retrieved 16 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Staff.

"Completed Projects & Studies" .

DAN SA website . DAN Southern Africa . Retrieved 17 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Staff.

"Projects & Studies" .

DAN SA website . DAN Southern Africa . Retrieved 17 February 2016 .

^ "Alert Diver Magazine" .

www.dansa.org . Retrieved 3 March 2024 .

^ "DAN Europe Alert Diver" .

alertdiver.eu . Retrieved 3 March 2024 .

^ "Alert Diver online" .

dan.org . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ Vann, R.D.; Denoble, P.J.; Pollock, N.W., eds. (2014).

Rebreather Forum 3 Proceedings (PDF) . Durham, NC: AAUS/DAN/PADI.

ISBN 978-0-9800423-9-9 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2014 . Retrieved 26 February 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Divers Alert Network DAN on Facebook Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Rubicon Research Repository [ usurped ] DAN Asia-Pacific Office DAN Europe Office DAN Southern African Office South African Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society International DAN Website Return to the Sea Episode 203 "The Mystery of the Bends" at OceanArchives ( Fair use policy for video at OceanArchives ) v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International VIAF National United States NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐d6gpr
Cached time: 20250817073641
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.332 seconds
Real time usage: 1.562 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11861/1000000
Revision size: 51477/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 629881/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16379/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 215988/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.729/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19638721/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1149.885      1 -total
 35.53%  408.610      1 Template:Reflist
 23.79%  273.600     45 Template:Cite_web
 16.95%  194.855      5 Template:Infobox_organization
 15.76%  181.258      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 15.31%  176.103      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 15.28%  175.746      5 Template:Infobox
 10.77%  123.822      6 Template:Annotated_link
  8.22%   94.482     35 Template:Navbox
  6.09%   69.994      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8706128:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817073641 and revision id 1300929426. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Divers_Alert_Network&oldid=1300929426 " Categories : Underwater diving medicine organizations Underwater diving safety Underwater diver organizations Non-profit organizations based in North Carolina Organizations based in Durham, North Carolina Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 05:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Divers Alert Network 6 languages Add topic

