Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Academic career 3 Selected publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Martine Nida-Rümelin 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher (born 1957) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Martine Nida-Rümelin" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Martine Nida-Rümelin (born 1957) is a German philosopher .

Biography [ edit ] Nida-Rümelin studied philosophy , psychology , mathematics , and political science at the University of Munich .

In her doctoral thesis, she discusses the knowledge argument by the Australian philosopher Frank Jackson , which is directed against a materialist conception of phenomenal consciousness. In it she presents a key argument based on qualia - that is, individual instances of subjective, conscious experience.

Her transformed version of the Mary's room thought-experiment has been much discussed and coined the "Nida-Rümelin room" by John Perry .

[ 1 ] In her habilitation she developed a non- reductionist view about the identity of conscious individuals. In 2019, she won the Jean Nicod Prize .

[ 2 ] She is the daughter of the sculptor Rolf Nida-Rümelin , the granddaughter of the sculptor Wilhelm Nida-Rümelin and the sister of the philosopher and politician Julian Nida-Rümelin .

Academic career [ edit ] Since 1999, she has been a professor at the University of Fribourg in Switzerland. Her main areas of interest are philosophy of mind , theory of knowledge and philosophy of language . The major part of her published work is concerned with the special status of conscious individuals and aims at developing a non- materialist account which avoids the weaknesses of traditional dualism .

Phenomenal consciousness , identity of conscious beings through time and across possible worlds, and the active role of the subject in its doings are central themes of her research. Rational intuitions and phenomenological reflexion play a prominent role in her philosophical approach. Between 2019 and 2022 she was Visiting Professor at the University of Italian Switzerland .

[ 3 ] Nida-Rümelin defends a position she calls Subject-Body Dualism.

[ 4 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Farben und phänomenales Wissen.

Eine Kritik materialistischer Theorien des Geistes, Conceptus Sonderband, Academia, St. Augustin 1993.

Der besondere Status von Personen: Eine Anomalie für die Theorie praktischer Rationalität.

in: Julian Nida-Rümelin und Ulrike Wessels (Hg.): Praktische Rationalität, de Gruyter, Berlin, 1993, S.143-166.

Was Mary nicht wissen konnte. Phänomenale Zustände als Gegenstand von Überzeugungen.

In Thomas Metzinger (Hg.): Bewußtsein, Beiträge aus der Gegenwartsphilosophie, Schöningh, Paderborn, 1995, S.259-282.

Pseudonormal Vision and Color Qualia , in Stuart Hameroff, Alfred Kaszniak und David Chalmers (Hg.) "Toward a Science of Consciousness III, The Third Tucson Discussions and Debates", MIT Press, 1999, S.75-84.

Grasping Phenomenal Properties , in Torin Alter & Sven Walter (Hrg.), Phenomenal Belief and Phenomenal Concepts, Oxford University Press, 2004.

Der Blick von innen. Zur transtemporalen Identität bewusstseinsfähiger Wesen.

Suhrkamp, Frankfurt am Main, 2006.

Dualist Emergentism , in Jonathan Cohen & Brian McLaughlin, Contemporary Debates in Philosophy of Mind, Blackwell Publishing.

Die Person als Autor ihres Tuns. Bemerkungen zur Deutung neurobiologischer Daten , in Adrian Holderegger u.a. (ed.), Hirnforschung und Menschenbild, Fribourg Academic Press, 2008.

The conceptual origin of subject body dualism , in Annalisa Colliva (ed.), Self and Self-Knowledge, Oxford University Press.

References [ edit ] ^ Perry, John, Knowledge, Possibility, and Consciousness , Jean Nicod Lectures, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT, 2003.

^ "M. NIDA-RÜMELIN (2019)" .

Institut Jean Nicod . Retrieved 2021-08-16 .

^ "Professors" .

usi.ch - Master in Philosophy . 2020 . Retrieved November 11, 2020 .

^ Ludwig, Kirk (2013). "The Argument for Subject-Body Dualism from Transtemporal Identity".

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

86 (3): 684– 701.

JSTOR 42000335 .

External links [ edit ] Literature by and about Martine Nida-Rümelin in the German National Library catalogue Martine Nida-Rümelin auf der Website Universität Freiburg v t e Mind–body dualism Types Cartesian dualism Emergent dualism Non-Cartesian dualism Predicate dualism Property dualism Substance dualism Thomistic dualism Dualists Robert F. Almeder Mario Beauregard Frank B. Dilley John Beloff René Descartes Michael Egnor C. Stephen Evans Edward Feser Richard Fumerton Brie Gertler Stewart Goetz W. D. Hart William Hasker Michael Huemer Edward Francis Kelly Charles Landesman E. J. Lowe David. H. Lund Geoffrey Madell J. P. Moreland Denyse O'Leary Martine Nida-Rümelin Scott B. Rae Daniel N. Robinson Howard D. Roelofs Howard Robinson Jeffrey M. Schwartz Richard Swinburne Charles Taliaferro William Homan Thorpe Peter Unger Keith Yandell Dean Zimmerman Related Cartesianism Dualism (Indian philosophy) Interactionism Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Academics MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martine_Nida-Rümelin&oldid=1283303381 " Categories : 20th-century German philosophers 20th-century German women 21st-century German philosophers 1957 births Academic staff of the University of Fribourg Dualists German philosophers of language German philosophers of mind German women philosophers Jean Nicod Prize laureates Living people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from January 2023 All BLP articles lacking sources This page was last edited on 31 March 2025, at 17:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Martine Nida-Rümelin 1 language Add topic

