Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Surveying 3 Mathematics and physics 4 Other works 5 Death 6 Legacy 7 Works 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Willebrord Snellius 43 languages Afrikaans العربية تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Limburgs Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch astronomer and mathematician (1580-1626) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( July 2025 ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Dutch .

(August 2021) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Dutch article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Dutch Wikipedia article at [[:nl:Willebrord Snel van Royen]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|nl|Willebrord Snel van Royen}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Willebrord Snellius Willebrord Snel van Royen (1580–1626) Born 13 June 1580 Leiden , Dutch Republic Died 30 October 1626 (1626-10-30) (aged 46) Leiden , Dutch Republic Nationality Dutch Alma mater University of Leiden Known for Snell's law , Snellius's triangulation , Snellius–Pothenot problem Scientific career Fields Astronomy and mathematics Institutions University of Leiden Academic advisors Ludolph van Ceulen Rudolph Snellius Notable students Jacobus Golius Willebrord Snellius [ 1 ] [ 2 ] (born Willebrord Snel van Royen [ 3 ] (13 June 1580 [ 4 ] – 30 October 1626), commonly known simply as Snellius and Snell , was a Dutch astronomer and mathematician .

Snell is best known for the law of refraction of light known as Snell's law , [ 5 ] his pioneering work in survey known as Snellius's triangulation , and the Snellius–Pothenot problem , a means in planar trigonometry of finding an unknown point from known ones.

Early life [ edit ] Willebrord Snellius was born in Leiden , Netherlands . In 1613 he succeeded his father, Rudolph Snel van Royen (1546–1613) as professor of mathematics at the University of Leiden .

[ 6 ] Surveying [ edit ] See also: Triangulation (surveying) § Willebrord Snell Quadrant of Snellius, Museum Boerhaave , Leiden Snellius's Triangulation (1615) Commemorative plaque on Snellius's house in Leiden In 1615, Snellius, became the first known surveyor since Eratosthenes in 3rd century BC Ptolemaic Egypt to use triangulation to make a large-scale arc measurement to determine the Earth's circumference .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In his work The terrae Ambitus vera quantitate (1617) under the author's name ("The Dutch Eratosthenes") Snellius describes achieving his result by calculating the distances between a number of high points in the plain west and southwest of the Netherlands using triangulation . By necessity Snellius's high points were nearly all church spires , virtually the only tall buildings at that time in the west of the Netherlands. More or less ordered from north to south and/or in successive order of measuring, Snellius used a network of fourteen measure points to make a total of 53 triangulation measurements.

These cities were: Alkmaar : St. Laurenskerk ; Haarlem : Sint-Bavokerk ; Leiden : a then new part (built in 1599) of the city walls ; [ 9 ] The Hague : Sint-Jacobskerk ; Amsterdam : Oude Kerk ; Utrecht : Cathedral of Utrecht ; Zaltbommel : Sint-Maartenskerk [ nl ; de ] ; Gouda : Sint Janskerk ; Oudewater : Sint-Michaelskerk [ nl ] ; Rotterdam : Sint-Laurenskerk ; Dordrecht : Grote Kerk ; Willemstad : Koepelkerk [ nl ; de ] ; Bergen-op-Zoom : Gertrudiskerk ; Breda : Grote Kerk .

Snellius was helped in measuring by two of his students, the Austrian barons Erasmus and Casparus Sterrenberg. In several cities he also received support of friends among the civic leaders ( regenten ).

[ citation needed ] In order to carry out these measurements accurately Snellius had a large quadrant built, with which he could accurately measure angles in tenths of degrees. This instrument can still be seen in the Museum Boerhaave in Leiden. In his calculations Snellius made use of a solution for what is now called the Snellius–Pothenot problem .

He came up with an estimate of 28,500 Rhineland rods – in modern units 107.37 km [ 10 ] for one degree of latitude . 360 times 107.37 then gives a circumference of the Earth of 38,653 km. The actual circumference is 40,075 kilometers, making Snellius' estimate 3.5% low.

Mathematics and physics [ edit ] Snellius was also a distinguished mathematician, producing a new method for calculating π —the first such improvement since ancient times. He discovered the law of refraction in 1621.

[ 11 ] Other works [ edit ] Cyclometricus , 1621 In addition to the Eratosthenes Batavus , he published Cyclometricus, de circuli dimensione (1621), and Tiphys Batavus (1624). He also edited Coeli et siderum in eo errantium observationes Hassiacae (1618), containing the astronomical observations of Landgrave William IV of Hesse . A work on trigonometry ( Doctrina triangulorum ) authored by Snellius was published a year after his death.

[ 6 ] Death [ edit ] Coeli et siderum in eo errantium observationes Hassicae , 1618 Snellius died in Leiden in October 1626, at the age of 46 from an illness diagnosed as colic .

[ 12 ] His grave can be seen in the Pieterskerk, Leiden .

Legacy [ edit ] Snellius Glacier in Antarctica is named after Willebrord Snellius.

The lunar crater Snellius is named after Willebrord Snellius.

The Royal Netherlands Navy has named three survey ships after Snellius, including a currently-serving vessel .

Works [ edit ] Eratosthenes Batavus (in Latin). Lugduni Batavorum: Joost van Colster, Joris Abrahamsz van der Marsce. 1617.

Coeli et siderum in eo errantium observationes Hassicae (in Latin). Lugduni Batauorum: Joost van Colster. 1618.

Cyclometricus (in Latin). Lugduni Batavorum: Matthijs Elzevier, Bonaventura Elzevier. 1621.

Doctrinae triangulorum canonicae libri quatuor (in Latin). Lugduni Batavorum: Joannes Maire. 1627.

See also [ edit ] Area of a circle – Concept in geometry Notes [ edit ] ^ Willebrord Snellius at the Leiden Digital Family Tree.

^ Eerste Nederlandse Systematisch Ingerichte Encyclopaedie ^ Encarta Winkler Prins, Grote Oosthoek , Eerste Nederlandse Systematisch Ingerichte Encyclopaedie ^ Sometimes mistakenly noted as 1590 or 1591; Cf.

P.C. Molhuysen ; P.J. Blok , eds. (1927).

"Snellius, Willebrord" .

Nieuw Nederlandsch biografisch woordenboek . Leiden.

.

^ For a reconstruction of this discovery see Hentschel 2001 . It is now known that this law was already known to Ibn Sahl in 984. The same law was also investigated by Ptolemy and in the Middle Ages by Witelo , but due to lack of adequate mathematical instruments (i.e. trigonometric functions) their results were saved as tables, not functions.

^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ Haasbroek, N.D. (1968): Gemma Frisius, Tycho Brahe and Snellius and their triangulation. Publ. Netherl. Geod. Comm., Delft.

[1] ^ Torge, W.; Müller, J. (2012).

Geodesy . De Gruyter Textbook. De Gruyter. p. 5.

ISBN 978-3-11-025000-8 . Retrieved 2 May 2021 .

^ the tower of the Sint-Pieterskerk had collapsed in 1512 ^ a Rhenish rod is in this calculation considered as 3.767358 meter ^ "Snellius biographies" (PDF) , dwc.knaw.nl , retrieved 15 August 2019 .

^ De Wreede, L. C. (2007). Willebrord Snellius (1580–1626): a humanist reshaping the mathematical sciences. Utrecht University References [ edit ] Willebrord Snellius (1580-1626): a humanist reshaping the mathematical sciences, thesis of Liesbeth de Wreede, Dissertation Utrecht 2007 N. Haasbroek: Gemma Frisius, Tycho Brahe and Snellius and their triangulations . Delft 1968.

Struik, Dirk Jan (1970–1980). "Snel, Willebrord".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. XII. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9 .

"Snellius (Willebrord)".

Nieuw Nederlandsch Biografisch Woordenboek . Vol. VII.

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Willebrord van Royen Snell" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Snell, Willebrord ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 293.

Klaus Hentschel : Das Brechungsgesetz in der Fassung von Snellius. Rekonstruktion seines Entdeckungspfades und eine Übersetzung seines lateinischen Manuskriptes sowie ergänzender Dokumente.

Archive for History of Exact Sciences 55,4 (2001), doi:10.1007/s004070000026.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Willebrord Snellius .

Willebrord Snellius at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Works by Willebrord Snellius at Open Library (in Latin) Works by or about Willebrord Snellius at the Internet Archive (in Latin) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Vatican Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Willebrord_Snellius&oldid=1304591584 " Categories : 17th-century Dutch mathematicians 1580 births 1626 deaths Burials at Pieterskerk, Leiden 17th-century Dutch astronomers Geodesists Academic staff of Leiden University Dutch mathematics educators Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from July 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from July 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Open Library links Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with Internet Archive links Use dmy dates from March 2016 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 00:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Willebrord Snellius 43 languages Add topic

