Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Grounds for a quiet title action or complaint 2 Limitations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Quiet title 1 language Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lawsuit over ownership of real property This article's lead section contains information that is not included elsewhere in the article .

If this information is appropriate for the lead, it should also be included in the article's body. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e An action to quiet title is a lawsuit brought in a court having jurisdiction over property disputes, in order to establish a party's title to real property , or personal property having a title, of against anyone and everyone, and thus "quiet" any challenges or claims to the title.

This legal action is "brought to remove a cloud on the title " so that plaintiff and those in privity with them may forever be free of claims against the property.

[ 1 ] The action to quiet title resembles other forms of "preventive adjudication," such as the declaratory judgment .

[ 2 ] This genre of lawsuit is also sometimes called either a try title , trespass to try title , or ejectment action "to recover possession of land wrongfully occupied by a defendant." [ 3 ] Grounds for a quiet title action or complaint [ edit ] It comprises a complaint that the ownership (title) of a parcel of land or other real property is defective in some fashion, typically where title to the property is ambiguous – for example, where it has been conveyed by a quitclaim deed through which the previous owner disclaims all interest, but does not promise that good title is conveyed. Such an action may also be brought to dispel a restraint on alienation or another party's claim of a nonpossessory interest in land , such as an easement by prescription.

Other typical grounds for complaint include: adverse possession where the new possessor sues to obtain title in his or her own name; fraudulent conveyance of a property, perhaps by a forged deed or under coercion ; Torrens title registration, an action which terminates all unrecorded claims; treaty disputes regarding the boundaries between nations; tax taking issues, where a municipality claims title in lieu of back taxes owed (or a subsequent purchaser of land at a tax sale files action to gain insurable title); boundary disputes between states, municipalities, or private parties; surveying errors competing claims by reverters , remainders , missing heirs and lien holders (often arising in basic foreclosure actions when satisfied liens are not properly discharged from title due to clerical or recording errors between the county clerk and the satisfied lien holder) Limitations [ edit ] Unlike acquisition through a deed of sale, a quiet title action will give the party seeking such relief no cause of action against previous owners of the property, unless the plaintiff in the quiet title action acquired its interest through a warranty deed and had to bring the action to settle defects that existed when the warranty deed was delivered.

Not all quiet title actions "clear title" completely. Some states have a quiet title action for the purpose of clearing a particular, known claim, title defect, or perceived defect. This is contrasted with title registration which settles all title issues, both known and unknown. Quiet title actions are always subject to attack and are particularly vulnerable to jurisdictional challenges, both subject matter and personal, even years after final court decree in the action. It usually takes 3–6 months depending on the state where it is done.

A quiet title action is also subject in many geographic jurisdictions to a statute of limitations . This limitations of action is often 10 or 20 years.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Title (property) References [ edit ] ^ Ballentine's Law Dictionary, p. 452.

^ Bray, Samuel L. (2010). "Preventive Adjudication".

University of Chicago Law Review .

77 : 1275.

SSRN 1483859 .

^ Answers.com .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quiet_title&oldid=1292721117 " Categories : Property law Real property law Lawsuits Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from October 2019 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from October 2019 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2007 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 12:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quiet title 1 language Add topic

