Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hiatus 2 Reunion 3 Discography Toggle Discography subsection 3.1 Studio albums 3.2 Compilation album 4 References Toggle the table of contents Tropical Depression (band) 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Filipino reggae band Tropical Depression Origin Philippines Genres Reggae , reggaeton Years active 1987–present Members Bonglennon Eudela Pex Holigores TJ Espinola Macky dela Cuesta Cholo Famisan Bunny Liwanag Jaydee Abugan Past members Dominic "Papadom" Gamboa Lito Crisostomo Mike Llacar Lala Lejeune Arlene Empalmado Anabel Bosch Brutus Lacano Ryan Locsin Jun Lazo Omnie Saroca Pio Valdez Jacob Sawyer JR Oca Burn Belacho Boogs Villareal Jerros Dolino Jo Staples Tropical Depression is a Filipino reggae band formed in 1987 by vocalist and guitarist Dominic "Papadom" Gamboa (1965-2013) and guitarist Lawrence "Bonglennon" Eudela. The band went into the mainstream in 1990. Aside from Gamboa and Eudela, the band's notable line-up was composed of guitarist Lito Crisostomo, bassist Pex Holigores, keyboardists TJ Espinola and Mike Llacar, back-up vocalists Arlene Empalmado and Lala Lejeune, and drummer Brutus Lacano.

The band was one of the several bands who spearheaded the 1990s Pinoy rock explosion and popularized the songs "Kapayapaan", "Bilog Na Naman ang Buwan" and "Alaala".

Hiatus [ edit ] The group went into hiatus in 2013 following the death of original lead vocalist Dominic Gamboa. Gamboa died a day before his 48th birthday in December 2013. The wake of his burial was held private as per his family's request. The cause of death was said to be due to kidney failure .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] On February 12, 2016, Gamboa's widow Maria Amparo Concepcion "Teng" Santaromana-Gamboa, 50, was found dead with a gunshot wound in the head along Kalayaan Avenue, Makati . Santaromana-Gamboa, who worked in a business process outsourcing company in Makati, was believed to be killed minutes after she left her office at 2:20 AM on February 10. She was declared missing the following day. Police said that prior to her death, Santaromana-Gamboa was able to send a text message to her son informing him that she was on her way home aboard a taxicab. The primary suspect Nitro "Zenki" Agustin Ison a.k.a. Ricky Ibatuan Ramos, a taxi driver, was arrested in April 2016. The motive of the killing was later identified to be a robbery. Ison was also charged with other criminal cases in connection with at least seven cases of car thefts, seven cases of robberies using stolen taxicabs, three homicide cases and at least three rape cases in Quezon City , Mandaluyong and other areas in southern Metro Manila.

[ 5 ] Reunion [ edit ] The group reunited in 2015 with a new line-up composed of original members Bonglennon Eudela (guitar), TJ Espinola (keyboards) and Pex Holigores (bass), Brutus Lacano (drums), together with new frontmen JR Oca (vocals) and Burn Belacho (vocals, guitars & hegalong).

2024–present lineup Bonglennon Eudela - guitars, vocals, arrangement Pex Holigores - bass, vocals TJ Espinola - keyboards Jaydee Abugan - drums Macky dela Cuesta - keyboards Cholo Miguel Famisan - vocals Bunny Liwanag - vocals Discography [ edit ] Studio albums [ edit ] Title Date of release (Philippines) Record label Kapayapaan 1994 Viva Records Aabot Din Tayo 2002 NEO Records Compilation album [ edit ] Alert Level - The Album - released in 1993 References [ edit ] ^ Mercado, Mara (December 18, 2013).

"Papadom of Tropical Depression dies" .

Rappler . Retrieved January 4, 2014 .

^ Policarpio, Allan (December 19, 2013).

"Papadom of Tropical Depression; 47" .

Philippine Daily Inquirer . Retrieved January 4, 2014 .

^ Blanco, Eunice (December 18, 2013).

"Tropical Depression frontman passes away" .

The Philippine Star . Retrieved January 4, 2014 .

^ Sallan, Edwin (December 18, 2013).

"Papadom of Tropical Depression passes away on eve of 48th birthday" .

InterAksyon.com . Archived from the original on December 22, 2013 . Retrieved January 4, 2014 .

^ Frialde, Mike (April 15, 2016).

"Suspect in murder of Reggae artist's wife arrested" .

Philstar.com . Retrieved January 19, 2022 .

Authority control databases : Artists MusicBrainz Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tropical_Depression_(band)&oldid=1296003932 " Categories : Musical groups established in 1987 Filipino reggae musical groups Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2019 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 05:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tropical Depression (band) 1 language Add topic

