Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 1.1 Mahayana sutras 1.2 Other literature 1.3 Archeology and art 1.4 Artistic depictions 2 Buddhist Maitreya beliefs Toggle Buddhist Maitreya beliefs subsection 2.1 Types of Maitreya myths 2.2 Future coming of Maitreya 2.3 Foretold biography 2.4 In Tushita heaven 2.5 Revelations and manifestations 3 Mantras and dharanis Toggle Mantras and dharanis subsection 3.1 Dharanis 4 Maitreya in East Asia Toggle Maitreya in East Asia subsection 4.1 Maitreya devotion 4.2 Maitreya teachings and millenarianism 4.3 Japanese Buddhism 5 Non-Buddhist views Toggle Non-Buddhist views subsection 5.1 Chinese salvationist religions 5.2 Theosophy and New Age 5.3 Post-theosophical movements 5.4 Ahmadiyya 5.5 Baháʼí Faith 6 Maitreya claimants 7 Gallery 8 See also 9 Notes 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Maitreya 64 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български བོད་ཡིག Буряад Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa ქართული Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Future Buddha in Buddhist eschatology This article is about the Buddhist Bodhisattva Maitreya. For other uses, see Maitreya (disambiguation) .

Maitreya Bodhisattva Maitreya from the second-century Gandharan art period Sanskrit मैत्रेय ( Maitreya ) Pāli मेत्तेय्य ( Metteyya ) Burmese အရိမေတ္တေယျမြတ်စွာဘုရား Chinese 彌勒菩薩 弥勒菩萨 ( Pinyin : Mílè Púsa ) English Buddha Mitry Japanese 弥勒如来 （ みろくにょらい ） ( romaji : Miroku Nyorai ) Karen မဲၣ်တယါ ဘူးဒး ( Mehtuhyah Boodah ) Khmer សិអារ្យមេត្រី, អរិយមេត្តយ្យ Korean 미륵보살 彌勒菩薩 ( RR : Mireuk Bosal ) Mongolian ᠮᠠᠢᠢᠳᠠᠷᠢ ᠠᠰᠠᠷᠠᠯᠲᠤ Shan ဢရီႉမိတ်ႈတေႇယႃႉ Sinhala මෛත්‍රී බුදුන් ( Maithri Budun ) Thai พระศรีอริยเมตไตรย ( RTGS : Phra Si Ariya Mettrai ) Tibetan བྱམས་པ་ ( Wylie : byams pa ) ( THL : Jampa ) བྱམས་པ་མགོན་པོ་ ( Wylie : byams pa'i mgon po ) ( THL : Jampé Gönpo ) Vietnamese Di lặc Bồ Tát Information Venerated by Mahayana , Theravada , Vajrayana Attributes Compassion and Kindness Preceded by Gautama Buddha Succeeded by Rama Buddha [ 1 ] Buddhism portal Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e Schist Greco-Buddhist statue of Maitreya, Gandhara , c.

3rd century Maitreya ( Sanskrit ) or Metteyya ( Pali ), is a bodhisattva who is regarded as the future Buddha of this world in all schools of Buddhism , prophesied to become Maitreya Buddha or Metteyya Buddha .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In some Buddhist literature , such as the Amitabha Sutra and the Lotus Sutra , he is also referred to as Ajitā (Invincible, Unconquerable). In Tibetan Buddhism he is known as the "Lord of Love" or the "Noble Loving One" ( Pakpa Jampa ).

[ 4 ] The root of his name is the Sanskrit word maitrī (Pali: metta ; meaning friendliness, loving-kindness). The name Maitreya is also related to the Indo-Iranian name Mitra .

[ 5 ] In Hinduism , Maitreya is prophesied to be the king of Shambala , [ 6 ] which is also the birthplace of the Kalki Avatar .

[ 7 ] In all branches of Buddhism, Maitreya is viewed as the direct successor of Gautama Buddha . As the fifth and final Buddha of the current kalpa (eon), Maitreya's teachings will be focused around re-establishing the Buddha's Dharma on Earth. According to scriptures, Maitreya's teachings will be similar to those of Gautama (Śākyamuni).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The arrival of Maitreya is prophesied to occur during an era of decline when the teachings of Gautama Buddha have been disregarded or obliviated.

Despite many religious figures and spiritual leaders claiming to be Maitreya throughout history, diverse Buddhist sects insist that these are false claims, while underscoring that Maitreya has yet to appear as a Buddha on the grounds that the Buddha's teachings have not been disregarded. Traditional Buddhists believe that Maitreya currently resides in Tushita heaven.

[ 10 ] However, Maitreya is not inaccessible, and various Buddhists throughout history have also claimed to have been visited by Maitreya, to have had visions of him, and to have received teachings by him. As such, Mahayana Buddhists traditionally consider Maitreya to be the founder of the Yogacara tradition through his revelation of various scriptures like the Mahāyānasūtrālamkārakā , and the Madhyāntavibhāga .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Sources [ edit ] 11th century Maitreya, Bihar, India The name Maitreya is derived from the Sanskrit word maitrī "friendship", which is in turn derived from the noun mitra , signifying "friend". The Pali form Metteyya is mentioned in the Cakkavatti-Sīhanāda Sutta ( Digha Nikaya 26) of the Pāli Canon , and also in chapter 28 of the Buddhavamsa .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Maitreya's prophecy also appears in other texts like the Māhavastu , Lalitavistara , the Mūlasarvāstivāda -vinaya and the Divyāvadāna .

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] Due to their similar names, some modern scholars like Przyluski , Lamotte and Levi have speculated that inspiration for Maitreya may have come from ancient Indo-Iranian deities like Mithra and the future Zoroastrian savior figure of the Saoshyant .

[ 15 ] [ 14 ] However, David Alan Scott points out numerous differences in their artistic portrayals (even in the same geographic region) and discrepancies which make this direct link unlikely. He specifically points out the very ancient Buddhist roots of Maitreya in the earliest Buddhist texts .

[ 14 ] Scott does point out that both deities are personifications of the virtue of friendship , so they do have that in common ( maitrī ).

[ 14 ] Mahayana sutras [ edit ] There are many Mahāyāna sūtras which describe and discuss the bodhisattva Maitreya. He appears as a supporting character in several important Mahāyāna sūtras such as the Lotus Sutra , Vimalakirti Sutra , the Golden Light , the King of Samadhis Sutra , and the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines .

[ 2 ] In the Gaṇḍavyūha Sutra meanwhile, Maitreya has an entire chapter in which he preaches the Dharma to the pilgrim Sudhana in one hundred and twenty one verses.

[ 16 ] Then Sudhana is allowed to enter Maitreya's palace (Vairocanakutalamkara-garbha), where he has a grand vision of the entirety of Maitreya's bodhisattva career.

[ 16 ] In addition, there are also several Mahāyāna sūtras which focus specifically on Maitreya, his teachings and future activity. Some key Maitreya sutras in the Chinese canon are the following: Sutra on the Descending Birth of Maitreya (T.453:421a:421a–423c), translated by Dharmarakṣa (230?–316); Sutra on the Descending Birth of Maitreya (T.454:423c– 425c), translated by Kumārajīva (344–413); Sutra on Maitreya Becoming Buddha (T.456:428b–434b), translated by Kumārajīva (344–413); The Great Vehicle Sūtra Called "Petitioned by Noble Maitreya" (ārya maitriya paripṛhccha nāma mahāyāna sūtra), translated by Bodhiruci Sutra on Maitreya's Descending Birth and Becoming Buddha (T.455:426a–428b), translated by Yijing (635– 713); Sutra on the Time of Maitreya's Arrival (T.457:434b–435a), translator unknown Sutra on the Visualization of Maitreya Bodhisattva's Ascending Birth in Tuṣita Heaven (T.452:418b–420c), translated by Juqu Jing- sheng (?–464) The Tibetan Buddhist canon meanwhile contains the following Maitreya sutras: Maitreya-mahāsiṃhanāda ( Great Lion's Roar of Maitreya) Maitreyaparipṛcchā ( Questions of Maitreya , Ratnakuta section) Maitreyaparipṛcchā­dharmāṣṭa ( Questions of Maitreya on eight dharmas ) Maitreyaparipṛcchā ( Questions of Maitreya, General sutra section) Maitreyaprasthāna ( Maitreya's Setting Out ) Maitreya-vyākaraṇa ( Prophecy of Maitreya ) Ārya-maitri-pratijñā-nāma-dhāraṇī Other literature [ edit ] Maitreya also appears in other literary works. The Maitreyasamitināṭaka was an extensive Buddhist play in pre-Islamic Central Asia (c. 8th century).

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The Maitreyavyakarana (a poem in śatakam form) in Central Asia and the Anagatavamsa of South India also mention him.

[ citation needed ] Archeology and art [ edit ] In the Greco-Buddhist art of Gandhara , in the first centuries CE in northern India, Maitreya was the most popular figure to be represented along with Gautama Buddha . Numerous sculptures of Maitreya have been found in Greater Gandhara from the Kushan Empire period (30–375 CE). He also appears in Mathura to a lesser extent.

[ 19 ] Maitreya is already depicted at Sanchi before the Kushan period. But art depicting him becomes much more numerous during the Kushan era, when his cult seems to have grown in popularity.

[ 19 ] In 4th- to 6th-century China, Buddhist artisans saw Shakyamuni and Maitreya as interchangeable, which indicates that the iconography of the two figures were not fully established at an early date.

[ 20 ] An example is the stone sculpture found in the Qingzhou cache dedicated to Maitreya in 529 CE as recorded in the inscription (currently in the Qingzhou Museum, Shandong ). The religious belief of Maitreya apparently developed around the same time as that of Amitābha , as early as the 3rd century CE.

[ 21 ] Artistic depictions [ edit ] Greco-Buddhist standing Maitreya Maitreya is often depicted standing or sitting on a throne. He is often represented as a northern Indian nobleman or prince with a full head of hair, fine flowing robes and jewels.

[ 22 ] Gandharan style images present him with a distinctive long hair loop folded at the top of the head.

[ 23 ] Maitreya is often depicted carrying a vase or bottle ( kamaṇḍalu ), an element which goes back to the Gandharan sculptures and which he shares with depictions of the deity Brahma (along with the hair loop).

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Because of this, some scholars argue that the water bottle and hair loop are symbols of his brahminical origins, and indeed, some stories depict Maitreya as being born to a Human family during his last life.

[ 23 ] Maitreya is also often shown in a heaven realm, indicating his current location (Tushita).

[ 23 ] In Indian symbolism, the kamaṇḍalu pot symbolizes immortality ( amrita ), fertility, life and wealth.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] In Buddhism, the similar pūrṇa- kumbha (full bottle) also symbolizes "auspicious abundance", wisdom, health, longevity, wealth, prosperity, and the Buddha's infinite quality of teaching the Dharma.

[ 26 ] In Tibetan Buddhism, it is termed a bumpa (wisdom urn, ritual vase).

Buddhist Maitreya beliefs [ edit ] Nepalese Maitreya sculpture, c. 11th century Types of Maitreya myths [ edit ] According to Jan Nattier , there are four main types of the Maitreya myth which we find throughout the history of Buddhism . The typology is based around when and how a devotee expected to encounter the figure of Maitreya: [ 27 ] Here/now: In this version, a devotee expected to meet Maitreya on earth, during their present lifetime.

Here/later: A devotee expected to meet Maitreya on earth at some point after their death, during a future lifetime, perhaps when Maitreya attains Buddhahood and founds a new community. This is the most common and standard myth in which Maitreya's enlightenment is a future event devotees hope to be present for.

There/now: In visionary forms of the Maitreya myth, devotees attempted to encounter Maitreya in a vision of his court in Tushita heaven, or to literally travel there by some means (e.g. the story of Asanga's encounter).

There/later: A common wish among Maitreya devotees was to be reborn in Maitreya's Tushita palace or "inner court", which is his current Pure land .

Future coming of Maitreya [ edit ] Sitting gilded bronze Maitreya, c. late 6th-early 7th century, National Museum of Korea Head of a Thai four armed Maitreya, Northeastern Thailand , second quarter of the 8th century In all Buddhist traditions, Maitreya is prophesied to be the next Buddha who will arise in this world. He will attain Buddhahood far in the future (5,670,000,000 years from now).

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Since attaining enlightenment is thought to be much more likely while studying under a living Buddha, many Buddhists have hoped to meet Maitreya and train under him. As Buddhist studies scholar Alan Spongberg writes, Maitreya "came to represent a hope for the future, a time when all human beings could once again enjoy the spiritual and physical environment most favorable to enlightenment and the release from worldly suffering".

[ 30 ] The Maitreya legend has provided a positive view of the future for all Buddhist cultures, who have adapted and expressed the prophetic myth in different ways.

[ 31 ] According to Buddhist tradition, each kalpa (a cosmic period lasting millions of years) has several Buddhas .

[ 32 ] The previous kalpa was the vyuhakalpa (glorious aeon), and the present kalpa is called the bhadrakalpa (auspicious aeon).

[ 33 ] The Seven Buddhas of Antiquity ( saptatathāgata ) are seven Buddhas which bridge the last kalpa and the present kalpa, they begin with Vipassī and end (so far) with Gautama (Shakyamuni). Maitreya is thus the eighth Buddha in this line.

[ 34 ] According to traditional Buddhist sources Maitreya's advent is not imminent and instead will happen millions of years in the future. In spite of this, Buddhist believers can hope to accumulate good karma so that when the time comes, they will be reborn to meet the future Buddha Maitreya and reach enlightenment under him.

[ 35 ] Scriptures which describe the future coming of Maitreya also describe the paradise like conditions of the world during Maitreya's time. His coming is said to usher in a "golden age" of religion and civilization.

[ 35 ] Buddhist scriptures do not exhort believers to work to bring about this golden age (what Nattier calls "active apocalypticism "). This might be due to the Buddhist view of the cyclical nature of time and history.

[ 35 ] The cyclical nature of history is thus part of the Maitreya myth. Buddhists believe that there will come a time of Dharma decline in which social order and morality will decline and the human lifespan will also decline. There will be war, sickness and famine.

[ 36 ] The Buddha's Dharma will then be lost. After some time, the world will begin to improve again, and human lifespans will begin to increase. It is at the peak of this rise in goodness in the far future that Maitreya will arrive. As such, in the traditional Buddhist view, first there will be a period of decline, followed by a period of moral and social betterment. It is only then that Maitreya is expected to come.

[ 36 ] To be able to take part in this golden age, Buddhist devotees hoped to make enough good merit (through good deeds like giving and compassionate acts) which would condition their future rebirth.

[ 37 ] Maitreya, 13th century, Kamakura period , Tokyo National Museum , Important Cultural Property of Japan One mention of the prophecy in the Maitreyavyākaraṇa states that gods, men and other beings: Will lose their doubts, and the torrents of their cravings will be cut off: free from all misery they will manage to cross the ocean of becoming; and, as a result of Maitreya's teachings, they will lead a holy life. No longer will they regard anything as their own, they will have no possession, no gold or silver, no home, no relatives! But they will lead the holy life of oneness under Maitreya's guidance. They will have torn the net of the passions, they will manage to enter into trances, and theirs will be an abundance of joy and happiness, for they will lead a holy life under Maitreya's guidance.

[ 38 ] Thus, many Buddhists throughout history have sought to develop the necessary merit to meet Maitreya on Earth during the life of his final Buddhahood.

[ 3 ] [ 39 ] This includes many Theravada Buddhists. One famous Theravadin who expressed this wish was the Sinhalese king Duṭṭhagāmaṇī .

[ 39 ] In Mahayana Buddhism, Buddhas preside over pure lands , such as Sukhavati . Once Maitreya becomes a Buddha, he will rule over the Ketumati pure land, an earthly paradise sometimes associated with the city of Varanasi (also known as Benares) in Uttar Pradesh , India, [ 40 ] and in other descriptions, the kingdom of Shambhala .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Foretold biography [ edit ] Various Buddhist sources give details about Maitreya's birth, family and country. According to the Cakkavatti Sutta: The Wheel-turning Emperor ( Digha Nikaya 26), Maitreya Buddha will be born in a time when humans will live to an age of eighty thousand years, in the city of Ketumatī, whose king will be the Cakkavattī (wheel-turning emperor) Sankha. Sankha will live in the palace where once dwelt King Mahāpanadā, but later he will give the palace away and will himself become a follower of Maitreya Buddha.

[ 43 ] Maitreya will be born to the chief priest of Sankha, Brahmayu, and his wife Brahmavati. In some sources his family name is Maitreya and his first name is Ajita.

[ 44 ] Maitreya will live as a householder, have a son, and then renounce the world and achieve Buddhahood like Shakyamuni.

[ 44 ] In some accounts, Maitreya will meet Mahakasyapa , who has been in samadhi on top of mount Kukkutapada since the passing of Shakyamuni. According to some accounts, Mahakasyapa will then hand Shayamuni's robe to Maitreya.

[ 45 ] Buddhist texts from several traditions say that beings in Maitreya's time will be much bigger than during the time of Sakyamuni. To these gigantic beings, Buddha's robe barely covers two fingers and a modern human appears insect sized.

[ 46 ] Some sources state that Maitreya will be 88 cubits (132 feet, 40 meters) tall and will live for 88,000 years. Like Maṅgala Buddha , his rays will make people hard to distinguish between day and night. His teachings will preserve for the next 180,000 years. According to the commentary of Anāgatavamsa, his teaching will last for 360,000 years.

[ 47 ] In Tushita heaven [ edit ] Maitreya depicted as the founder of the Hosso (Japanese Yogacara) school, c. 16th century Buddhists believe that Maitreya is currently a spiritually advanced bodhisattva (a being who is practicing the path towards full Buddhahood ) in Tuṣita heaven where he will remain until it is the right time for him to descend to earth to attain Buddhahood.

[ 3 ] [ 37 ] Maitreya currently resides in a palace at the center of Tuṣita Heaven (Pāli: Tusita ).

[ 48 ] Gautama Buddha also lived here before he was born into the world as all bodhisattvas live in the Tuṣita Heaven before they descend to the human realm to become Buddhas. Though the concept of the bodhisattva is different in Theravada and Mahayana Buddhism, both traditions of Buddhism share a belief in Maitreya bodhisattva as the current regent of the Buddha's Dharma in Tusita.

[ 3 ] Many Buddhists throughout history have cultivated merit through good deeds in order to be reborn in Tusita and meet Maitreya bodhisattva there in their next life.

[ 37 ] This may be combined with the wish to descend back down to earth as part of Maitreya's future entourage. Mahayana Buddhists such as Dao'an , Xuanzang , Yjing , and other masters of East Asian Yogacara , have expressed devotion for Maitreya and have sought to be reborn in his pure land , the palace at the center of Tuṣita.

[ 49 ] One Theravada example is the legend of the monk Malaya-Mahadeva, who is said to have traveled to Tushita and met Maitreya according to the 11th century Rasavāhinī .

[ 50 ] Modern figures like Xuyun , and Taixu have also expressed the wish to meet Maitreya in Tushita.

[ 48 ] Revelations and manifestations [ edit ] Bodhisattva Maitreya, Gandhara , 2nd-3rd cents., National Museum of Korea , Seoul Maitreya is also believed by Buddhists to manifest "emanation bodies" ( nirmanakayas ) on earth in order to aid living beings and teach the Dharma.

[ 51 ] Chinese Buddhists consider the rotund monk Budai as an emanation of Maitreya in China. Buddhist yogis and scholars, like Dao'an , have also sought to receive visions, teachings, or guidance from Maitreya in this present life.

[ 52 ] Various stories are recorded of individuals ascending to meet Maitreya (through meditation and samadhi ) or of Maitreya descending to meet them here on earth.

[ 52 ] 11th century CE, Basalt sculpture, Bihar The most famous of these revelations in Mahayana Buddhism are five scriptures Maitreya is traditionally said to have revealed to the 4th century Indian Buddhist master Asanga .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] These texts are important in the Yogacara tradition and are considered to be part of the third turning within the Three Turnings of the Wheel of Dharma . They teach the "consciousness-only" idealist philosophy of Yogacara Buddhism.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Buddhist tradition associates Asanga (c. 4th century), one of the founders of the Yogacara school, with the bodhisattva Maitreya. According to traditional accounts, after twelve years of retreat and meditation, Asanga encountered a dying dog and treated his wounds by removing the maggots from the wounds to a piece of Asanga's own flesh. It was only after his act of love and compassion that Asanga had a vision of Maitreya, who turned out to be that very dying dog. Maitreya then took Asanga to the celestial realm of Tushita and transmitted to him several Buddhist scriptures (the so called "five dharmas of Maitreya").

[ 53 ] The Chinese and Tibetan traditions disagree on which scriptures are included in the "Five Dharmas of Maitreya". In the Tibetan tradition, the five texts are: Mahāyānasūtrālamkārakārikā , ("The Adornment of Mahayana sutras"), Dharmadharmatāvibhāga ("Distinguishing Phenomena and Pure Being"), Madhyāntavibhāgakārikā ("Distinguishing the Middle and the Extremes"), Abhisamayalankara ( "Ornament for clear realization"), and the Ratnagotravibhaga (Exposition of the Jeweled lineage).

[ 11 ] [ 54 ] The Chinese tradition meanwhile maintains that the five revealed scriptures are: the Yogācārabhūmi , *Yogavibhāga [now lost] , Mahāyānasūtrālamkārakā , Madhyāntavibhāga and the Vajracchedikākāvyākhyā.

[ 12 ] Mantras and dharanis [ edit ] Maitreya in a leaf from a Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā Sūtra Manuscript, Bengal, early 12th century Close-up of a statue depicting Maitreya Bodhisattva at the Thikse Monastery in Ladakh , India Maitreya centered altar, Buddha Tooth Relic Temple and Museum , Chinatown , Singapore .

Mahayana sources contain various mantras and dharanis of Maitreya.

His common name mantra (as taught in Shingon Buddhism ) is: [ 55 ] oṃ maitreya svāhā Another Maitreya mantra taught in the Tibetan tradition is: [ 56 ] oṃ āḥ maitrī sarva siddhi hūṃ Two other mantras from the Chinese canon (in a text translated by Kūkai ) include: [ 57 ] Namaḥ samanta-buddhānāṃ aparājite jayanti svāhā Namaḥ samanta-buddhānāṃ ajitaṃjaya sarva-sattva-āśaya-anugata svāhā Dharanis [ edit ] A popular dharani taught in Tibetan Buddhism is the Incantation of Noble Maitreya's Promise (Ārya-maitri-pratijñā-nāma-dhāraṇī ): [ 58 ] [ 59 ] Namo ratnatrayāya namo bhagavate śākyamunaye tathāgatāyārhate samyaksaṃbuddhāya.

Tadyathā: oṃ ajite ajite aparājite ajitañjaya hara hara maitri avalokite kara kara mahāsamayasiddhe bhara bhara mahābodhimaṇḍabīje smara smara asmākaṃ samaya bodhi bodhi mahābodhi svāhā oṃ mohi mohi mahāmohi svāhā oṃ muni muni smara svāhā English translation: [ 58 ] [Homage] Homage to the Three Jewels. Homage to the Lord Shakyamuni, Tathagata, Arhat, Completely Perfect Buddha.

As follows: [Root mantra] Om Invincible, Invincible, Unconquered Conquer the Unconquered, take, take [it], You Who Look Down with Friendliness, act, act, Bring, bring the fulfillment of your great pledge, Shake the seat of great awakening, Remember, remember [your] pledge for us, Awakening, awakening, great awakening, svaha.

[Heart mantra] Om fascinating, fascinating, greatly fascinating, svaha.

[Close Heart mantra] Om sage, sage, remember, svaha.

Another version of the dharani can be found in Toh 890 of the Kangyur alongside the benefits of reciting it: [ 60 ] Homage to the Three Jewels.

Homage to Maitreya the Victorious One.

namo ratna trayāya namo bhagavate śākyamunaye tathāgatāya arhate samyaksaṃ­buddhāya tadyathā oṃ ajite ajite aparājite ajitaṃ jaya hara hara maitri avalokite kara kara mahā­samayasiddhe bhara bhara mahābodhimaṇḍabīje smara smara asmakaṃ samaya bodhi bodhi mahābodhi svāhā This was the root mantra.

oṃ mohi mohi mahāmohi svāhā This was the heart mantra.

oṃ muni muni smara svāhā This was the auxiliary heart mantra.

“Once I have fully awakened to unsurpassed and perfectly complete enlightenment, I will be certain to search out any being who simply hears, recites, chants, correctly contemplates, or meditates on this dhāraṇī and offer them a prophecy for unsurpassed and perfectly complete enlightenment. Even if this dhāraṇī is recited into the ear of a deer or bird from the animal realm, they will also receive a prophecy for unsurpassed and perfectly complete enlightenment. Whoever merely hears this will never go to the lower realms, nor will they be stained by the dirt of the lower realms. They will not be reborn in a mother’s womb. They will become a universal monarch for a thousand divine eons. They will inhabit the path of the ten virtuous actions. Whichever material enjoyments they wish for and seek will appear for them. I, a blessed one, will never forget that being. Having reached the seat of awakening, I will absolutely provide them, no matter who they are, a prophecy for unsurpassed and perfectly complete enlightenment.” The Chinese canon contains the following: namo ratna-trayāya, nama āryāvalokiteśvarāya bodhi-sattvāya mahāsatvāya mahākāruṇikāya tad-yathā, oṃ, maitre maitre maitra-manasi maitra-sambhave maitra-udbhave mahāsamaye svāhā Maitreya in East Asia [ edit ] Seated stone-carved Maitreya, Leshan Giant Buddha in Sichuan , China Statue of Maitreya (Mile Pusa) with the Four Heavenly Kings , Baoshan Temple , Shanghai .

Illustration of the Maitreya Sutra, Yulin Caves , Gansu, China Maitreya devotion [ edit ] Maitreya devotion (Chinese: 彌勒信仰) has been a part of East Asian Buddhism since the time of Dao'an (312–85), who is known to have founded a Maitreya devotionalism in China.

[ 52 ] Maitreya devotion was popular during the Northern Wei period (386–534). During the Sui Dynasty, three separate people declared themselves to be incarnations of Maitreya, attempting to bolster their authority, lead insurrections, and overthrow the Sui Dynasty (each attempted overthrow was ultimately unsuccessful).

[ 61 ] Devotional practices to Maitreya were an important part of the East Asian Yogacara school. A key element of Maitreya devotion in East Asia is the intention to be reborn in Maitreya's Inner Court of Tushita Heaven (兜率內院).

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Some Buddhist scriptures have noted that Maitreya is currently teaching at the Inner Court of Tushita, and some East Asian masters who were Maitreya devotees, such as Xuanzang (7th century), Kuiji , Wonhyo , and Yijing , had the intention of being reborn there after their death.

[ 51 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] Xuanzang was a famous devotee of Maitreya who vowed to be reborn in his Tushita palace so that he could "serve upon the Kind Lord", and to eventually "descend with him to perform the deeds of the Buddhas, until we attain unsurpassed bodhi".

[ 67 ] Xuanzang also taught a devotional verse (gatha) and taught everyone to recite it, the gatha is: [ 68 ] Namo Maitreya Tathagata , the Perfectly Awakened One! May all living beings swiftly be in the presence of your kind visage. Namo the inner community abiding with Maitreya Tathagata! After I shed this life, may I be reborn among them.

The work of the Silla monk Wŏnhyo (617–686), especially his commentary on the Maitreya sutras, is an important source for East Asian Maitreya devotion.

[ 69 ] According to this work, Maitreya devotion consists of a visualization meditation in which one visualizes the majestic adornments of Tushita heaven and "the superiority of receiving rebirth [there] as a bodhisattva." [ 70 ] According to Spongberg, "this means that one is to visualize oneself, personally present, amidst all of the splendors of Tusita Heaven, splendors that certainly include, but are not limited to, Maitreya." [ 71 ] The practice further includes hearing the name of Maitreya (a kind of mindfulness of the Buddha ),  "respectfully trusting in the virtues manifested by this name", repenting past bad deeds, and other ritual acts like taking care of stupas, offering incense, flowers, etc.

[ 70 ] According to Wonhyo, this practice results in being reborn in Tushita to personally receive teachings from Maitreya so that one cannot relapse from Buddhahood.

[ 70 ] A famous episode during Xuanzang's travels illustrates his devotion to Maitreya. While sailing on the Ganges , he was overtaken by pirates who were going to sacrifice him to Durga . After asking for a moment of silence to meditate, Xuanzang meditated on Maitreya, praying he would be reborn in Tushita with him and focusing his thoughts on the bodhisattva. Xuanzang then had a vision of Maitreya seated on his glittering throne in Tushita surrounded by many devas. Then a storm came and the pirates, terrified, threw themselves at Xuanzang's feet.

[ 72 ] Modern Chinese Buddhist monks, such as Xuyun , have also been known to have dreamt of going to the Inner Court of Tushita.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] The modern Chinese reformer Taixu 太虛 (1890–1947), one of the key founders of Humanistic Buddhism , was also a devotee of Maitreya. He is known to have promoted devotional practices and liturgies focused on Maitreya and was even said to have propagated the "Maitreya School" ( Cizong 慈宗).

[ 75 ] Maitreya devotion is most widely practice in Chinese Mahayana Buddhism , but it may also be found in other Chinese religions , like Yiguandao .

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Maitreya devotion was also popular in Silla Korea and in Japanese Buddhism .

[ 78 ] Maitreya teachings and millenarianism [ edit ] Main article: Maitreya teachings Throughout Chinese history , the Buddhist prophecy of Maitreya and the doctrine of the age of social decline ( Chinese : 末法; pinyin : Mò Fǎ ; "the Degenerate Age of Dharma") was adopted and wielded by numerous religious, social and political groups. Some of these groups operated as secret societies, like the White Lotus Society . Many of these groups held millenarian beliefs about the immanent arrival of Maitreya. Not all of these groups were orthodox Buddhists, and some combined Chinese folk religion , Buddhism and Taoist beliefs. Nattier points out that there was a pre-existent Taoist belief in a messianic savior figure ( Li Hong ). Some of these millenarian groups held antiestablishment views and even led rebellions against the Chinese state at various points of socio-political crisis.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] During the Sui Dynasty, there were three different rebellions led by three separate leaders who claimed to be Maitreya, one in 610 at the capital ( Chang'an ) and two in 613 (one led by magician named Song Zixian and another by a monk named Xiang Haiming).

[ 81 ] During the Tang dynasty, another Maitreyan rebellion was led by a certain Wang Huaigu.

[ 82 ] During the Song, Wang Ze led a revolt of Buddhists expecting Maitreya (1047); they took over the city of Beizhou in Hebei before they were crushed.

[ 83 ] The Song Dynasty government declared Maitreya Sects to be "heresies and unsanctioned religions". Tens of thousands of Maitreya Sect followers were killed.

[ 84 ] The Yuan dynasty saw the Red Turban Rebellion (aka The First White Lotus Rebellion c. 1351–1368) led by Han Shantong , leader of the White Lotus Society , and Army Commander Liu Futong rebelled against the Mongols.

[ 82 ] A Second White Lotus Rebellion broke out in 1796 among impoverished settlers in the mountainous region that separates Sichuan from Hubei and Shaanxi as a protest against heavy taxes imposed by the Manchu rulers of the Qing Dynasty.

[ 85 ] The White Lotus Society influenced the development of the 19th century " Society of Harmonious Fists " which led the Boxer Rebellion in 1899.

[ citation needed ] Japanese Buddhism [ edit ] Maitreya is a central figure for the Japanese Yogacara school (Hossō-shū) who considers Maitreya to be the founder of the tradition. Maitreya (Jp. Miroku) devotion was extensively promoted during the Kamakura period (1185–1333) by Hossō-shū scholars like Jōkei (1155–1213).

[ 13 ] Japanese illustration of Maitreya (Miroku), Chōgenji, Obama , Fukui , Japan.

The monk and religious founder of the Shingon sect Kukai is believed by Shingon adherents to currently be in a state of meditation on Mount Koya . He awaits the coming of Maitreya. Following his example, later Shingon meditators attempted to self-mummify (known as Sokushinbutsu ) through ascetic practices to also wait for the coming of Maitreya.

[ 79 ] In Nichiren Buddhism , Maitreya is seen as a steward and protector of the bodhisattvas who teach the Lotus Sutra , a view promoted by the sutra itself.

[ 86 ] [ better source needed ] According to Nichiren , all beings can be "Maitreya", since the true meaning of this name "designates the Votaries of the Lotus Sutra" who compassionately uphold the teaching of this sutra.

[ 87 ] [ better source needed ] Non-Buddhist views [ edit ] Chinese salvationist religions [ edit ] Beginning with the White Lotus Society (whose roots go back to the 12th century), Maitreya has been an important part of many Chinese Salvanionist Religious sects . In many of these sects, Maitreya is seen as a "primordial one" and a heavenly religious leader who will come to change the world radically. The most common myth is that Maitreya is a savior sent by Eternal Venerable Mother ( Wusheng Laomu , i.e. Queen Mother of the West) to show people the way to their true home, the heaven of the Eternal Mother, where all beings are originally from.

[ 88 ] According to some of these sectarian salvation religions, Maitreya's arrival is immanent and he will usher the final age in which all beings will be reunited with the Eternal Mother, an event called the "recovery of original wholeness" (shou-yuan).

[ 88 ] One modern example of such a sect is Yiguandao (Eternal Way), a 19th century salvationist religion. In Yiguandao, Maitreya is a key figure, a great savior, patriach and teacher sent by the Eternal Venerable Mother. Yiguandao claims that during the end times, Maitreya will incarnate on Earth to save humanity, known among believers as Mile Zushi ( Chinese : 彌勒祖師; lit.

'Grand Patriach Mile').

[ 89 ] Maitreya appears as a similar figure in another popular salvation religion, Xiantiandao ( Chinese : 先天道; pinyin : Xiāntiān Dào ; lit.

'Way of Former Heaven').

Theosophy and New Age [ edit ] In Theosophy , Maitreya (or Lord Maitreya) has multiple aspects signifying not just the future Buddha, but similar concepts from other religious or spiritual traditions.

[ 90 ] For modern Theosophy, Maitreya is an advanced enlightened being and a high-ranking member of secret spiritual hierarchy, the Masters of the Ancient Wisdom. These masters guide the spiritual evolution of humanity and Maitreya is said to hold the "Office of the World Teacher". As such, Maitreya is in charge of teaching and guiding humanity. As Annie Besant writes, Maitreya has "the duty of watching over the spiritual destinies of mankind; of guiding, blessing, maintaining the various religions of the world, founded in outline by Himself." [ 91 ] Maitreya may occasionally incarnate in the world to guide humanity directly.

[ 92 ] Some Theosophists, like C. W. Leadbeater , held that Maitreya previously reincarnated as Christ .

[ 93 ] In the early 20th century, leading Theosophists became convinced that a return of Maitreya as a "World Teacher" was imminent.  At this time, a South Indian boy, Jiddu Krishnamurti , was thought to be destined as the "vehicle" for Maitreya; however, in his early 30s, Krishnamurti, himself, declined to serve in this role.

[ 94 ] The Theosophical Maitreya gave rise to further Western conceptions of Maitreya as a future world teacher who would usher in a new age for humanity's spiritual evolution. The related Ascended Master Teachings also contains teachings about Maitreya. Various views regarding Maitreya can thus be found in contemporary New Age and Esoteric groups.

Post-theosophical movements [ edit ] Since the growth of Theosophy in the late 19th century, diverse religions and spiritual movements have adopted and reinterpreted older Jain, Hindu and Buddhist beliefs about Maitreya.

Share International , for example, equates Maitreya with the prophesied figures of multiple religious traditions, claims that Maitreya is already present in the world but is preparing to make an open declaration of his presence in the near future. They claim that he is here to inspire mankind to create a new era based on sharing and justice.

[ 95 ] In the beginning of the 1930s, the Ascended Master Teachings placed Maitreya in the "Office of World Teacher" until 1956, when he was described as moving on to the "Office of Planetary Buddha" and "Cosmic Christ" in their concept of a Spiritual Hierarchy.

[ citation needed ] In 1911, Rudolf Steiner claimed "Roughly three thousand years after our time the world will experience the Maitreya Buddha incarnation, which will be the last incarnation of Jeshu ben Pandira. This Bodhisattva, who will come as Maitreya Buddha, will also come in a physical body in our century in his reincarnation in the flesh—but not as Buddha—and he will make it his task to give humanity all the true concepts about the Christ Event." Steiner was careful to distinguish Jeshu ben Pandira as somebody entirely distinct from Jesus of Nazareth, as Maitreya was said to be entirely distinct from Jesus (but in moment-to-moment relationship with him the last three years of his life).

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Ahmadiyya [ edit ] The Ahmadiyyas believe Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908) fulfilled expectations regarding the Maitreya Buddha.

[ 98 ] The founder has given the whole account about the truth of forthcoming of Jesus Christ and his travel via Tibet and the transformation of word "Masiha" to "Metteyya" in one of his Prolific writings "Jesus in India" (Maseeh Hindustan Mai).

Baháʼí Faith [ edit ] See also: Baháʼí Faith and Buddhism Followers of the Baháʼí Faith believe that Bahá'u'lláh is the fulfillment of the prophecy of appearance of Maitreya, the fifth Buddha.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Baháʼís believe that the prophecy that Maitreya will usher in a new society of tolerance and love has been fulfilled by Bahá'u'lláh's teachings on world peace.

[ 99 ] Maitreya claimants [ edit ] Main article: List of Buddha claimants Tang Dynasty Empress Wu Zetian who claimed to be Maitreya incarnate The following list is just a small selection of those people who claimed or claim to be the incarnation of Maitreya. Many have either used the Maitreya incarnation claim to form a new Buddhist sect, a new religious movement or cult or even a political rebellion.

In the 5th century, Fu Dashi (傅大士) implied that he was the reincarnation of Maitreya and founded the Maitreya Sect (彌勒教) which was established during the reign of Liang Wudi (梁武帝).

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] In 515, a monk from Jizhou of the Northern Wei dynasty named Faqing (法庆), proclaimed himself as the "New Buddha", "Mahayana Buddha" quoting Buddhist scriptures that "Maitreya has descended to become a Buddha", and "Maitreya Buddha replaces Sakyamuni Buddha to save the world". Faqing gathered an army to rebel against the rule of the Wei dynasty in the name of Buddhism." [ 103 ] [ 104 ] Feng Yi (冯宜) and Heyue (贺悦), Hu people from Wucheng County of the Northern Wei dynasty in the 6th century led a rebellion claiming to be Maitreya Buddha against the Northern Wei army on the outskirts of Yuntai city.

[ 105 ] Song Zixian (宋子贤), a native of Tang County in the Sui dynasty , who was an expert in magic, and claimed to be able to transform into the form of Buddha and claimed to be an incarnation of Maitreya Buddha and staged a rebellion.

[ 106 ] In 613 the monk Xiang Haiming (向海明) claimed himself Maitreya and adopted an imperial title.

[ 82 ] He declared the beginning of new era Baiwu (白烏).

[ 106 ] In the early years of Tang Dynasty rule (713), Wang Huaigu (王怀古) of Tangbeizhou led a rebellion claiming to be the New Buddha (interpreted as Maitreya Buddha).

[ 105 ] In 690 Wu Zetian , empress regnant of the Wu Zhou interregnum (690–705), proclaimed herself an incarnation of the future Buddha Maitreya, and made Luoyang the "holy capital". In 693 she temporarily replaced the compulsory Dao De Jing in the curriculum with her own Rules for Officials .

[ 107 ] Gung Ye , a South Korean warlord and king of the short-lived state of Taebong during the 10th century, claimed himself as the living incarnation of Maitreya and ordered his subjects to worship him. His claim was widely rejected by most Buddhist monks and later he was dethroned and killed by his own servants.

In 1047, Wang Ze (王則), a farmer in Zhuozhou went to Beizhou to herd sheep for a local landowner, then rebelled claiming to be the ruler of Dongping (东平郡主) with the slogan "The time of Sakyamuni Buddha has passed, Maitreya Buddha takes the place of leading the power of nature." [ 108 ] Gao Tansheng (高昙晟), a monk from Huaizhou in the 7th century gathered nearly 50 monks to assassinate the county magistrate and the general of the city guard using the belief that the era of Maitreya Buddha was coming, and proclaimed himself as the "Mahayana Emperor (大乘皇帝)" and founded Jianyuan falun (建元法轮).

[ 109 ] Liu Ningjing (刘凝静), a woman from Wannian County, Sichuan during the Northern Song dynasty claimed that the era of Maitreya would come to the world and rebelled.

[ 110 ] Du Ke Yong (杜可用), also known as Du Wanyi (杜萬一), the leader of the Jiangxi people's revolution in the early Yuan dynasty, which began with the White Lotus sect , referred to himself as Du Shengren (杜聖人), called by the name of Vidyārāja (明王), using the narrative "Maitreya has been born, and Vidyārāja has been born." [ 111 ] Wang Lun (王倫), a leader of the White Lotus sect in Shandong province, China in the 1770s said that he was the rebirth of Maitreya and destined to become the Emperor of China, he mobilized his followers and marched towards the city of Shouzhang to stage a rebellion in October 1774.

[ 112 ] In 1777, a man named Wang Fulin, announced that he was an incarnation of Maitreya Buddha and his mother was Wusheng Laomu at a Yuan-tun sect meeting he called the Great Dragon Flower meeting with about a thousand disciples to stage an uprising in Hozhou city and Lanzhou province.

[ 113 ] Bahá'u'lláh (1817–1892), the Prophet-Founder of the Bahá'í Faith , is recognized by Bahá'ís as the promised Maitreya Buddha and Promised One of all religions.

[ 114 ] Wang Tianzu (王添組), a disciple of Wu Zixiang (10th patriarch of Yiguandao ) claimed to be an incarnation of Maitreya and claimed to foresaw an approaching apocalypze. He had a disciple Liao Ganzhou (廖幹周) who gathered 1500 followers who wore white turbans emblazoned with red crosses and organized a rebellion in Shicheng province, Jiangxi in the year of November 1803.

[ 115 ] Xu Hai Wu (徐還無), is believed by Yiguandao followers to be an incarnation of Maitreya along with Yang Hai Xiu (楊還虛) who is believed to be an incarnation of Guan Yin and became the 13th patriarch in Yiguandao's lineage.

[ 116 ] Lin Qing (林清) claiming to be an reincarnation of Maitreya Buddha together with Li Wencheng (李文成) claiming to be an incarnation of the Vidyārāja jointly carried out the Eight Trigrams Rebellion in 1813 .

[ 117 ] His followers considered him to be sent by Wusheng Laomu to overthrow the Qing dynasty which they considered had lost mandate of heaven to rule.

Liu Xi Er (劉四兒), the son of Liu Song (劉松) of the White Lotus sect also claimed to be an incarnation of Maitreya Buddha, and had a mission on earth to help Niu Ba (牛八) who was allegedly a descendant of the Ming empire to regain power.

[ 118 ] Lu Zhongyi (1849–1925), the 17th patriarch of Yiguandao , claimed to be an incarnation of Maitreya.

Jiddu Krishnamurti , Indian-origin meditator, writer who frequently give lecture about life is believed to be the vehicle for Maitreya by Theosophical doctrine.

[ 119 ] Ram Bahadur Bomjon , a 34-year-old Nepalese ascetic who has been hailed by many as the new Buddha. Publicly labeling himself since 2012 as the "Maitriya" Guru, he and his followers openly claim that he is the awaited Maitreya Buddha. He is a controversial figure who is currently under investigation for rape charges, and separately for the disappearance of four members of his ashram.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] L. Ron Hubbard , founder of the belief systems Dianetics and Scientology , suggested he was "Metteya" (Maitreya) in the 1955 poem Hymn of Asia . Numerous editors and followers of Hubbard claim that in the book's preface, specific physical characteristics said to be outlined—in unnamed Sanskrit sources—as properties of the coming Maitreya were properties with which Hubbard's appearance supposedly aligned.

Samael Aun Weor (1917–1977) – stated in The Aquarian Message that "the Maitreya Buddha Samael is the Kalki Avatar of the New Age." The Kalkian Avatar and Maitreya Buddha, he claimed, are the same "White Rider" of the Book of Revelation .

Li Hongzhi (李洪志), founder of the Falun Gong spiritual movement, whom some followers believe to be Maitreya.

[ 122 ] American guru and godman Adi Da was suggested by his devotees to be Maitreya.

[ 123 ] Jose Luis de Jesus Miranda - A Puerto Rican preacher who claimed to be Maitreya and Jesus Christ reincarnated in the early 2000s.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Followers of B.R. Ambedkar in the Dalit Buddhist Movement regard him as a bodhisattva , the Maitreya, although he never claimed it himself.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] In Honbushin , a Japanese new religion , the religion's founder Ōnishi Tama (1916–1969) is referred to as Miroku-sama (みろく様).

Miroku (みろく) is the Japanese name for Maitreya, and sama is an honorific suffix.

[ 128 ] Some modern authors claim the Hindu Avatar Kalki is Maitreya.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] Some Muslim writers claimed Islamic prophet Muhammad as Maitreya.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] Gallery [ edit ] Rituals in Jamchen Lhakhang Monastery Nepal Maitreya ( water bottle on left thigh), art of Mathura , second century CE A 9th-century Srivijayan art bronze Maitreya from South Sumatra . A stupa adorns his crown.

The future Buddha Maitreya, Gandhara, 3rd century CE Sitting Maitreya (holding kumbha ), Gandhara, 3rd century CE A statue of Maitreya Buddha inside Trikal Maitreya Buddha Vihara (Jamchen Lhakhang Monastery) at Bouddhanath premises , Kathmandu , Nepal Seated Maitreya, Korean, 4–5th century CE, Guimet Museum Seated Maitreya, Japan, Asuka period (538–710) The monk Budai as an incarnation of Maitreya Maitreya and disciples in Budai form, as depicted at the Feilai Feng grottos near Lingyin Temple in Hangzhou , China Monumental statue of Maitreya at Bingling Temple , China Statue of the Tiger Subduing arhat , believed to be an incarnation of Maitreya Maitreya figurine, Bát Tràng kiln, Hanoi, Revival Lê dynasty , 17th–18th century CE Eight-armed male deity (Maitreya). Provenance Vat Ampil Tok, Kg. Chhnang. 10th century. Bronze with dark patina. Green traces on the feet. H. 75 cm. Inv. 2024.

National Museum of Cambodia . Phnom Penh.

Maitreya figurine, Lái Thiêu kiln, HCMC, Nguyễn dynasty , 18th–19th century CE Statue of Maitreya in Budai form surrounded by a dragon on Cấm Mountains , Vietnam 110 ft (35 metre) Maitreya Buddha facing down the Shyok River, Nubra Valley near Diskit Monastery Golden Maitreya Statue rises just over 100 feet or 55 meters in the center of grounds of the temple Beopjusa , built in 1990 See also [ edit ] Baháʼu'lláh , similar eschatological figure in the Baháʼí Faith Budai , a traditional manifestation of Maitreya Christ , similar eschatological figure in Christianity History of Buddhism in India Dalit Buddhist movement Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent Navayana Spread of Buddhism Index of Buddhism-related articles Kalki Kalki Purana Leshan Giant Buddha Lord of Light Mahdi , similar eschatological and messianic figure in Islam.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] [ 138 ] Maitreya (Benjamin Creme) Maitreya (Mahābhārata) Maitreya Project Maitreya (Theosophy) Messiah , similar eschatological figure in Christianity and Judaism Paraclete , similar eschatological figure in Christianity Saoshyant , similar eschatological figure in Zoroastrianism Secular Buddhism Notes [ edit ] ^ Anāgatavamsa ^ a b c Dharmachakra Translation Committee (2021).

"Maitreya's Setting Out | Introduction" .

84000 Translating The Words of The Buddha . Retrieved 2024-02-08 .

^ a b c d Williams, Paul.

Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations 2nd edition.

Routledge, 2009, p. 218.

^ "Maitreya - Buddha-Nature" .

buddhanature.tsadra.org . Retrieved 2024-02-07 .

^ Jayarava, Visible Mantra: Visualising & Writing Buddhist Mantras, pp. 142-43. 2011 ^ Thomas, Andrew (1977).

"Shambala: Oasis of Light" (PDF) . Manchester: The Philips Park Press.

^ LePage, Victoria (1996).

Shambhala: The Fascinating Truth Behind the Myth of Shangri-La . Quest Books. pp.

125– 126.

ISBN 978-0835607506 .

^ a b Horner (1975) , The minor anthologies of the Pali canon , p. 97. Regarding Metteyya, Bv XXVII, 19: "I [Gautama Buddha] at the present time am the Self-Awakened One, and there will be Metteyya...." ^ a b Buddha Dharma Education Association (2014).

"Suttanta Pitaka: Khuddaka Nikāya: 14.Buddhavamsa-History of the Buddhas" .

Guide to Tipiṭaka . Tullera, NSW, Australia: Buddha Dharma Education Association. Archived from the original on 2014-12-21 . Retrieved 2014-12-21 .

^ "Maitreya | Buddhism | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2022-04-16 .

^ a b c d Ruegg, D.S.

La Theorie du Tathagatagarbha et du Gotra . Paris: Ecole d'Extreme Orient, 1969, p. 35.

^ a b c d Brunnholzl, Karl , When the Clouds Part: The Uttaratantra and Its Meditative Tradition as a Bridge between Sutra and Tantra, Shambhala Publications, 2015, p. 81.

^ a b Ford, James L. (2006).

Jokei and Buddhist Devotion in Early Medieval Japan.

Oxford University Press, USA. pp. 69-71.

ISBN 978-0-19-518814-1 ^ a b c d David Alan Scott (1990). "The Iranian Face of Buddhism.

" East and West, 40(1-4), 43–77. doi:10.2307/29756924 ^ Tiele, CP (1912).

"Appendix: some Buddhistic parallels" .

The religion of the Iranian peoples . Vol. I. (from the German) with Darmesteter's sketch of "Persia" and Goldziher's "Influence of Parsism on Islam (1st ed.). Bombay: The Parsi Publishing Co. p. 159.

No one who has studied the Zoroastrian doctrine of the Saoshyants or the coming saviour-prophets can fail to see their resemblance to the future Maitreya.

^ a b Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 69. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ 古代维吾尔语说唱文学《弥勒会见记》 ^ "The Maitreya-samiti and Khotanese" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 14, 2012.

^ a b Behrendt, Kurt; Brancaccio, Pia.

Gandharan Buddhism: Archaeology, Art, and Texts, pp. 17-20. UBC Press, Nov 1, 2011.

^ Angela Falco Howard et al., Chinese Sculpture , Yale University Press, 2006, p. 228 ^ 中國早期的彌勒信仰 (PDF) (in Chinese), TW : TT034, archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-12-30 ^ a b Williams, Paul.

Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations 2nd edition.

Routledge, 2009, p. 220.

^ a b c d Behrendt, Kurt; Brancaccio, Pia.

Gandharan Buddhism: Archaeology, Art, and Texts, pp. 30-31, 152. UBC Press, Nov 1, 2011.

^ Jansen, Eva Rudy (1993).

The Book of Hindu Imagery . Binkey Kok Publications. p. 158.

ISBN 9789074597074 . Retrieved 2008-08-21 .

p.52 ^ Blau, Tatjana; Mirabai Blau (2002).

Buddhist Symbols . Sterling Publishing Company, Inc. p. 256.

ISBN 9781402700330 . Retrieved 2008-08-21 .

p.225 ^ Hyytiäinen, Tiina (2008). "The Eight Auspicious Symbols". In Saloniemi, Marjo-Riitta (ed.).

Tibet: A Culture in Transition . Vapriikki. p. 196.

ISBN 978-951-609-377-5 .

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . pp. 25-26. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Ritzinger, Justin.

Anarchy in the Pure Land: Reinventing the Cult of Maitreya in Modern Chinese Buddhism , p. 13. Oxford University Press, 2017.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 30. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . pp. 1-2. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 2. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ "Chapter 36: The Buddhas in the three periods of time" .

Buddhism in a Nutshell Archives . Hong Kong: Buddhistdoor International . Retrieved 2014-12-21 .

^ Buswell, RE Jr.; Lopez, DS Jr. (2014).

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism (1st ed.). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-691-15786-3 .

^ Buswell, RE Jr.; Lopez, DS Jr. (2014).

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism (1st ed.). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 776.

ISBN 978-0-691-15786-3 .

^ a b c Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 26. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ a b Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 27. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ a b c Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 28. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Trans. in Conze 1959:241 ^ a b Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 17. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ "《彌勒上生經》與《彌勒下生經》簡介" (PDF) .

^ Lubos Belka (2003).

"The Myth of Shambala" .

Archiv Orientální .

71 (3). Nakl. Ceskoslovenské akademie věd.: 254, 261 . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ Roerich, Nicholas (2003).

Shambhala . Vedams eBooks (P) Ltd. p. 65.

ISBN 978-81-7936-012-5 . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ Vipassana.info, Pali Proper Names Dictionary: Metteyya ^ a b Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 74. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . pp. 74-75. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ John S. Strong (2007).

Relics of the Buddha . Princeton University Press. p. 220.

ISBN 978-0-691-11764-5 .

^ Stuart, Daniel M. (2017).

The Stream of Deathless Nectar: The Short Recension of the Amatarasadhārā of the Elder Upatissa, A Commentary on the Chronicle of the Future Buddha Metteyya, With a Historical Introduction (PDF) . Bangkok and Lumbini: The Fragile Palm Leaves Foundation and The Lumbini International Research Institute. pp. 122 and 232.

ISBN 9-788880-010951 .

^ a b Jingjing Li (2018).

"Traversing China for the Forgotten Pure Land of Maitreya Buddha" .

Buddhistdoor Global . Retrieved 2024-02-07 .

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 11, 29. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 72. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ a b Williams, Paul.

Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations 2nd edition.

Routledge, 2009, pp. 219-220.

^ a b c Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 29. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Westerhoff, Jan.

The Golden Age of Indian Buddhist Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2018, pp. 152-153.

^ Hookham, S. K. (1991). The Buddha within: Tathagatagarbha doctrine according to the Shentong interpretation of the Ratnagotravibhaga. SUNY Press.

ISBN 0-7914-0357-2 . Source; [3] (accessed: Tuesday May 5, 2009), p.325.

^ Hastings, James et al.

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, Volume 4, Scribner, 1912, p. 491.

^ Lama Yeshe.

Universal Love: The Yoga Method of Buddha Maitreya, p. 108. Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive. 2008.

^ 呉音から西洋古典語へ : 第1部 印欧語文献とし ての弘法大師請来密教経典 , p. 51.

^ a b Lama Yeshe.

Universal Love: The Yoga Method of Buddha Maitreya, pp. 127-128. Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive. 2008.

^ Complete Dedication Prayer Book eBook . FPMT. 2022-03-14.

^ "The Dhāraṇī "Maitreya's Pledge" / 84000 Reading Room" .

84000 . 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha . Retrieved 23 April 2025 .

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 31. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ "兜率內院疑點之探討" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-02-27 . Retrieved 2011-12-31 .

^ "兜率內院疑點之回應" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-02-27 . Retrieved 2011-12-31 .

^ "往生彌陀淨土、兜率淨土修持難易比較" .

Archived from the original on 2004-12-27 . Retrieved 2012-12-07 .

^ "日本弥勒行者考" . Fjdh.com. Archived from the original on 2012-02-27 . Retrieved 2011-12-31 .

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . pp. xi, 11, 94-95. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Kai Sheng.

A History of Chinese Buddhist Faith and Life, p. 249-250. BRILL, 2020.

^ Kai Sheng.

A History of Chinese Buddhist Faith and Life, p. 250. BRILL, 2020.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . pp. 96-97. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ a b c Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 98. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 101. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p. 11. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ "發現新世界——小兜率天——法王晉美彭措夢境經歷" . Buddhanet.idv.tw.

Archived from the original on 2012-02-27 . Retrieved 2011-12-31 .

^ "虛雲和尚年譜" . Bfnn.org.

Archived from the original on 2012-02-27 . Retrieved 2011-12-31 .

^ Ritzinger, Justin.

Anarchy in the Pure Land: Reinventing the Cult of Maitreya in Modern Chinese Buddhism , p. 1. Oxford University Press, 2017.

^ "天佛院遊記(下)" . Archived from the original on 2014-12-26 . Retrieved 2014-12-26 .

^ "四禪淨土遊記" . Boder.idv.tw.

Archived from the original on 2012-03-12 . Retrieved 2011-12-31 .

^ Maitreya Devotion (彌勒信仰) , Digital Dictionary of Buddhism (Muller et al.) ^ a b Williams, Paul.

Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations 2nd edition.

Routledge, 2009, p. 219.

^ Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . p.31. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Yang Shao-yun (2004).

Buddhist Political Ideology in the Rebellion and Moonlight Child Incident of 6th century China (Honors thesis, National University of Singapore) (Thesis). Archived from the original on 5 October 2006 . Retrieved 29 November 2006 .

^ a b c Notable Maitreyan Rebellions , FYSM068—Collective Violence and Traumatic Memory in Asia. 16 October 2005. Retrieved 29 November 2006.

^ Song Dynasty Renaissance 960–1279 Archived 2007-02-04 at the Wayback Machine , SAN-BECK. Retrieved 29 November 2006.

^ Is Qigong Political? A new look at Falun Gong QI: The Journal of Traditional Eastern Health & Fitness. Retrieved 29 November 2006.

^ White Lotus Rebellion Archived 2006-10-25 at the Wayback Machine , The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. May 2001. Retrieved 29 November 2006.

^ "SGI Library Online – The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin" . Sgilibrary.org. Archived from the original on 2012-03-18 . Retrieved 2012-08-15 .

^ The Record of Orally Transmitted Teachings p 143.Translated by Burton Watson ^ a b Sponberg, Alan; Hardacre, Helen (eds.).

Maitreya, the Future Buddha . pp. 110-112. Cambridge University Press, 1988.

^ Lu, Yunfeng (2008), The Transformation of Yiguan Dao in Taiwan Adapting to a Changing Religious Economy , p. 23. Lexington Books, ISBN 9780739117194 ^ Leadbeater, C. W.

(2007) [originally published 1925. Chicago: Theosophical Press].

The masters and the path ( paperback ) (reprint ed.). New York: Cosimo Classics. pp.

4– 5, 10, 31– 32, 34, 36, 74, 211– 301.

ISBN 978-1-60206-333-4 . Retrieved 2021-12-15 – via Google Books .

As it did with practically every major religious, philosophical, and cultural tradition, modern Theosophy was syncretic.  Theosophy did not identify as a religion, but as a science or way of knowing, even while it ascribed occult and esoteric significance to many Buddhist concepts. According to Theosophical writings, the kingdom above the human kingdom, is composed of a group of highly enlightened beings or "Masters of Wisdom".  These Masters make up a spiritual hierarchy (the Masters of the Ancient Wisdom ), of which Maitreya holds the highest rank, that of the "Office of the World Teacher"; as such, he is called "the Christ." Besant, Annie & Leadbeater, C. W.

(1913).

Man: how, whence, and whither; a record of clairvoyant investigation ( hardcover ) (1st ed.).

Adyar, Madras & Benares : Theosophical Publishing House. pp. 339, 520.

OCLC 871602 .

^ Besant, Annie.

Initiation, The Perfecting of Man (1923), p. 110.

^ Creme, Benjamin (1986).

Maitreya's Mission Vol. 1 . London: Share International Foundation. pp.

82– 95.

^ Leadbeater, C.W.

The Inner Life , 1917, pp. 9-10.

^ Lutyens, Mary (1975).

Krishnamurti: the years of awakening ( hardcover ) (1st US ed.). New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux .

ISBN 978-0-374-18222-9 – via Internet Archive .

Biography of Jiddu Krishnamurti, the presumed "vehicle" of the Maitreya in the 20th century, describes the events in some detail.

^ Share International .

^ "I. The Christ Impulse in Historical Development I – GA 130. Esoteric Christianity and the Mission of Christian Rosenkreutz – Rudolf Steiner Archive" .

^ Creme, Benjamin (1986).

1986 . London: Share International Foundation. pp.

82– 95.

^ Review of Religions , vol. 97, March 2002, p. 24 .

^ a b Momen, Moojan (1995).

Buddhism And The Bahaʼi Faith: An Introduction to the Bahaʼi Faith for Theravada Buddhists . Oxford: George Ronald. pp.

50– 52.

ISBN 0-85398-384-4 .

^ Buck, Christopher (2004). "The eschatology of Globalization: The multiple-messiahship of Bahā'u'llāh revisited". In Sharon, Moshe (ed.).

Studies in Modern Religions, Religious Movements and the Bābī-Bahā'ī Faiths . Boston: Brill. pp.

143– 178.

ISBN 90-04-13904-4 .

^ "傅大士研究" . Archived from the original on 2009-04-10 . Retrieved 2024-11-09 .

^ 星如, 侯 (2023).

"简析弥勒信仰在中国民间信仰史的表现及发展变化" .

国学 .

11 (1).

doi : 10.12677/CnC.2023.111009 .

^ Seiwert 2003 , p. 111.

^ Ma 2011 , p. 23.

^ a b 王钦若, 宋 (1960).

册府元龟 . 北京: 中华书局.

^ a b Seiwert 2003 , p. 120.

^ Tang Dynasty Empire 618–906 Archived 2007-02-04 at the Wayback Machine , SAN-BECK. Retrieved 29 November 2006.

^ Seiwert 2003 , p. 213.

^ 馬光, 司 (1084).

資治通鑑 .

^ "南北朝隋唐时代的金刀之谶与弥勒信仰" .

中國人民大學清史研究所 .

^ 劭忞, 柯 (2018).

新元史 . 上海古籍出版社.

ISBN 9787532583805 .

^ Naquin, Susan (1989).

Shantung Rebellion: the Wang Lun Uprising of 1774 . Yale University Press. pp. xiv.

ISBN 0300026382 .

^ Naquin, Susan (1981).

Shantung Rebellion. The Wang Lun Uprising of 1774 . Yale University Press. p. 154.

^ Buck, Christopher (2004).

The eschatology of Globalization: The multiple-messiahship of Baha'u'llah revisited . BRILL.

ISBN 90-04-13904-4 .

^ Anthony, Robert (2016).

Ethnic and Religious Violence in South China: The Hakka-Tiandihui Uprising of 1802 . p. 549.

^ "一贯道溯源论：从秘密结社传教到反动会道门" .

中國人民大學清史研究所 .

^ Perkins, Dorothy (2013).

Encyclopedia of China: History and Culture . Routledge.

ISBN 9781135935627 .

^ Murray, Dian, Qin Baoqi (1994).

The Origins of the Tiandihui: The Chinese Triads in Legend and History . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0804723249 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ * J. Krishnamurti, Duduk Diam dengan Batin yang Hening, Yayasan Krishnamurti Indonesia, Jakarta, 2006, hal. 133 ^ " 'Ascetic' Ram Bahadur Bamjan accused of raping nun" .

Online Khabar . 16 September 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ Emburry-Dennis, Tom.

"Ashram of 'Buddha boy' worshipped as reincarnation of Buddha raided by police after devotees 'disappear' " .

Independent .

^ Lu, Yunfeng (12 May 2005).

"Entrepreneurial Logics and the Evolution of Falun Gong" .

Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion .

44 (2): 173– 185.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-5906.2005.00274.x .

^ Carolyn Lee (2003).

Adi Da: The Promised God-Man Is Here by The Ruchira Sannyasin Order of Adidam Ruchiradam . Dawn Horse Press.

ISBN 1-57097-143-9 .

^ Bose, M.B. (2017). Tereza Kuldova and Mathew A. Varghese (ed.).

Urban Utopias: Excess and Expulsion in Neoliberal South Asia . Springer. pp.

144– 146.

ISBN 978-3-319-47623-0 .

^ Fitzgerald, Timothy (2003).

The Ideology of Religious Studies . Oxford University Press. p. 129.

ISBN 978-0-19-534715-9 .

^ Fitzgerald, Timothy (2003).

The Ideology of Religious Studies . Oxford University Press. p. 129.

ISBN 978-0-19-534715-9 .

^ Bose, M.B. (2017). Tereza Kuldova and Mathew A. Varghese (ed.).

Urban Utopias: Excess and Expulsion in Neoliberal South Asia . Springer. pp.

144– 146.

ISBN 978-3-319-47623-0 .

^ "みろく様祭" .

ほんぶしん (in Japanese) . Retrieved 2025-04-30 .

^ Powell, Robert; Isaacson, Estelle (2013).

Gautama Buddha's Successor . SteinerBooks.

ISBN 978-1-58420-162-5 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 .

^ Roerich, Elena Ivanovna (1987).

Letters, 1929-1938 . Agni Yoga Society . Retrieved 17 May 2020 .

^ Plott, John C.; Dolin, James Michael; Hatton, Russell E. (1977).

Global History of Philosophy: The period of scholasticism . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. p. 358.

ISBN 978-0-89581-678-8 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 .

^ Lawrence, Troy (1990).

New Age Messiah identified: who is Lord Maitreya? : Tara Center's "mystery man" alive and living in London . Huntington House Publishers. p. 62.

ISBN 978-0-910311-17-5 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 .

^ Stutley, Margaret (1985).

Hinduism: The Eternal Law : an Introduction to the Literature, Cosmology and Cults of the Hindu Religion . Aquarian Press.

ISBN 978-0-85030-348-3 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 .

^ Faruqui, Mumtaz Ahmad (2015-04-16).

Anecdotes from the Life of the Prophet Muhammad . Ahmadiyya Anjuman Ishaat Islam Lahore USA.

ISBN 978-1-934271-27-8 .

^ Middya, Fardun Ali (2018-12-10).

Mentions of Prophet Muhammad: Peace be Upon Him and His Family . Educreation Publishing. p. 29.

^ Kamada, S. (2012). Mahdi and Maitreya (Miroku): Saviors in Islam and Buddhism. Journal of the interdisciplinary study of monotheistic religions: JISMOR, 8, 59-76.

^ Jawad, A. (2008). Maitreya of Gandhāra—An Anticipated Sanguine of Buddhism. Ancient Pakistan, 19, 43-47.

^ Hardacre, H., van Voss, M. H., & Werblowsky, R. J. Z. (1984). Chronicle and Calendar of Events. Numen, 155-158.

Further reading [ edit ] Horner, IB , ed. (1975).

The minor anthologies of the Pali canon. Volume III: Buddhavaṁsa (Chronicle of Buddhas) and Cariyāpiṭaka (Basket of Conduct) . London: Pali Text Society .

ISBN 0-86013-072-X .

Mipham, Jamgon; Maitreya; Shenga, Khenpo; Dharmachakra Translation Committee, trans. (2013).

Distinguishing Phenomena from Their Intrinsic Nature: Maitreya's Dharmadharmatavibhanga with Commentaries by Khenpo Shenga and Ju Mipham.

Snow Lion.

ISBN 978-1-55939-502-1 .

Descent of Maitreya Buddha and his Enlightenment (PDF) . Taishō Volume 14, Number 454. Translated by Iida, Shōtarō; Goldston, Jane. Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai. 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 13, 2018.

Mipham, Jamgon; Maitreya; Dharmachakra Translation Committee, trans. (2021).

Middle Beyond Extremes: Maitreya's Madhyantavibhaga with Commentaries by Khenpo Shenga and Ju Mipham . Snow Lion.

ISBN 978-1-55939-501-4 .

Ma, Xisha; Huiying Meng (2011), Popular Religion and Shamanism , Brill, ISBN 978-9004174559 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Seiwert, Hubert Michael (2003), Popular Religious Movements and Heterodox Sects in Chinese History , Brill, ISBN 9004131469 Lee, Yu Min (1983), The Maitreya Cult and Its Art in Early China , University Microfilms International Sponberg, Alan (1988), Maitreya, the Future Buddha , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521180104 Ritzinger, Justin (2017), Anarchy in the Pure Land: Reinventing the Cult of Maitreya in Modern Chinese Buddhism , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0190491161 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Maitreya .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Maitreya .

The Maitreya Project, building a huge statue of Maitreya in Kushinagar, India [ usurped ] April 2010 Smithsonian Magazine Article Archived 2013-12-30 at the Wayback Machine About the Future Buddha Ariya Ajita Metteyya The Story of the Coming Buddha: Ariya Metteyya The Jonang Dharma on Maitreya "Maitreya" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

v t e Bodhisattvas Major Avalokiteśvara ( Guanyin ) Mañjuśrī Samantabhadra Kṣitigarbha Maitreya Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Chinese Skanda Sangharāma (Guān Yǔ) Vajrayana Padmasambhava Mandāravā Tārā Vajrapāṇi Vajrasattva Sitātapatrā Cundī Other Bhaiṣajyarāja Candraprabha Niō Supratiṣṭhitacāritra Supuṣpacandra Sūryaprabha Vasudhārā Viśiṣṭacāritra Viśuddhacāritra Vimalakirti v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Chinese Buddhist pantheon Buddhas 佛 (Fó)/如來 (Rúlái) Five Wisdom Tathāgatas (Wǔfāng Fó) Seven Buddhas of Antiquity (Guòqù Qīfó) Buddhas of the Ten Directions (Shífāng Fó) [zh] Eighty-eight Buddhas (Bāshíbā Fó) Śākyamuni (Shìjiāmóuní Fó) Vairocana (Pílúzhēnǎ Fó) Amitābha (Āmítuó Fó) Bhaisajyaguru (Yàoshī Fó) Amoghasiddhi (Bùkōngchéngjiù Fó) Akshobhya (Āchù Fó) Ratnasambhava (Bǎoshēng Fó) Dīpankara (Rándēng Fó) Vipassī (Pípóshī Fó) Vessabhū (Píshèpó Fó) Kakusandha (Jūliúsūn Fó) Koṇāgamana (Jūnàhán Fó) Kassapa (Jiāshè Fó) Bodhisattvas 菩薩 (Púsà) Four Great Bodhisattvas (Sìdà Púsà) [zh] Eight Great Bodhisattvas (Bādà Púsà) [zh] Twelve Bodhisattvas of Perfect Enlightenment (Shí'èr Yuánjué Púsà) Avalokiteśvara (Guānyīn Púsà) Manjushri (Wénshū Púsà) Samantabhadra (Pǔxián Púsà) Kṣitigarbha (Dìzàng Púsà) Mahāsthāmaprāpta (Dàshìzhì Púsà) Vajrapāṇi (Jīngāngshǒu Púsà) Maitreya (Mílè Púsa) Ākāśagarbha (Xūkōngzàng Púsà) Cundī (Zhǔntí Púsà) Tara (Duōluó Púsà) Sūryaprabha (Rìguāng Púsà) Candraprabha (Yuèguāng Púsà) Bhaiṣajyarāja (Yàowáng Púsà) Bhaiṣajyasamudgata (Yàoshàng Púsà) Cintāmaṇicakra (Rúyìlún Guānyīn) Vajrasattva (Jīngāng Sàduǒ Púsà) Nagarjuna (Lóngshù Púsà) Sitātapatrā (Báisǎngài Fódǐng) Wisdom Kings 明王 (Míngwáng) Eight Wisdom Kings (Bādà Míngwáng) Ten Wisdom Kings (Shídà Míngwáng) Mahamayuri (Kǒngquè Míngwáng) Ucchuṣma (Huìjì Jīngāng) Kuṇḍali (Jūntúlì Míngwáng) Hayagriva (Mǎtóu Guānyīn) Acala (Bùdòng Míngwáng) Trailokyavijaya (Xiángsānshì Míngwáng) Yamāntaka (Dàwēidé Míngwáng) Mahacakra (Dàlún Míngwáng) Padanaksipa (Bùzhì Míngwáng) Mahabala (Dàlì Míngwáng) Aparajita (Wúnéngshēng Míngwáng) Vajrahāsa (Dàxiào Míngwáng) Deities and Demons 諸天鬼神 (Zhūtiān Guǐshén) Twenty-Four Protective Deities (Èrshísì Zhūtiān) Twelve Heavenly Generals (Shí'èr Shénjiāng) Eight Great Yakṣa Generals (Bādà Yèchā Dàjiàng) Eight Legions of Devas and Nāgas (Tiānlóng bābù) Four Heavenly Kings (Sì Tiānwáng) Ulkāmukha Pretarāja (Miànrán Dàshì) Brahma (Fàntiān) Indra (Dìshìtiān) Shiva (Dàzìzàitiān) Lakshmi (Gōngdétiān) Saraswati (Biàncáitiān) Surya (Rìtiān) Chandra (Yuètiān) Pañcika (Sànzhī Dàjiàng) Hārītī (Guǐzǐmǔ) Yama (Yánluó Wáng) Marici (Mólìzhītiān) Prithvi (Jiānláo Dishén) Sāgara (Suōjiéluó Lóngwáng) Vajra-Weilding God (Zhíjīngāng shén) Gunyapati (Mìjī Jīngāng) Narayana (Nàluóyántiān) Mahākāla (Dàhēitiān) Sudhana (Shàncái) Nagakanya (Lóngnǚ) Puti Shushen Ziwei Emperor Dongyue Emperor (Dōngyuè Dàdì) Thunder god (Léigōng) Skanda (Wéituó) Sangharama Bodhisattva (Qíelán Púsà) Deva (Tiān) Nāga (Lóng) Asura (Āxiūluō) Yaksha (Yèchà) Garuda (Jiālóuluó) Gandharva (Gāntàpó) Kinnara (Jǐnnàluō) Mahoraga (Móhóuluójiā) Apsara (Fēitiān Nǚshén) Kalaviṅka (Jiālíngpínqié) Arhats 羅漢 (Luóhàn) Five Hundred Arhats (Wǔbǎi luóhàn) Eighteen Arhats (Shíbā Luóhàn) Sixteen Arhats (Shíliù Luóhàn) Mahākāśyapa (Xiánglóng Luóhàn) Nagasena(Wāěr Luóhàn) Rahula (Chénsāi Luóhàn) Pindola Bharadvaja (Qílù Luóhàn) Bodhidharma (Guojiāng Luóhàn) Asita (Chángméi Luóhàn) Kanaka the Vatsa (Xǐqìng Luóhàn) Kanaka the Bharadvaja (Jǔbō Luóhàn) Subinda (Tuōda Luóhàn) Nakula (Jìngzuò Luóhàn) Kalika (Qíxiàng Luóhàn) Vijraputra (Xiàoshī Luóhàn) Gobaka (Kāixīn Luóhàn) Pantha the Elder (Tànshǒu Luóhàn) Vanavasa (Bājiāo Luóhàn) Pantha the Younger (Kānmén Luóhàn) Sangha 高僧・祖師 (Gāosēng・Zǔshī) Ānanda Moggallāna Bodhidharma (Damo) An Shigao Kumarajiva Zhiyi Xuanzang Faxian Yijing Yixing Shandao Huiguo Amoghavajra (Bukong) Vajrabodhi (Jingangzhi) Śubhakarasiṃha (Shanwuwei) Hanshan Deqing Yunqi Zhuhong Ouyi Zhixu Budai Jigong Emperor Ming Emperor Wu Fu Dashi Mahayana Chan Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Tantrism Chinese mythology Religion in China v t e Japanese Buddhist pantheon Buddhas 如来部 (Nyorai-bu) Śākyamuni (Shaka Nyorai) Amitābha (Amida Nyorai) Bhaiṣajyaguru (Yakushi Nyorai) Vairocana (Dainichi Nyorai) Five Wisdom Buddhas (Godai Nyorai) Bodhisattvas 菩薩部 (Bosatsu-bu) Maitreya (Miroku) Avalokiteśvara (Kannon) Samantabhadra (Fugen) Mañjuśrī (Monju) Mahāpratisarā (Daizuigu) Kṣitigarbha (Jizō) Ākāśagarbha (Kokūzō) Mahāsthāmaprāpta (Seishi) Vajrasattva (Kongōsatta) Vajrapāramitā (Kongō-Haramitsu) Wisdom Kings 明王部 (Myōō-bu) Five Wisdom Kings Acala (Fudō-Myōō) Rāgarāja (Aizen-Myōō) Ucchuṣma (Ususama-Myōō) Hayagrīva (Batō-Myōō) Mahāmāyūrī (Kujaku-Myoō) Yamāntaka (Daiitoku-Myoō) Heavenly deities 天部 (Ten-bu) Four Heavenly Kings (Shitennō) Eight Legions (Hachi-Bushū) Twelve Devas (Jūni-ten) Twelve Heavenly Generals (Jūni Shinshō) Twenty-Eight Legions (Nijūhachi-Bushū) Sarasvatī (Benzaiten) Vaiśravaṇa (Bishamonten) Śakra (Taishakuten) Brahmā (Bonten) Maheśvara (Daijizaiten) Mahākāla (Daikokuten) Ḍākinī (Dakiniten) Yama (Enma-Daiō) Gigeiten Skanda (Idaten) Gaṇapati (Kankiten) Hārītī (Kishimojin) Apsara (Hiten) Kalaviṅka (Karyōbinga) Lakṣmī (Kisshōten) Mārīcī (Marishiten) Vajrapāṇi (Niō) Circumstantial appearances 垂迹身部 (Suijakushin-bu) Gongen Kumano Gongen Atago Gongen Konpira Daigongen Religious masters 高僧・祖師部 (Kōsō・Soshi-bu) Nāgārjuna (Ryūju) Vasubandhu (Seshin) Bodhidharma Prince Shōtoku Kūkai Saichō Eisai Dōgen Kigen Genshin Hōnen Ippen Shinran Nichiren Sixteen Arhats Zen Tendai Shingon Pure Land Shugendō Nichiren Japanese mythology Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany Japan Czech Republic People DDB NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐lkdjx
Cached time: 20250817043718
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.430 seconds
Real time usage: 1.751 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8211/1000000
Revision size: 90179/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 321161/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9464/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 400324/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.814/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18389220/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1349.839      1 -total
 37.83%  510.617      1 Template:Reflist
 15.72%  212.202     41 Template:Cite_book
 14.13%  190.778     26 Template:Cite_web
 11.56%  156.104      1 Template:Infobox_Buddha
 11.41%  154.057      1 Template:Infobox
  8.10%  109.382      1 Template:Buddhism
  7.94%  107.138      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.12%   96.138      1 Template:Lang
  5.22%   70.412      6 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:225886:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043718 and revision id 1295980524. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maitreya&oldid=1295980524 " Categories : Maitreya Bodhisattvas Buddhist eschatology Sanskrit words and phrases Messianism Sinhalese Buddhist deities Buddhism in China Chinese gods Journey to the West characters Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Burmese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 02:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maitreya 64 languages Add topic

