Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Capacity measures in the Anglo-Saxon period 1.2 After the Norman Conquest 2 Measures in the city museum 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Winchester measure 2 languages العربية Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of legal standards of volume Winchester measure is a set of legal standards of volume instituted in the late 15th century (1495) by King Henry VII of England and in use, with some modifications, until the present day. It consists of the Winchester bushel and its dependent quantities, the peck , (dry) gallon and (dry) quart . They would later become known as the Winchester Standards, named because the examples were kept in the city of Winchester .

Winchester measure may also refer to: the systems of weights and measures used in the Kingdom of Wessex during the Anglo-Saxon period, later adopted as the national standards of England, as well as the physical standards (prototypes) associated with these systems of units [ 1 ] a set of avoirdupois weight standards dating to the mid-14th century, in particular, the 56-pound standard commissioned by King Edward III , which served as the prototype for Queen Elizabeth I 's reform of the avoirdupois weight system in 1588 [ 2 ] a type of glass bottle, usually amber, used in the drug and chemical industry, known variously as the Boston round , Winchester bottle, or Winchester quart bottle History [ edit ] During the 10th century, the capital city of the English king, Edgar , was at Winchester and, at his direction, standards of measurement were instituted.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, nothing is known of these standards except that, following the Norman Conquest , the physical standards (prototypes) were removed to London.

[ 5 ] In 1496, a law of King Henry VII instituted the bushel that would later come to be known by the name "Winchester".
In 1588 Queen Elizabeth I, while reforming the English weight system (which, at the time, included no less than three different pounds going by the name "avoirdupois") based the new Exchequer standard on an ancient set of bronze weights found at Winchester and dating to the reign of Edward III.

These incidents have led to the widespread belief that the Winchester units of dry capacity measure, namely, the bushel and its dependent quantities the peck , gallon and quart , must have originated in the time of King Edgar. However, contemporary scholarship can find no evidence for the existence of any these units in Britain prior to the Norman Conquest. Furthermore, all of the units associated with Winchester measure (quarter, bushel, peck, gallon, pottle, quart, pint) have names of French derivation, at least suggestive of Norman origin.

Capacity measures in the Anglo-Saxon period [ edit ] Prior to the Norman Conquest, the following units of capacity measure were used: sester , amber , mitta , coomb , and seam . A statute of 1196 ( 9 Ric. 1 . c. 27) decreed: It is established that all measures of the whole of England be of the same amount, as well of corn as of vegetables and of like things, to wit, one good horse load; and that this measure be level as well in cities and boroughs as without.

[ 6 ] This appears to be a description of the seam, which would later be equated with the quarter. The word seam is of Latin derivation (from the Vulgar Latin sauma = packsaddle).

[ 7 ] Some of the other units are likewise of Latin derivation, sester from sextarius, amber from amphora.

[ 8 ] The sester could thus be taken as roughly a pint, the amber a bushel. However, the values of these units, as well as their relationships to one another, varied considerably over the centuries so that no clear definitions are possible except by specifying the time and place in which the units were used.

After the Norman Conquest [ edit ] One of the earliest documents defining the gallon, bushel and quarter is the Assize of Weights and Measures , also known as the Tractatus de Ponderibus et Mensuris , sometimes attributed to Henry III or Edward I , but nowadays generally listed under Ancient Statutes of Uncertain Date and presumed to be from c.

1250 −1305. It states, By Consent of the whole Realm the King’s Measure was made, so that an English Penny, which is called the Sterling, round without clipping, shall weigh Thirty-two Grains of Wheat dry in the midst of the Ear; Twenty-pence make an Ounce; and Twelve Ounces make a Pound, and Eight Pounds make a Gallon of Wine; and Eight Gallons of Wine make a Bushel of London; which is the Eighth Part of a Quarter.

[ 9 ] In 1496, An Act for Weights and Measures ( 12 Hen. 7 . c. 5) stated That the Measure of a Bushel contain viij.

Gallons of Wheat, and that every Gallon contain viij.

li.

of Wheat of Troy Weight, and every Pound contain xij.

Ounces of Troy Weight, and every Ounce contain xx.

Sterlings, and every Sterling be of the Weight of xxxij.

Corns of Wheat that grew in the Midst of the Ear of Wheat, according to the old Laws of this Land.

[ 10 ] Even though this bushel does not quite fit the description of the Winchester bushel, the national standard prototype bushel constructed the following year (and still in existence) is near enough to a Winchester bushel that it is generally considered the first, even though it was not known by that name at the time.

[ 11 ] The Winchester bushel is first mentioned by name in a statute of 1670 entitled An Act for ascertaining the Measures of Corn and Salt ( 22 Cha. 2 . c. 8) which states, And that if any person or persons after the time aforesaid shall sell any sort of corn or grain, ground or unground, or any kind of salt, usually sold by the bushel, either in open market, or any other place, by any other bushel or measure than that which is agreeable to the standard, marked in his Majesty's exchequer, commonly called the Winchester measure, containing eight gallons to the bushel, and no more or less, and the said bushel strucken even by the wood or brim of the same by the seller, and sealed as this act directs, he or they shall forfeit for every such offence the sum of forty shillings .

[ 12 ] It is first defined in law by a statute of 1696–97 ( 8 & 9 Will. 3 . c. 22 ss. 9 & 45) And to the End all His Majesties Subjects may know the Content of the Winchester Bushell whereunto this Act refers, and that all Disputes and Differences about Measure may be prevented for the future, it is hereby declared that every round Bushel with a plain and even Bottom, being Eighteen Inches and a Halfe wide throughout, & Eight Inches deep, shall be esteemed a legal Winchester Bushel according to the Standard in His Majesty's Exchequer.

[ 13 ] In 1824 a new Act was passed in which the gallon was defined as the volume of ten pounds of pure water at 62 °F (17 °C) with the other units of volume changing accordingly. The "Winchester bushel", which was some 3% smaller than the new bushel (eight new gallons), was retained in the English grain trade until formally abolished in 1835. In 1836, the United States Department of the Treasury formally adopted the Winchester bushel as the standard for dealing in grain and, defined as 2,150.42 cubic inches, it remains so today.

While the United Kingdom and the British Colonies changed to "Imperial" measures in 1826, the US continued to use Winchester measures and still does.

Measures in the city museum [ edit ] None of Edgar's standard measures, which were probably made of wood, remain, but the city's copy of the standard yard, although stamped with the official mark of Elizabeth I , may date from the early twelfth century, during the reign of Henry I . Preserved standard weights date from 1357, and although the original bushel is lost, a standard bushel, gallon and quart made of bronze , issued in 1497 and stamped with the mark of Henry VII are still held.

See also [ edit ] History of measurement Winchester bottle References [ edit ] ^ Ronald Edward Zupko (1977).

British weights & measures: a history from antiquity to the seventeenth century . University of Wisconsin Press. pp.

12– 3.

ISBN 9780299073404 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ The Encyclopedia Americana: a library of universal knowledge . Encyclopedia Americana Corp. 1919. p.

472 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ Dorothy Whitelock (1996).

English Historical Documents 500–1042 . Psychology Press. p. 437.

ISBN 978-0-415-14366-0 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ Felix Liebermann (1903).

Die gesetze der Angelsachsen: Text und übersetzung . Max Niemeyer. p. 204 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ Ronald Edward Zupko (1977).

British weights & measures: a history from antiquity to the seventeenth century . University of Wisconsin Press. pp.

11– 2.

ISBN 9780299073404 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ Alfred Edward Bland; Richard Henry Tawney (1919).

English economic history: select documents . Macmillan Co. p.

154 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ Ronald Edward Zupko (1985).

A dictionary of weights and measures for the British Isles: the Middle Ages to the twentieth century . American Philosophical Society. p.

369 .

ISBN 978-0-87169-168-2 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ F. E. Harmer (11 August 2011).

Select English Historical Documents of the Ninth and Tenth Centuries . Cambridge University Press. p. 74.

ISBN 978-1-107-40222-5 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ Sir William James Ashley (1888).

An Introduction to English Economic History and Theory: The Middle Ages . Rivingtons. p.

171 . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ Great Britain; William David Evans; Anthony Hammond; Thomas Colpitts Granger (1836).

A collection of statutes connected with the general administration of the law: arranged according to the order of subjects . W. H. Bond. pp.

312 –3 . Retrieved 4 January 2012 .

^ Winchester Bushel - Science Museum ^ Great Britain (1763).

Statutes at Large ...: (43 v.) ... From Magna charta to 1800 . Vol. 8. Printed by Joseph Bentham. pp.

287– 9 . Retrieved 6 January 2012 .

^ Statutes of the Realm: volume 7: 1695-1701 (1820), pp. 247-257 Further reading [ edit ] Stevenson, Maurice.

Weights and Measures of the City of Winchester , Winchester Museums Service Oxford English Dictionary: Winchester British History Online , University of London Encyclopædia Britannica: British Imperial System "Official United States Standards for Grain" (PDF) .

United States Department of Agriculture . 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 August 2006 . Retrieved 7 March 2008 .

External links [ edit ] Exchequer standard Winchester bushel measure, 1601 Image from Science Museum , London v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor v t e Imperial units Comparison with US customary system Length Twip Thousandth of an inch Barleycorn Inch Hand Link Foot Yard Fathom Rod Chain Gunter's chain Furlong Cable Mile Nautical mile League Area Square inch Square foot Square yard Perch Rood Acre Square mile Volume Derived Cubic inch Cubic foot Hoppus Cubic yard Cubic mile Tmcft Cooking Teaspoon Tablespoon Fluid ounce Cup Pint Quart Trade gallon Gallon Other Chaldron Minim Gill Fluid Scruple Fluid Drachm Peck Bushel Barrel Stuck Hogshead Speed Miles per hour Mass Grain Drachm Ounce Pound (mass) Stone Quarter Slug Long hundred Hundredweight Ship load Ton Pressure Ksi Pounds per square inch Other units and measures British thermal unit Degree Fahrenheit Rankine Foot-candle Foot-pound Foot-poundal Horsepower Horsepower-hour Kenning Pound (force) Pound-foot Poundal Span Spinning count Related systems Avoirdupois system English units Winchester Exchequer English Engineering units Foot–pound–second system (FPS) Twenty-foot equivalent unit Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Winchester_measure&oldid=1297748030 " Categories : Imperial units Measurement 1490s in law Obsolete units of measurement Systems of units History of Winchester Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 07:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Winchester measure 2 languages Add topic

