Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Precursors of transhumanism 1.2 Early transhumanist thinking 1.3 Artificial intelligence and the technological singularity 1.4 Growth of transhumanism 2 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 2.1 Aims 2.2 Ethics 2.3 Currents 2.4 Spirituality 3 Practice Toggle Practice subsection 3.1 Technologies of interest 4 Debate Toggle Debate subsection 4.1 Feasibility 4.2 Intrinsic immorality 4.3 Loss of human identity 4.4 Socioeconomic effects 4.4.1 Cultural aesthetics 4.5 New eugenics 4.6 Existential risks 4.6.1 Antinatalism and pronatalism 5 Propagandistic use Toggle Propagandistic use subsection 5.1 Common enemy to anti-democratic movements 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Transhumanism 55 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical movement For the critique of humanism and related term, see Posthumanism .

Not to be confused with Transhumance or Transgender .

Transhumanism Issues Accelerating change Eradication of suffering Fourth Industrial Revolution Human enhancement Genetic Moral Neuro- Cognitive liberty New eugenics Eugenics Human nature Meliorism Post-politics Post-scarcity People Andrews Bostrom Church Cordeiro de Chardin Drexler Fahy FM-2030 Freitas Fyodorov Fuller de Garis Gasson Goertzel de Grey Haldane Hanson Harari Harbisson Harris Huxley Hughes Istvan Johnson Kurzweil Land Moen Moravec More Musk Pearce Rothblatt Sandberg Savulescu Sorgner Spencer Stock Stolyarov Thiel Vinge Vita-More Walker Warwick Wiener Yudkowsky Influential works Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883) Looking Backward (1888) The Will to Power (~1901) Daedalus (1924) La raza cósmica (1925) The Phenomenon of Man (1955) The Dialectic of Sex (1970) Metaman (1993) The Hedonistic Imperative (1995) Regeln für den Menschenpark (1997) The Age of Spiritual Machines (1999) Citizen Cyborg (2004) The Singularity Is Near (2005) Human Enhancement (2009) Fanged Noumena (2011) The Transhumanist Wager (2013) Sapiens (2014) Homo Deus (2015) The Transhumanist Bill of Rights (2015) The Age of Em (2016) The Precipice (2020) What We Owe the Future (2022) " Techno-Optimist Manifesto " (2023) Variants Accelerationism Effective Cypherpunk Dataism Extropianism Immortalism Longtermism Postgenderism Posthumanism Russian Cosmism Singularitarianism Technogaianism Technolibertarianism Technological utopianism Techno-progressivism Related topics Dyson sphere Technologies Emerging Disruptive Hypothetical v t e Part of a series on Human enhancement Advocacy Rationale Adaptionist "Beneficient" Emancipatory Compensatory Democratic "Directive" Libertarian " Metahumanistic " Posthumanistic " Prometheist " Preventative Transhumanistic Paradigm Biohappiness Cyborgs Eugenics Intelligence amplification Moral enhancement Prostheses ( De facto ) germline interventions Selective Cloning Counseling Genetic Genomic Pre-conception Genetic enhancement Genetic engineering Epigenome editing PGD Embryo quality Oocyte selection Polygenic (risk) score (technical article) Prenatal testing Selective abortion Sex selection Sperm sorting "Nobelist sperm banks" Somatic interventions Body hacking Somatic gene therapy for color blindness in sports doping Stem-cell therapy Embryonic cells Fetal tissue implant Chemical Stimulants Amphetamine Methamphetamine Ritalin Nootropics Modafinil Piracetam Xanthine derivatives Caffeine Neurological Brain implant Brain–computer interface Deep brain stimulation " Man-Computer Symbiosis " (1960) Neuralink Neurohacking Opposition Appeal to nature Bioconservatism " Brave New World Argument " Chesterton Francis Fukuyama Our Posthuman Future (2002) Cloning prohibition Leon Kass Stem cell controversy " Designer baby " " Frankenstein's monster " He Jiankui affair Hwang affair Against life extension Undesirability of immortality Nikolas Kompridis Legal EU convention on Bioethics Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act (vetoed) United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning In the UK 1990 act 2003 act 2008 act 2001 act C. S. Lewis The Abolition of Man (1943) That Hideous Strength (1945) "Playing God" Religious response to ART s " Wisdom of repugnance " Related ART Exo wombs IVG Augmented learning Deep ecology Treating executive dysfunction Evolutionary humanism Longevity Anti-aging movement Life extension Rejuvenation Young blood transfusion Natalism Natura naturans Pontifical and Promethean man Collapse of the therapy-enhancement divide Promethean gap Technophobia Therapy-enhancement distinction v t e Part of a series on Utopias Mythical and religious Arcadia City of the Caesars Cloud cuckoo land Cockaigne Eden Elysium Fortunate Isles Garden of the gods Golden Age Great Unity Ketumati Kingdom of God Libertatia Mag Mell Mahoroba Merry England Mezzoramia Most Great Peace Mount Penglai New Jerusalem Opona Satya Yuga Shangri-La Valhalla Yvy marã e'ỹ Zion Literature Ideology and Utopia List The Republic Utopia Gulliver's Travels Dystopian literature Theory Communitas perfecta Communist society Heterotopia Ideal city Renaissance Sforzinda Pantisocracy Real utopian sociology Third International Theory Utopia for Realists Utopian studies Concepts Arcology Agriculturalism Escapism Millenarianism New Man Social harmony Technological Cyber-utopianism Post-scarcity economy Transhumanism Utopian socialism Practice Architecture Egalitarian community HosPex Open borders Pirate utopia UBI Intentional community Atarashiki-mura Huaxi Village Nanjie Sustainable Communities by country America Finland Germany Organizations Associationists Anthroposophs Lindisfarne Millennium WSF Zeitgeist v t e Part of a series on Humanism History Renaissance humanism Northern Europe France Humanist Manifesto Forms Buddhist Christian Existential Integral Jewish Marxist Neo- Pan- Personism Rationalist Religious Secular Super- Theistic Trans- Transcendental Universal Organizations Humanist International Humanists International American Humanist Association Humanists UK Humanistischer Verband Deutschlands Humanist Society Scotland Norwegian Humanist Association Icelandic Ethical Humanist Association Humanists Sweden Humanist Society (Singapore) Center for Inquiry See also Antihumanism Posthumanism Confucianism Religion of Humanity Ethical movement Humanistic psychology Humanistic capitalism Humanistic economics Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Transhumanism is a philosophical and intellectual movement that advocates the enhancement of the human condition by developing and making widely available new and future technologies that can greatly enhance longevity, cognition, and well-being.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Transhumanist thinkers study the potential benefits and dangers of emerging technologies that could overcome fundamental human limitations, as well as the ethics of using such technologies.

[ 4 ] Some transhumanists speculate that human beings may eventually be able to transform themselves into beings of such vastly greater abilities as to merit the label of posthuman beings.

[ 2 ] Another topic of transhumanist research is how to protect humanity against existential risks , including artificial general intelligence , asteroid impact , gray goo , pandemic , societal collapse , and nuclear warfare .

[ 5 ] The biologist Julian Huxley popularised the term "transhumanism" in a 1957 essay.

[ 6 ] The contemporary meaning of the term was foreshadowed by one of the first professors of futurology , a man who changed his name to FM-2030 . In the 1960s, he taught "new concepts of the human" at The New School when he began to identify people who adopt technologies, lifestyles, and worldviews "transitional" to posthumanity as " transhuman ".

[ 7 ] The assertion laid the intellectual groundwork for the British philosopher Max More to begin articulating the principles of transhumanism as a futurist philosophy in 1990, organizing in California a school of thought that has since grown into the worldwide transhumanist movement.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Influenced by seminal works of science fiction , the transhumanist vision of a transformed future humanity has attracted many supporters and detractors from a wide range of perspectives, including philosophy and religion.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Precursors of transhumanism [ edit ] According to Nick Bostrom , transcendentalist impulses have been expressed at least as far back as the quest for immortality in the Epic of Gilgamesh , as well as in historical quests for the Fountain of Youth , the Elixir of Life , and other efforts to stave off aging and death.

[ 2 ] Transhumanists draw upon and claim continuity from intellectual and cultural traditions such as the ancient philosophy of Aristotle or the scientific tradition of Roger Bacon .

[ 10 ] In his Divine Comedy , Dante coined the word trasumanar meaning "to transcend human nature, to pass beyond human nature" in the first canto of Paradiso .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] The interweaving of transhumanist aspirations with the scientific imagination can be seen in the works of some precursors of Enlightenment such as Francis Bacon .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] One of the early precursors to transhumanist ideas is René Descartes 's Discourse on Method (1637), in which Descartes envisions a new kind of medicine that can grant both physical immortality and stronger minds.

[ 17 ] In his first edition of Political Justice (1793), William Godwin included arguments favoring the possibility of "earthly immortality " (what would now be called physical immortality ). Godwin explored the themes of life extension and immortality in his gothic novel St. Leon , which became popular (and notorious) at the time of its publication in 1799, but is now mostly forgotten.

St. Leon may have inspired his daughter Mary Shelley 's novel Frankenstein .

[ 18 ] There is debate about whether the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche can be considered an influence on transhumanism, despite its exaltation of the Übermensch (overhuman), due to its emphasis on self-actualization rather than technological transformation.

[ 2 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] The transhumanist philosophies of More and Sorgner have been influenced strongly by Nietzschean thinking.

[ 19 ] By contrast, The Transhumanist Declaration "advocates the well-being of all sentience (whether in artificial intellects, humans, posthumans, or non-human animals)".

[ 22 ] The late 19th- to early 20th-century movement known as Russian cosmism , by Russian philosopher N. F. Fyodorov , is noted for anticipating transhumanist ideas.

[ 23 ] In 1966, FM-2030 (formerly F. M. Esfandiary), a futurist who taught "new concepts of the human" at The New School , in New York City , began to identify people who adopt technologies, lifestyles and worldviews transitional to posthumanity as " transhuman ".

[ 24 ] Early transhumanist thinking [ edit ] Julian Huxley , the biologist who popularised the term transhumanism in an influential 1957 essay [ 6 ] Fundamental ideas of transhumanism were first advanced in 1923 by the British geneticist J. B. S. Haldane in his essay Daedalus: Science and the Future , which predicted that great benefits would come from the application of advanced sciences to human biology—and that every such advance would first appear to someone as blasphemy or perversion, "indecent and unnatural".

[ 25 ] In particular, he was interested in the development of the science of eugenics , ectogenesis (creating and sustaining life in an artificial environment), and the application of genetics to improve human characteristics such as health and intelligence.

His article inspired academic and popular interest.

J. D. Bernal , a crystallographer at Cambridge , wrote The World, the Flesh and the Devil in 1929, in which he speculated on the prospects of space colonization and radical changes to human bodies and intelligence through bionic implants and cognitive enhancement .

[ 26 ] These ideas have been common transhumanist themes ever since.

[ 2 ] The biologist Julian Huxley is generally regarded as the founder of transhumanism after using the term for the title of an influential 1957 article.

[ 6 ] But the term derives from a 1940 paper by the Canadian philosopher W. D. Lighthall .

[ 27 ] Huxley describes transhumanism in these terms: Up till now human life has generally been, as Hobbes described it, "nasty, brutish and short"; the great majority of human beings (if they have not already died young) have been afflicted with misery… we can justifiably hold the belief that these lands of possibility exist, and that the present limitations and miserable frustrations of our existence could be in large measure surmounted… The human species can, if it wishes, transcend itself—not just sporadically, an individual here in one way, an individual there in another way, but in its entirety, as humanity.

[ 6 ] Huxley's definition differs, albeit not substantially, from the one commonly in use since the 1980s. The ideas raised by these thinkers were explored in the science fiction of the 1960s, notably in Arthur C. Clarke 's 2001: A Space Odyssey , in which an alien artifact grants transcendent power to its wielder.

[ 28 ] Japanese Metabolist architects produced a manifesto in 1960 which outlined goals to "encourage active metabolic development of our society" [ 29 ] through design and technology. In the Material and Man section of the manifesto, Noboru Kawazoe suggests that: After several decades, with the rapid progress of communication technology, every one will have a "brain wave receiver" in his ear, which conveys directly and exactly what other people think about him and vice versa. What I think will be known by all the people. There is no more individual consciousness, only the will of mankind as a whole.

[ 30 ] Artificial intelligence and the technological singularity [ edit ] The concept of the technological singularity , or the ultra-rapid advent of superhuman intelligence, was first proposed by the British cryptologist I. J. Good in 1965: Let an ultraintelligent machine be defined as a machine that can far surpass all the intellectual activities of any man however clever. Since the design of machines is one of these intellectual activities, an ultraintelligent machine could design even better machines; there would then unquestionably be an "intelligence explosion," and the intelligence of man would be left far behind. Thus the first ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that man need ever make.

[ 31 ] Computer scientist Marvin Minsky wrote on relationships between human and artificial intelligence beginning in the 1960s.

[ 32 ] Over the succeeding decades, this field continued to generate influential thinkers, such as Hans Moravec and Ray Kurzweil , who oscillated between the technical arena and futuristic speculations in the transhumanist vein.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] The coalescence of an identifiable transhumanist movement began in the last decades of the 20th century. In 1972, Robert Ettinger , whose 1964 Prospect of Immortality founded the cryonics movement , [ 35 ] contributed to the conceptualization of "transhumanity" with his 1972 Man into Superman.

[ 36 ] FM-2030 published the Upwingers Manifesto in 1973.

[ 37 ] Growth of transhumanism [ edit ] See also: List of transhumanists The first self-described transhumanists met formally in the early 1980s at the University of California, Los Angeles , which became the main center of transhumanist thought. Here, FM-2030 lectured on his " Third Way " futurist ideology.

[ 38 ] At the EZTV Media venue, frequented by transhumanists and other futurists, Natasha Vita-More presented Breaking Away , her 1980 experimental film with the theme of humans breaking away from their biological limitations and the Earth's gravity as they head into space.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] FM-2030 and Vita-More soon began holding gatherings for transhumanists in Los Angeles , which included students from FM-2030's courses and audiences from Vita-More's artistic productions. In 1982, Vita-More authored the Transhumanist Arts Statement [ 41 ] and in 1988 she produced the cable TV show TransCentury Update on transhumanity, a program that reached over 100,000 viewers.

In 1986, Eric Drexler published Engines of Creation : The Coming Era of Nanotechnology, [ 42 ] which discussed the prospects for nanotechnology and molecular assemblers , and founded the Foresight Institute . As the first nonprofit organization to research, advocate for, and perform cryonics , the Southern California offices of the Alcor Life Extension Foundation became a center for futurists. In 1988, the first issue of Extropy Magazine was published by Max More and Tom Morrow. In 1990, More, a strategic philosopher, created his own particular transhumanist doctrine, which took the form of the Principles of Extropy, and laid the foundation of modern transhumanism by giving it a new definition: [ 43 ] Transhumanism is a class of philosophies that seek to guide us towards a posthuman condition. Transhumanism shares many elements of humanism, including a respect for reason and science, a commitment to progress, and a valuing of human (or transhuman) existence in this life. [...] Transhumanism differs from humanism in recognizing and anticipating the radical alterations in the nature and possibilities of our lives resulting from various sciences and technologies [...] In 1992, More and Morrow founded the Extropy Institute , a catalyst for networking futurists and brainstorming new memeplexes by organizing a series of conferences and, more importantly, providing a mailing list, which exposed many to transhumanist views for the first time during the rise of cyberculture and the cyberdelic counterculture. In 1998, philosophers Nick Bostrom and David Pearce founded the World Transhumanist Association (WTA), an international non-governmental organization working toward the recognition of transhumanism as a legitimate subject of scientific inquiry and public policy .

[ 44 ] In 2002, the WTA modified and adopted The Transhumanist Declaration.

[ 22 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] The Transhumanist FAQ , prepared by the WTA (later Humanity+ ), gave two formal definitions for transhumanism: [ 47 ] The intellectual and cultural movement that affirms the possibility and desirability of fundamentally improving the human condition through applied reason, especially by developing and making widely available technologies to eliminate aging and to greatly enhance human intellectual, physical, and psychological capacities.

The study of the ramifications, promises, and potential dangers of technologies that will enable us to overcome fundamental human limitations, and the related study of the ethical matters involved in developing and using such technologies.

In possible contrast with other transhumanist organizations, WTA officials considered that social forces could undermine their futurist visions and needed to be addressed.

[ 7 ] A particular concern is equal access to human enhancement technologies across classes and borders.

[ 48 ] In 2006, a political struggle within the transhumanist movement between the libertarian right and the liberal left resulted in a more centre-leftward positioning of the WTA under its former executive director James Hughes .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] In 2006, the board of directors of the Extropy Institute ceased operations of the organization, saying that its mission was "essentially completed".

[ 50 ] This left the World Transhumanist Association as the leading international transhumanist organization. In 2008, as part of a rebranding effort, the WTA changed its name to " Humanity+ ".

[ 51 ] In 2012, the transhumanist Longevity Party had been initiated as an international union of people who promote the development of scientific and technological means to significant life extension that now has more than 30 national organisations throughout the world.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] The Mormon Transhumanist Association was founded in 2006.

[ 54 ] By 2012, it had hundreds of members.

[ 55 ] The first transhumanist elected member of a parliament was Giuseppe Vatinno , in 2012 in Italy.

[ 56 ] In 2017, Penn State University Press , in cooperation with philosopher Stefan Lorenz Sorgner and sociologist James Hughes , established the Journal of Posthuman Studies [ 57 ] as the first academic journal explicitly dedicated to the posthuman, with the goal of clarifying the notions of posthumanism and transhumanism, as well as comparing and contrasting both.

Theory [ edit ] It is a matter of debate whether transhumanism is a branch of posthumanism and how this philosophical movement should be conceptualised with regard to transhumanism.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Transhumanism is often referred to as a variant or activist form of posthumanism by its conservative , [ 60 ] Christian [ 61 ] and progressive [ 62 ] [ 63 ] critics.

[ 64 ] A common feature of transhumanism and philosophical posthumanism is the future vision of a new intelligent species, into which humanity will evolve and which eventually will supplement or supersede it. Transhumanism stresses the evolutionary perspective, including sometimes the creation of a highly intelligent animal species by way of cognitive enhancement (i.e.

biological uplift ), [ 7 ] but clings to a "posthuman future" as the final goal of participant evolution.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Nevertheless, the idea of creating intelligent artificial beings (proposed, for example, by roboticist Hans Moravec ) has influenced transhumanism.

[ 33 ] Moravec's ideas and transhumanism have also been characterised as a "complacent" or " apocalyptic " variant of posthumanism and contrasted with " cultural posthumanism " in humanities and the arts.

[ 67 ] While such a "cultural posthumanism" would offer resources for rethinking the relationships between humans and increasingly sophisticated machines, transhumanism and similar posthumanisms are, in this view, not abandoning obsolete concepts of the " autonomous liberal subject ", but are expanding its " prerogatives " into the realm of the posthuman .

[ 68 ] Transhumanist self-characterisations as a continuation of humanism and Enlightenment thinking correspond with this view.

Some secular humanists conceive transhumanism as an offspring of the humanist freethought movement and argue that transhumanists differ from the humanist mainstream by having a specific focus on technological approaches to resolving human concerns (i.e.

technocentrism ) and on the issue of mortality.

[ 69 ] Other progressives have argued that posthumanism, in its philosophical or activist forms, amounts to a shift away from concerns about social justice , from the reform of human institutions and from other Enlightenment preoccupations, toward narcissistic longings to transcend the human body in quest of more exquisite ways of being.

[ 70 ] The philosophy of transhumanism is closely related to technoself studies , an interdisciplinary domain of scholarly research dealing with all aspects of human identity in a technological society and focusing on the changing nature of relationships between humans and technology.

[ 71 ] Aims [ edit ] You awake one morning to find your brain has another lobe functioning. Invisible, this auxiliary lobe answers your questions with information beyond the realm of your own memory, suggests plausible courses of action, and asks questions that help bring out relevant facts. You quickly come to rely on the new lobe so much that you stop wondering how it works. You just use it. This is the dream of artificial intelligence.

— Byte , April 1985 [ 72 ] Ray Kurzweil believes that a countdown to when " human life will be irreversibly transformed " can be made through plotting major world events on a graph.

While many transhumanist theorists and advocates seek to apply reason, science and technology to reduce poverty, disease, disability, and malnutrition around the globe, [ 47 ] transhumanism is distinctive in its particular focus on the applications of technologies to the improvement of human bodies at the individual level. Many transhumanists actively assess the potential for future technologies and innovative social systems to improve the quality of all life , while seeking to make the material reality of the human condition fulfill the promise of legal and political equality by eliminating congenital mental and physical barriers .

Transhumanist philosophers argue that there not only exists a perfectionist ethical imperative for humans to strive for progress and improvement of the human condition, but that it is possible and desirable for humanity to enter a transhuman phase of existence in which humans enhance themselves beyond what is naturally human. In such a phase, natural evolution would be replaced with deliberate participatory or directed evolution .

Some theorists such as Ray Kurzweil think that the pace of technological innovation is accelerating and that the next 50 years may yield not only radical technological advances, but possibly a technological singularity , which may fundamentally change the nature of human beings.

[ 73 ] Transhumanists who foresee this massive technological change generally maintain that it is desirable, but some are concerned about the dangers of extremely rapid technological change and propose options for ensuring that advanced technology is used responsibly. For example, Bostrom has written extensively on existential risks to humanity's future welfare, including ones that emerging technologies could create.

[ 74 ] In contrast, some proponents of transhumanism view it as essential to humanity's survival. For instance, Stephen Hawking points out that the "external transmission" phase of human evolution, where knowledge production and knowledge management is more important than transmission of information via evolution , may be the point at which human civilization becomes unstable and self-destructs, one of Hawking's explanations for the Fermi paradox . To counter this, Hawking emphasizes either self-design of the human genome or mechanical enhancement (e.g., brain-computer interface ) to enhance human intelligence and reduce aggression , without which he implies human civilization may be too stupid collectively to survive an increasingly unstable system, resulting in societal collapse .

[ 75 ] While many people believe that all transhumanists are striving for immortality , that is not necessarily true. Hank Pellissier, managing director of the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies (2011–2012), surveyed transhumanists. He found that, of the 818 respondents, 23.8% did not want immortality.

[ 76 ] Some of the reasons argued were boredom, Earth's overpopulation, and the desire "to go to an afterlife".

[ 76 ] Ethics [ edit ] Transhumanists engage in interdisciplinary approaches to understand and evaluate possibilities for overcoming biological limitations by drawing on futurology and various fields of ethics.

[ citation needed ] Unlike many philosophers, social critics, and activists who morally value preservation of natural systems, transhumanists see the concept of the specifically natural as problematically nebulous at best and an obstacle to progress at worst.

[ 77 ] In keeping with this, many prominent transhumanist advocates, such as Dan Agin, call transhumanism's critics, on the political right and left jointly, " bioconservatives " or " bioluddites ", the latter term alluding to the 19th-century anti-industrialisation social movement that opposed the replacement of human manual labourers by machines.

[ 78 ] A belief of counter-transhumanism is that transhumanism can cause unfair human enhancement in many areas of life, but specifically on the social plane. This can be compared to steroid use, where athletes who use steroids in sports have an advantage over those who do not . The same disparity may happen when people have certain neural implants that give them an advantage in the workplace and in education.

[ 79 ] Additionally, according to M.J. McNamee and S.D. Edwards, many fear that the improvements afforded by a specific, privileged section of society will lead to a division of the human species into two different species.

[ 80 ] The idea of two human species, one at a great physical and economic advantage over with the other, is troublesome at best. One may be incapable of breeding with the other, and may by consequence of lower physical health and ability, be considered of a lower moral standing than the other.

[ 80 ] Nick Bostrom has said that transhumanism advocates for the wellbeing of all sentient beings, including non-human animals , extraterrestrials , and artificial forms of life.

[ 81 ] This view is reiterated by David Pearce , who advocates the use of biotechnology to eradicate suffering in all sentient beings .

[ 82 ] Currents [ edit ] There is a variety of opinions within transhumanist thought. Many of the leading transhumanist thinkers hold views that are under constant revision and development.

[ 83 ] Some distinctive currents of transhumanism are identified and listed here in alphabetical order: Abolitionism , the concept of using biotechnology to eradicate suffering in all sentient beings.

[ 82 ] Democratic transhumanism , a political ideology synthesizing liberal democracy , social democracy , radical democracy and transhumanism.

[ 84 ] Equalism , a socioeconomic theory based upon the idea that emerging technologies will put an end to social stratification through even distribution of resources in the technological singularity era.

[ 85 ] Extropianism , an early school of transhumanist thought characterized by a set of principles advocating a proactive approach to human evolution.

[ 43 ] Immortalism , a moral ideology based upon the belief that radical life extension and technological immortality is possible and desirable, and advocating research and development to ensure its realization.

[ 86 ] Libertarian transhumanism , a political ideology synthesizing libertarianism and transhumanism.

[ 78 ] Postgenderism , a social philosophy which seeks the voluntary elimination of gender in the human species through the application of advanced biotechnology and assisted reproductive technologies .

[ 87 ] Postpoliticism , a transhumanist political proposal that aims to create a " postdemocratic state " based on reason and free access of enhancement technologies to people.

[ 88 ] Singularitarianism , a moral ideology based upon the belief that a technological singularity is possible, and advocating deliberate action to effect it and ensure its safety.

[ 73 ] Technogaianism , an ecological ideology based upon the belief that emerging technologies can help restore Earth's environment and that developing safe, clean , alternative technology should therefore be an important goal of environmentalists .

[ 84 ] Spirituality [ edit ] Although many transhumanists are atheists , agnostics , or secular humanists , some have religious or spiritual views.

[ 44 ] Despite the prevailing secular attitude, some transhumanists pursue hopes traditionally espoused by religions, such as immortality , [ 86 ] while several controversial new religious movements from the late 20th century have explicitly embraced transhumanist goals of transforming the human condition by applying technology to alter the mind and body, such as Raëlism .

[ 89 ] But most thinkers associated with the transhumanism focus on the practical goals of using technology to help achieve longer and healthier lives, while speculating that future understanding of neurotheology and the application of neurotechnology will enable humans to gain greater control of altered states of consciousness , which were commonly interpreted as spiritual experiences , and thus achieve more profound self-knowledge .

[ 90 ] Transhumanist Buddhists have sought to explore areas of agreement between various types of Buddhism and Buddhist-derived meditation and mind-expanding neurotechnologies.

[ 91 ] They have been criticised for appropriating mindfulness as a tool for transcending humanness.

[ 92 ] Some transhumanists believe in the compatibility between the human mind and computer hardware, with the theoretical implication that human consciousness may someday be transferred to alternative media (a speculative technique commonly known as mind uploading ).

[ 93 ] One extreme formulation of this idea that interests some transhumanists is the proposal of the Omega Point by Christian cosmologist Frank Tipler . Drawing upon ideas in digitalism , Tipler has advanced the notion that the collapse of the Universe billions of years hence could create the conditions for the perpetuation of humanity in a simulated reality within a megacomputer and thus achieve a form of " posthuman godhood ". Before Tipler, the term Omega Point was used by Pierre Teilhard de Chardin , a paleontologist and Jesuit theologian who saw an evolutionary telos in the development of an encompassing noosphere , a global consciousness.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] Viewed from the perspective of some Christian thinkers, the idea of mind uploading is asserted to represent a denigration of the human body , characteristic of gnostic manichaean belief.

[ 97 ] Transhumanism and its presumed intellectual progenitors have also been described as neo-gnostic by non-Christian and secular commentators.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] The first dialogue between transhumanism and faith was a one-day conference at the University of Toronto in 2004.

[ 100 ] Religious critics alone faulted transhumanism for offering no eternal truths or relationship with the divine. They commented that a philosophy bereft of these beliefs leaves humanity adrift in a foggy sea of postmodern cynicism and anomie . Transhumanists responded that such criticisms reflect a failure to look at the actual content of transhumanist philosophy, which, far from being cynical, is rooted in optimistic, idealistic attitudes that trace back to the Enlightenment .

[ 101 ] Following this dialogue, William Sims Bainbridge , a sociologist of religion , conducted a pilot study, published in the Journal of Evolution and Technology , suggesting that religious attitudes were negatively correlated with acceptance of transhumanist ideas and indicating that people with highly religious worldviews tended to perceive transhumanism as a direct, competitive (though ultimately futile) affront to their spiritual beliefs.

[ 102 ] Since 2006, the Mormon Transhumanist Association sponsors conferences and lectures on the intersection of technology and religion.

[ 103 ] The Christian Transhumanist Association [ 104 ] was established in 2014.

Since 2009, the American Academy of Religion holds a "Transhumanism and Religion" consultation during its annual meeting, where scholars in the field of religious studies seek to identify and critically evaluate any implicit religious beliefs that might underlie key transhumanist claims and assumptions; consider how transhumanism challenges religious traditions to develop their own ideas of the human future, in particular the prospect of human transformation, whether by technological or other means; and provide critical and constructive assessments of an envisioned future that place greater confidence in nanotechnology, robotics and information technology to achieve virtual immortality and create a superior posthuman species.

[ 105 ] The physicist and transhumanist thinker Giulio Prisco states that "cosmist religions based on science, might be our best protection from reckless pursuit of superintelligence and other risky technologies." [ 106 ] He also recognizes the importance of spiritual ideas, such as those of Russian Orthodox philosopher Nikolai Fyodorovich Fyodorov , to the origins of the transhumanism movement.

Practice [ edit ] While some transhumanists such as Ray Kurzweil and Hans Moravec take an abstract and theoretical approach to the perceived benefits of emerging technologies, others have offered specific proposals for modifications to the human body, including heritable ones. Transhumanists are often concerned with methods of enhancing the human nervous system . Though some, such as Kevin Warwick , propose modification of the peripheral nervous system , the brain is considered the common denominator of personhood and is thus a primary focus of transhumanist ambitions.

[ 107 ] In fact, Warwick has gone a lot further than merely making a proposal. In 2002 he had a 100 electrode array surgically implanted into the median nerves of his left arm to link his nervous system directly with a computer and thus to also connect with the internet. As a consequence, he carried out a series of experiments. He was able to directly control a robot hand using his neural signals and to feel the force applied by the hand through feedback from the fingertips. He also experienced a form of ultrasonic sensory input and conducted the first purely electronic communication between his own nervous system and that of his wife who also had electrodes implanted.

[ 108 ] As proponents of self-improvement and body modification , transhumanists tend to use existing technologies and techniques that supposedly improve cognitive and physical performance, while engaging in routines and lifestyles designed to improve health and longevity.

[ 109 ] Depending on their age, some transhumanists, such as Kurzweil, express concern that they will not live to reap the benefits of future technologies. However, many have a great interest in life extension strategies and in funding research in cryonics to make the latter a viable option of last resort, rather than remaining an unproven method.

[ 110 ] While most transhumanist theory focuses on future technologies and the changes they may bring, many today are already involved in the practice on a very basic level. It is not uncommon for many to receive cosmetic changes to their physical form via cosmetic surgery, even if it is not required for health reasons. Human growth hormones attempt to alter the natural development of shorter children or those who have been born with a physical deficiency. Doctors prescribe medicines such as Ritalin and Adderall to improve cognitive focus, and many people take "lifestyle" drugs such as Viagra, Propecia, and Botox to restore aspects of youthfulness that have been lost in maturity.

[ 111 ] Other transhumanists, such as cyborg artist Neil Harbisson , use technologies and techniques to improve their senses and perception of reality. Harbisson's antenna, which is permanently implanted in his skull, allows him to sense colours beyond human perception such as infrareds and ultraviolets.

[ 112 ] Technologies of interest [ edit ] Main article: Human enhancement technologies Transhumanists support the emergence and convergence of technologies including nanotechnology , biotechnology , information technology and cognitive science (NBIC), as well as hypothetical future technologies like simulated reality , artificial intelligence , superintelligence , 3D bioprinting , mind uploading , chemical brain preservation and cryonics . They believe that humans can and should use these technologies to become more than human .

[ 113 ] Therefore, they support the recognition or protection of cognitive liberty , morphological freedom and procreative liberty as civil liberties , so as to guarantee individuals the choice of using human enhancement technologies on themselves and their children.

[ 114 ] Some speculate that human enhancement techniques and other emerging technologies may facilitate more radical human enhancement no later than at the midpoint of the 21st century. Kurzweil's book The Singularity is Near and Michio Kaku's book Physics of the Future outline various human enhancement technologies and give insight on how these technologies may impact the human race.

[ 73 ] [ 115 ] Some reports on the converging technologies and NBIC concepts have criticised their transhumanist orientation and alleged science fictional character.

[ 116 ] At the same time, research on brain and body alteration technologies has been accelerated under the sponsorship of the U.S. Department of Defense , which is interested in the battlefield advantages they would provide to the supersoldiers of the United States and its allies.

[ 117 ] There has already been a brain research program to "extend the ability to manage information", while military scientists are now looking at stretching the human capacity for combat to a maximum 168 hours without sleep.

[ 118 ] Neuroscientist Anders Sandberg has been practicing on the method of scanning ultra-thin sections of the brain. This method is being used to help better understand the architecture of the brain. It is currently being used on mice. This is the first step towards hypothetically uploading contents of the human brain, including memories and emotions, onto a computer .

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] Debate [ edit ] The very notion and prospect of human enhancement and related issues arouse public controversy.

[ 121 ] Criticisms of transhumanism and its proposals take two main forms: those objecting to the likelihood of transhumanist goals being achieved (practical criticisms) and those objecting to the moral principles or worldview sustaining transhumanist proposals or underlying transhumanism itself (ethical criticisms). Critics and opponents often see transhumanists' goals as posing threats to human values.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] The human enhancement debate is, for some, framed by the opposition between strong bioconservatism and transhumanism. The former opposes any form of human enhancement, whereas the latter advocates for all possible human enhancements.

[ 124 ] But many philosophers hold a more nuanced view in favour of some enhancements while rejecting the transhumanist carte blanche approach.

[ 125 ] Transhumanists argue that parents have a moral responsibility called procreative beneficence to make use of these methods, if and when they are shown to be reasonably safe and effective, to have the healthiest children possible. They believe this responsibility is a moral judgment best left to individual conscience, rather than imposed by law, in all but extreme cases. In this context, the emphasis on freedom of choice is called procreative liberty .

[ 7 ] Some of the best-known critiques of the transhumanist program are novels and fictional films. These works, despite presenting imagined worlds rather than philosophical analyses, are touchstones for some of the more formal arguments.

[ 7 ] Various arguments have been made to the effect that a society that adopts human enhancement technologies may come to resemble the dystopia depicted in Aldous Huxley 's 1932 novel Brave New World .

[ 126 ] Some authors consider humanity already transhuman, because recent medical advances have significantly altered our species. But this has not happened in a conscious and therefore transhumanistic way.

[ 127 ] From such a perspective, transhumanism is perpetually aspirational: as new technologies become mainstream, the adoption of still unadopted technologies becomes a new shifting goal.

Giuseppe Vattino, a member of Italy's parliament, believes transhumanism will make people "less subject to the whims of nature, such as illness or climate extremes".

[ 128 ] Feasibility [ edit ] In a 1992 book, sociologist Max Dublin pointed to many past failed predictions of technological progress and argued that modern futurist predictions would prove similarly inaccurate. He also objected to what he saw as scientism , fanaticism and nihilism by a few in advancing transhumanist causes. Dublin also said that historical parallels existed between Millenarian religions and Communist doctrines .

[ 129 ] Although generally sympathetic to transhumanism, public health professor Gregory Stock is skeptical of the technical feasibility and mass appeal of the cyborgization of humanity predicted by Kurzweil, Hans Moravec , and Kevin Warwick . He said that, throughout the 21st century, many humans will be deeply integrated into systems of machines, but remain biological. Primary changes to their own form and character would arise not from cyberware , but from the direct manipulation of their genetics , metabolism and biochemistry .

[ 130 ] In her 1992 book Science as Salvation , philosopher Mary Midgley traces the notion of achieving immortality by transcendence of the material human body (echoed in the transhumanist tenet of mind uploading ) to a group of male scientific thinkers of the early 20th century, including J. B. S. Haldane and members of his circle. She characterizes these ideas as "quasi-scientific dreams and prophesies" involving visions of escape from the body coupled with "self-indulgent, uncontrolled power-fantasies". Her argument focuses on what she perceives as the pseudoscientific speculations and irrational, fear-of-death-driven fantasies of these thinkers, their disregard for laymen and the remoteness of their eschatological visions.

[ 131 ] Another critique is aimed mainly at " algeny " (a portmanteau of alchemy and genetics ), which Jeremy Rifkin defined as "the upgrading of existing organisms and the design of wholly new ones with the intent of 'perfecting' their performance".

[ 132 ] It emphasizes the issue of biocomplexity and the unpredictability of attempts to guide the development of products of biological evolution . This argument, elaborated in particular by the biologist Stuart Newman , is based on the recognition that cloning and germline genetic engineering of animals are error-prone and inherently disruptive of embryonic development . Accordingly, so it is argued, it would create unacceptable risks to use such methods on human embryos. Performing experiments, particularly ones with permanent biological consequences, on developing humans would thus be in violation of accepted principles governing research on human subjects (see the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki ). Moreover, because improvements in experimental outcomes in one species are not automatically transferable to a new species without further experimentation, it is claimed that there is no ethical route to genetic manipulation of humans at early developmental stages.

[ 133 ] As a practical matter, international protocols on human subject research may not present a legal obstacle to attempts by transhumanists and others to improve their offspring by germinal choice technology. According to legal scholar Kirsten Rabe Smolensky, existing laws protect parents who choose to enhance their child's genome from future liability arising from adverse outcomes of the procedure.

[ 134 ] Transhumanists and other supporters of human genetic engineering do not dismiss practical concerns out of hand, insofar as there is a high degree of uncertainty about the timelines and likely outcomes of genetic modification experiments in humans. But bioethicist James Hughes suggests that one possible ethical route to the genetic manipulation of humans at early developmental stages is the building of computer models of the human genome, the proteins it specifies and the tissue engineering he argues that it also codes for. With the exponential progress in bioinformatics , Hughes believes that a virtual model of genetic expression in the human body will not be far behind and that it will soon be possible to accelerate approval of genetic modifications by simulating their effects on virtual humans.

[ 7 ] Public health professor Gregory Stock points to artificial chromosomes as a safer alternative to existing genetic engineering techniques.

[ 130 ] Thinkers [ who?

] who defend the likelihood of accelerating change point to a past pattern of exponential increases in humanity's technological capacities. Kurzweil developed this position in his 2005 book The Singularity Is Near .

Intrinsic immorality [ edit ] Some argue that, in transhumanist thought, humans attempt to substitute themselves for God . The 2002 Vatican statement Communion and Stewardship: Human Persons Created in the Image of God, [ 135 ] stated that "changing the genetic identity of man as a human person through the production of an infrahuman being is radically immoral", implying, that "man has full right of disposal over his own biological nature". The statement also argues that creation of a superhuman or spiritually superior being is "unthinkable", since true improvement can come only through religious experience and " realizing more fully the image of God ". Christian theologians and lay activists of several churches and denominations have expressed similar objections to transhumanism and claimed that Christians attain in the afterlife what radical transhumanism promises, such as indefinite life extension or the abolition of suffering. In this view, transhumanism is just another representative of the long line of utopian movements which seek to create "heaven on earth" .

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] On the other hand, religious thinkers allied with transhumanist goals such as the theologians Ronald Cole-Turner and Ted Peters hold that the doctrine of "co-creation" provides an obligation to use genetic engineering to improve human biology.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] Other critics target what they claim to be an instrumental conception of the human body in the writings of Minsky, Moravec, and some other transhumanists.

[ 68 ] Reflecting a strain of feminist criticism of the transhumanist program, philosopher Susan Bordo points to "contemporary obsessions with slenderness, youth and physical perfection", which she sees as affecting both men and women, but in distinct ways, as "the logical (if extreme) manifestations of anxieties and fantasies fostered by our culture." [ 140 ] Some critics question other social implications of the movement's focus on body modification . Political scientist Klaus-Gerd Giesen, in particular, has asserted that transhumanism's concentration on altering the human body represents the logical yet tragic consequence of atomized individualism and body commodification within a consumer culture .

[ 98 ] Bostrom responds that the desire to regain youth , specifically, and transcend the natural limitations of the human body, in general, is pan-cultural and pan-historical, not uniquely tied to the culture of the 20th century. He argues that the transhumanist program is an attempt to channel that desire into a scientific project on par with the Human Genome Project and achieve humanity's oldest hope, rather than a puerile fantasy or social trend.

[ 2 ] Loss of human identity [ edit ] In the U.S., the Amish are a religious group most known for their avoidance of certain modern technologies. Transhumanists draw a parallel by arguing that in the near-future there will probably be "humanish", people who choose to "stay human" by not adopting human enhancement technologies. They believe their choice must be respected and protected.

[ 141 ] In his 2003 book Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age , environmental ethicist Bill McKibben argued at length against many of the technologies that are postulated or supported by transhumanists, including germinal choice technology , nanomedicine and life extension strategies. He claims that it would be morally wrong for humans to tamper with fundamental aspects of themselves (or their children) in an attempt to overcome universal human limitations, such as vulnerability to aging , maximum life span and biological constraints on physical and cognitive ability. Attempts to "improve" themselves through such manipulation would remove limitations that provide a necessary context for the experience of meaningful human choice. He claims that human lives would no longer seem meaningful in a world where such limitations could be overcome technologically. Even the goal of using germinal choice technology for clearly therapeutic purposes should be relinquished, since it would inevitably produce temptations to tamper with such things as cognitive capacities. He argues that it is possible for societies to benefit from renouncing particular technologies, using as examples Ming China , Tokugawa Japan and the contemporary Amish .

[ 142 ] Biopolitical activist Jeremy Rifkin and biologist Stuart Newman accept that biotechnology has the power to make profound changes in organismal identity. They argue against the genetic engineering of human beings because they fear the blurring of the boundary between human and artifact .

[ 133 ] [ 143 ] Philosopher Keekok Lee sees such developments as part of an accelerating trend in modernization in which technology has been used to transform the "natural" into the "artefactual".

[ 144 ] In the extreme, this could lead to the manufacturing and enslavement of " monsters " such as human clones , human-animal chimeras , or bioroids , but even lesser dislocations of humans and non-humans from social and ecological systems are seen as problematic. The film Blade Runner (1982) and the novels The Boys From Brazil (1976) and The Island of Doctor Moreau (1896) depict elements of such scenarios, but Mary Shelley's 1818 novel Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus is most often alluded to by critics who suggest that biotechnologies could create objectified and socially unmoored people as well as subhumans . Such critics propose that strict measures be implemented to prevent what they portray as dehumanizing possibilities from ever happening, usually in the form of an international ban on human genetic engineering.

[ 145 ] Science journalist Ronald Bailey claims that McKibben's historical examples are flawed and support different conclusions when studied more closely.

[ 146 ] For example, few groups are more cautious than the Amish about embracing new technologies, but, though they shun television and use horses and buggies, some are welcoming the possibilities of gene therapy since inbreeding has afflicted them with a number of rare genetic diseases.

[ 130 ] Bailey and other supporters of technological alteration of human biology also reject the claim that life would be experienced as meaningless if some human limitations are overcome with enhancement technologies as extremely subjective.

Writing in Reason magazine, Bailey has accused opponents of research involving the modification of animals as indulging in alarmism when they speculate about the creation of subhuman creatures with human-like intelligence and brains resembling those of Homo sapiens . Bailey insists that the aim of conducting research on animals is simply to produce human health care benefits.

[ 147 ] A different response comes from transhumanist personhood theorists who object to what they characterize as the anthropomorphobia fueling some criticisms of this research, which science fiction writer Isaac Asimov termed the " Frankenstein complex ". For example, Woody Evans argues that, provided they are self-aware , human clones, human-animal chimeras and uplifted animals would all be unique persons deserving of respect, dignity, rights, responsibilities, and citizenship .

[ 148 ] They conclude that the coming ethical issue is not the creation of so-called monsters, but what they characterize as the " yuck factor " and " human-racism ", that would judge and treat these creations as monstrous.

[ 44 ] [ 149 ] In book 3 of his Corrupting the Image series, Douglas Hamp goes so far as to suggest that the Beast of John's Apocalypse is himself a hybrid who will induce humanity to take "the mark of the Beast ", in the hopes of obtaining perfection and immortality.

[ 150 ] At least one public interest organization, the U.S.-based Center for Genetics and Society , was formed, in 2001, with the specific goal of opposing transhumanist agendas that involve transgenerational modification of human biology, such as full-term human cloning and germinal choice technology . The Institute on Biotechnology and the Human Future of the Chicago-Kent College of Law critically scrutinizes proposed applications of genetic and nanotechnologies to human biology in an academic setting.

Socioeconomic effects [ edit ] Some critics of libertarian transhumanism have focused on the likely socioeconomic consequences in societies in which divisions between rich and poor are on the rise.

Bill McKibben , for example, suggests that emerging human enhancement technologies would be disproportionately available to those with greater financial resources, thereby exacerbating the gap between rich and poor and creating a "genetic divide".

[ 142 ] Even Lee M. Silver , the biologist and science writer who coined the term " reprogenetics " and supports its applications, has expressed concern that these methods could create a two-tiered society of genetically engineered "haves" and "have nots" if social democratic reforms lag behind implementation of enhancement technologies.

[ 151 ] The 1997 film Gattaca depicts a dystopian society in which one's social class depends entirely on genetic potential and is often cited by critics in support of these views.

[ 7 ] These criticisms are also voiced by non-libertarian transhumanist advocates, especially self-described democratic transhumanists , who believe that the majority of current or future social and environmental issues (such as unemployment and resource depletion ) must be addressed by a combination of political and technological solutions (like a guaranteed minimum income and alternative technology ). Therefore, on the specific issue of an emerging genetic divide due to unequal access to human enhancement technologies, bioethicist James Hughes, in his 2004 book Citizen Cyborg: Why Democratic Societies Must Respond to the Redesigned Human of the Future , argues that progressives or, more precisely, techno-progressives , must articulate and implement public policies (i.e., a universal health care voucher system that covers human enhancement technologies) to attenuate this problem as much as possible, rather than trying to ban human enhancement technologies. The latter, he argues, might actually worsen the problem by making these technologies unsafe or available only to the wealthy on the local black market or in countries where such a ban is not enforced.

[ 7 ] Sometimes, as in the writings of Leon Kass , the fear is that various institutions and practices judged as fundamental to civilized society would be damaged or destroyed.

[ 152 ] In his 2002 book Our Posthuman Future and in a 2004 Foreign Policy magazine article, political economist and philosopher Francis Fukuyama designates transhumanism as the world's most dangerous idea because he believes it may undermine the egalitarian ideals of democracy (in general) and liberal democracy (in particular) through a fundamental alteration of " human nature ".

[ 60 ] Social philosopher Jürgen Habermas makes a similar argument in his 2003 book The Future of Human Nature , in which he asserts that moral autonomy depends on not being subject to another's unilaterally imposed specifications. Habermas thus suggests that the human "species ethic" would be undermined by embryo-stage genetic alteration.

[ 153 ] Critics such as Kass and Fukuyama hold that attempts to significantly alter human biology are not only inherently immoral, but also threaten the social order . Alternatively, they argue that implementation of such technologies would likely lead to the "naturalizing" of social hierarchies or place new means of control in the hands of totalitarian regimes.

AI pioneer Joseph Weizenbaum criticizes what he sees as misanthropic tendencies in the language and ideas of some of his colleagues, in particular Minsky and Moravec, which, by devaluing the human organism per se, promotes a discourse that enables divisive and undemocratic social policies.

[ 154 ] In a 2004 article in the libertarian monthly Reason , science journalist Ronald Bailey contested Fukuyama's assertions by arguing that political equality has never rested on the facts of human biology. He asserts that liberalism was founded not on the proposition of effective equality of human beings, or de facto equality, but on the assertion of an equality in political rights and before the law, or de jure equality. Bailey asserts that the products of genetic engineering may well ameliorate rather than exacerbate human inequality, giving to the many what were once the privileges of the few. Moreover, he argues, "the crowning achievement of the Enlightenment is the principle of tolerance". In fact, he says, political liberalism is already the solution to the issue of human and posthuman rights since in liberal societies the law is meant to apply equally to all, no matter how rich or poor, powerful or powerless, educated or ignorant, enhanced or unenhanced.

[ 155 ] Other thinkers sympathetic to transhumanist ideas, such as Russell Blackford , have also objected to the appeal to tradition and what they see as alarmism involved in Brave New World -type arguments.

[ 156 ] Cultural aesthetics [ edit ] In addition to the socioeconomic risks and implications of transhumanism, there are indeed implications and possible consequences in regard to cultural aesthetics. Currently, there are a number of ways in which people choose to represent themselves in society. The way in which a person dresses, hair styles, and body alteration all serve to identify the way a person presents themselves and is perceived by society. According to Foucault, [ 157 ] society already governs and controls bodies by making them feel watched. This "surveillance" of society dictates how the majority of individuals choose to express themselves aesthetically.

One of the risks outlined in a 2004 article by Jerold Abrams is the elimination of differences in favor of universality. This, he argues, will eliminate the ability of individuals to subvert the possibly oppressive, dominant structure of society by way of uniquely expressing themselves externally. Such control over a population would have dangerous implications of tyranny. Yet another consequence of enhancing the human form not only cognitively, but physically, will be the reinforcement of "desirable" traits which are perpetuated by the dominant social structure.

[ 157 ] New eugenics [ edit ] Main article: New eugenics The tradition of human enhancement originated with the eugenics movement that was once prominent in the biological sciences, and was later politicized in various ways. This continuity is especially clear in the case of Julian Huxley himself.

[ 158 ] The major transhumanist organizations strongly condemn the coercion involved in such policies and reject the racist and classist assumptions on which they were based, along with the pseudoscientific notions that eugenic improvements could be accomplished in a practically meaningful time frame through selective human breeding.

[ 159 ] Instead, most transhumanist thinkers advocate a " new eugenics ", a form of egalitarian liberal eugenics .

[ 160 ] In their 2000 book From Chance to Choice: Genetics and Justice , non-transhumanist bioethicists Allen Buchanan, Dan Brock, Norman Daniels and Daniel Wikler have argued that liberal societies have an obligation to encourage as wide an adoption of eugenic enhancement technologies as possible (so long as such policies do not infringe on individuals' reproductive rights or exert undue pressures on prospective parents to use these technologies) to maximize public health and minimize the inequalities that may result from both natural genetic endowments and unequal access to genetic enhancements.

[ 161 ] Most transhumanists holding similar views nonetheless distance themselves from the term "eugenics" (preferring " germinal choice " or " reprogenetics ") [ 151 ] to avoid having their position confused with the discredited theories and practices of early-20th-century eugenic movements.

[ 123 ] Health law professor George Annas and technology law professor Lori Andrews are prominent advocates of the position that the use of these technologies could lead to human- posthuman caste warfare.

[ 145 ] [ 162 ] Existential risks [ edit ] See also: Existential risk studies and Existential risk from advanced artificial intelligence In his 2003 book Our Final Hour , British Astronomer Royal Martin Rees argues that advanced science and technology bring as much risk of disaster as opportunity for progress. However, Rees does not advocate a halt to scientific activity. Instead, he calls for tighter security and perhaps an end to traditional scientific openness.

[ 163 ] Advocates of the precautionary principle , such as many in the environmental movement , also favor slow, careful progress or a halt in potentially dangerous areas. Some precautionists believe that artificial intelligence and robotics present possibilities of alternative forms of cognition that may threaten human life.

[ 164 ] Transhumanists do not necessarily rule out specific restrictions on emerging technologies so as to lessen the prospect of existential risk . Generally, however, they counter that proposals based on the precautionary principle are often unrealistic and sometimes even counter-productive as opposed to the technogaian current of transhumanism, which they claim is both realistic and productive. In his television series Connections , science historian James Burke dissects several views on technological change , including precautionism and the restriction of open inquiry . Burke questions the practicality of some of these views, but concludes that maintaining the status quo of inquiry and development poses hazards of its own, such as a disorienting rate of change and the depletion of our planet's resources. The common transhumanist position is a pragmatic one where society takes deliberate action to ensure the early arrival of the benefits of safe, clean , alternative technology , rather than fostering what it considers to be anti-scientific views and technophobia .

Nick Bostrom argues that even barring the occurrence of a singular global catastrophic event , basic Malthusian and evolutionary forces facilitated by technological progress threaten to eliminate the positive aspects of human society.

[ 165 ] One transhumanist solution proposed by Bostrom to counter existential risks is control of differential technological development , a series of attempts to influence the sequence in which technologies are developed. In this approach, planners would strive to retard the development of possibly harmful technologies and their applications, while accelerating the development of likely beneficial technologies, especially those that offer protection against the harmful effects of others.

[ 74 ] In their 2021 book Calamity Theory , Joshua Schuster and Derek Woods critique existential risks by arguing against Bostrom’s transhumanist perspective, which emphasizes controlling and mitigating these risks through technological advancements. They contend that this approach relies too much on fringe science and speculative technologies and fails to address deeper philosophical and ethical problems about the nature of human existence and its limitations. Instead, they advocate an approach more grounded in secular existentialist philosophy , focusing on mental fortitude , community resilience , international peacebuilding , and environmental stewardship to better cope with existential risks.

[ 5 ] Antinatalism and pronatalism [ edit ] Although most people focus on the scientific and technological barriers on the road to human enhancement, Robbert Zandbergen argues that contemporary transhumanists' failure to critically engage the cultural current of antinatalism is a far bigger obstacle to a posthuman future. Antinatalism is a stance seeking to discourage, restrict, or terminate human reproduction to solve existential problems. If transhumanists fail to take this threat to human continuity seriously, they run the risk of seeing the collapse of the entire edifice of radical enhancement.

[ 166 ] Simone and Malcolm Collins , founders of Pronatalist.org, are activists known primarily for their views and advocacy related to a secular and voluntaristic form of pronatalism , a stance encouraging higher birth rates to reverse demographic decline and its negative implications for the viability of modern societies and the possibility of a better future.

[ 167 ] Critical of transhumanism, they have expressed concern that life extension would worsen the problem of gerontocracy , causing toxic imbalances in power. The Collinses lament that voluntarily childfree transhumanists who "want to live forever believe they are the epitome of centuries of human cultural and biological evolution. They don’t think they can make kids that are better than them." [ 168 ] Propagandistic use [ edit ] Common enemy to anti-democratic movements [ edit ] Transhumanism has increasingly been co-opted by anti-democratic movements as a common enemy stereotype . These movements range from Putin sympathizers to radical anti-vaxxers and Christian fundamentalists . Critics argue that nonsensical claims often stem from deliberate ignorance, and terms like "Putin sympathizer" or " conspiracy theorist " are used to defame legitimate criticism.

[ 169 ] Political scientists like Markus Linden point out that Putin, in his speeches, argues against the so-called "liberal-globalist American egocentrism" and cancel culture , which parallels the agitation seen in alternative media . These discourses also occur on platforms like Nachdenkseiten , Rubikon , and Compact , where they are presented as analyses of the decline of Western democracy.

[ 169 ] The propagandistic use of the term "transhumanism" aims to create a comprehensive counter-narrative that unites right-wing extremists , theocratic groups, and liberals. Transhumanism is portrayed as a threat to traditional values and human nature. These narratives can also be found among ideologues like Alexander Dugin , who condemns transhumanism as the work of the devil, and Christian fundamentalists who equate it with the denial of traditional values.

[ 169 ] The use of the term "transhumanism" as an ideological rallying point for the Querfront is also evident in the fusion of right-wing , left-wing , and libertarian ideas that collectively oppose liberal democracies. This development emphasizes individual conceptions of humanity that are often incompatible with a pluralistic society . It requires a critical examination of the political implications of transhumanism and its instrumentalization by anti-democratic forces.

[ 169 ] See also [ edit ] Assisted reproductive technology Brain-computer interface Body hacking Cyberware Cyborg Digital immortality Directed evolution (transhumanism) Do-it-yourself biology Future of Humanity Institute Hard science fiction Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies Kardashev scale " My body, my choice " Meliorism Metaman (book) Participant evolution Posthuman Posthumanism Quantified self TechnoCalyps Technological dystopia Technological utopianism Transhuman Transhuman Space Transhumanism in fiction Life extension References [ edit ] ^ Mercer, Calvin; Throten, Tracy J., eds. (2015).

Religion and Transhumanism: The Unknown Future of Human Enhancement . Praeger.

ISBN 978-1-4408-3325-0 .

^ a b c d e f Bostrom, Nick (2005).

"A history of transhumanist thought" (PDF) .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

14 (1): 1– 25 . Retrieved February 21, 2006 .

^ Hopkins, P. D. (2012). "Transhumanism".

Encyclopedia of Applied Ethics (Second ed.). pp.

414– 422.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-373932-2.00243-X .

ISBN 978-0-12-373932-2 .

^ "We May Look Crazy to Them, But They Look Like Zombies to Us: Transhumanism as a Political Challenge" . Archived from the original on November 6, 2016 . Retrieved January 25, 2016 .

^ a b Schuster, Joshua; Woods, Derek (2021).

Calamity Theory: Three Critiques of Existential Risk . University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 9781517912918 .

^ a b c d Huxley, Julian (1957).

"Transhumanism" .

New Bottles for New Wine . London: Chatto & Windus. pp.

13– 17 . Retrieved March 1, 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Hughes, James (2004).

Citizen Cyborg: Why Democratic Societies Must Respond to the Redesigned Human of the Future . Westview Press.

ISBN 978-0-8133-4198-9 .

OCLC 56632213 .

^ Gelles, David (January 1, 2009).

"Immortality 2.0: A Silicon Valley Insider Looks at California's Transhumanist Movement" .

The Futurist .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2012 . Retrieved April 24, 2025 .

^ Google Ngram Viewer . Retrieved April 25, 2013 .

^ Porter, Allen (June 1, 2017).

"Bioethics and Transhumanism" .

The Journal of Medicine and Philosophy: A Forum for Bioethics and Philosophy of Medicine .

42 (3): 237– 260.

doi : 10.1093/jmp/jhx001 .

PMID 28499043 .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2017 . Retrieved May 30, 2023 .

^ Vita-More, Natasha (2012).

Life Expansion . University of Plymouth. pp.

74– 75.

See also Harrison, Peter; Wolyniak, Joseph (2015).

"The History of 'Transhumanism' " .

Notes and Queries .

62 (3): 465– 467.

doi : 10.1093/notesj/gjv080 .

ISSN 0029-3970 .

^ "Trasumanar (neologism)" .

danteworlds.laits.utexas.edu . Retrieved August 24, 2021 .

^ "Paradiso 1 – Digital Dante" .

digitaldante.columbia.edu . Retrieved August 24, 2021 .

^ "BioEdge: Was Dante a transhumanist?" .

BioEdge . Archived from the original on August 24, 2021 . Retrieved August 24, 2021 .

^ Bainbridge, W.S. (2011).

Leadership in Science and Technology: A Reference Handbook . SAGE Publications. p. 582.

ISBN 978-1-4522-6652-7 . Retrieved May 3, 2023 .

^ Manzocco, R. (2019).

Transhumanism - Engineering the Human Condition: History, Philosophy and Current Status . Springer Praxis Books. Springer International Publishing. p. 2.

ISBN 978-3-030-04958-4 . Retrieved May 3, 2023 .

^ Renée Mirkes. Transhumanist Medicine: Can We Direct Its Power to the Service of Human Dignity? The Linacre Quarterly, March 29, 2019 ^ "Godwin, William (1756–1836) – Introduction" .

Gothic Literature . enotes.com. 2008. Archived from the original on August 28, 2008 . Retrieved August 9, 2008 .

^ a b Sorgner, Stefan Lorenz (March 2009).

"Nietzsche, the Overhuman, and Transhumanism" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

20 (1): 29– 42.

^ Blackford, Russell (2010).

"Editorial: Nietzsche and European Posthumanisms" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

^ Sorgner, Stefan Lorenz (April 24, 2012).

"Was Nietzsche a Transhumanist?" .

IEET News .

^ a b "The Transhumanist Declaration" (PDF) . Retrieved May 24, 2023 .

^ "Art works by Russian cosmism painter XX – XXI ct. Catalogue of exhibition 2013 | Soviet Era Museum" .

sovieteramuseum.com . February 18, 2016 . Retrieved June 24, 2018 .

^ FM-2030 (1989).

Are You a Transhuman?: Monitoring and Stimulating Your Personal Rate of Growth in a Rapidly Changing World . Viking Adult.

ISBN 978-0-446-38806-1 .

OCLC 18134470 .

^ Haldane, J.B.S.

(1923).

Daedalus or, Science and the Future (PDF) . Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2021.

^ Clarke, Arthur C. (2000).

Greetings, Carbon-Based Bipeds . St Martin's Griffin, New York.

^ Harrison, Peter & Wolyniak, Joseph (2015).

"The History of 'Transhumanism' " .

Notes and Queries .

62 (3): 465– 467.

doi : 10.1093/notesj/gjv080 .

^ Hutton, Christopher.

"Google's Glass Castle: The Rise and Fear of a Transhuman Future" .

PopMatters .

^ Lin (2010), p. 24 ^ Lin, Zhongjie (2010).

Kenzo Tange and the Metabolist Movement: Urban Utopias of Modern Japan . Routledge. pp.

35– 36.

ISBN 978-1-135-28198-4 .

^ I.J. Good, "Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine" ( HTML Archived November 28, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ), Advances in Computers , vol. 6, 1965.

^ Minsky, Marvin (1960). "Steps toward artificial intelligence". pp.

406– 450.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.79.7413 .

^ a b Moravec, Hans (1998).

"When will computer hardware match the human brain?" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

1 . Retrieved June 23, 2006 .

^ Kurzweil, Raymond (1999).

The Age of Spiritual Machines . Viking Adult.

ISBN 978-0-670-88217-5 .

OCLC 224295064 .

^ Devlin, Hannah (November 18, 2016).

"The cryonics dilemma: will deep-frozen bodies be fit for new life?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved September 22, 2018 .

^ Ettinger, Robert (1974).

Man into Superman . Avon.

ISBN 978-0-380-00047-0 . Archived from the original on August 28, 2013.

^ FM-2030 (1973).

UpWingers: A Futurist Manifesto (Available as an eBook: FW00007527 ed.). New York: John Day Co.

ISBN 978-0-381-98243-0 .

OCLC 600299 .

^ "FM-2030: Are You Transhuman?" .

YouTube . October 2013. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2017 .

^ "EZTV Media" . Retrieved May 1, 2006 .

^ Regis, Ed (1990).

Great Mambo Chicken and the Transhuman Condition: Science Slightly Over the Edge . Perseus Books.

^ Vita-More, Natasha (January 1, 1997).

"The extropian manifesto" .

arthistoryarchive.com .

^ Drexler 1986 ^ a b More, Max (1990).

"Transhumanism | Towards a Futurist Philosophy" .

maxmore.com . Archived from the original on October 29, 2005.

^ a b c Hughes, James J. (2005).

"Report on the 2005 Interests and Beliefs Survey of the Members of the World Transhumanist Association" . World Transhumanist Association.

^ "The Transhumanist Declaration" .

Humanity+ .

^ Kirsch, Adam (June 20, 2020).

"Looking Forward to the End of Humanity" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ a b "What is Transhumanism?" .

Humanity + .

^ a b Ford, Alyssa (May–June 2005).

"Humanity: The Remix" .

Utne Magazine . Retrieved March 3, 2007 .

^ Saletan, William (June 4, 2006).

"Among the Transhumanists" .

Slate .

^ Vita-More, Natasha (2006).

"Next steps" .

Extropy Institute . Retrieved May 5, 2006 .

^ Newitz, Annalee (2008).

"Can Futurism Escape the 1990s?" .

Io9 . Retrieved November 18, 2008 .

^ Stambler, Ilia.

"The Longevity Party – Who Needs it? Who Wants it?" .

IEET . Retrieved August 23, 2012 .

^ "A Single-Issue Political Party for Longevity Science" .

Fight Aging!

. July 27, 2012.

^ "About" .

Mormon Transhumanist Association . Archived from the original on January 11, 2019 . Retrieved June 4, 2016 .

^ "Member Survey Results" .

Mormon Transhumanist Association . Archived from the original on November 6, 2018 . Retrieved June 4, 2016 .

^ "Italy elects first transhumanist MP" . Kurzweilai.net . Retrieved April 25, 2013 .

^ "Journal of Posthuman Studies: Philosophy, Technology, Media" .

^ Umbrello, Steven; Lombard, Jessica (December 14, 2018).

"Silence of the Idols: Appropriating the Myth of Sisyphus for Posthumanist Discourses" .

Postmodern Openings .

9 (4): 98– 121.

doi : 10.18662/po/47 .

hdl : 2318/1686606 .

ISSN 2069-9387 .

^ Evans, W. (June 2022).

"Review of On Transhumanism" .

Prometheus: Critical Studies in Innovation .

38 (2): 271– 74.

doi : 10.13169/prometheus.38.2.0271 .

S2CID 252023683 .

^ a b Fukuyama, Francis (September–October 2004).

"The world's most dangerous ideas: transhumanism" (reprint) .

Foreign Policy (144): 42– 43.

doi : 10.2307/4152980 .

JSTOR 4152980 . Retrieved November 14, 2008 .

^ Hook, Christopher (2004).

"Transhumanism and Posthumanism" (PDF) . In Post, Stephen G. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Bioethics (3rd ed.). New York: Macmillan. pp.

2517– 2520.

ISBN 978-0-02-865774-5 .

OCLC 52622160 .

^ Winner, Langdon (Fall 2002).

"Are Humans Obsolete?" (PDF) .

The Hedgehog Review . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 10, 2008 . Retrieved December 10, 2007 .

^ Coenen, Christopher (2007).

"Utopian Aspects of the Debate on Converging Technologies" (PDF) . In Banse, Gerhard; et al. (eds.).

Assessing Societal Implications of Converging Technological Development (1st ed.). Berlin: edition sigma. pp.

141– 172.

ISBN 978-3-89404-941-6 .

OCLC 198816396 . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 28, 2011 . Retrieved August 22, 2008 .

^ MacFarlane, James Michael (2020), "The Techno-Centred Imagination", Transhumanism as a New Social Movement , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

205– 233, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-40090-3_8 , ISBN 978-3-030-40089-7 , S2CID 219495940 ^ Bostrom, Nick.

"Why I Want to be a Posthuman When I Grow Up" (PDF) . Retrieved December 10, 2007 .

^ Umbrello, Steven (October 17, 2018).

"Posthumanism" .

Con Texte .

2 (1): 28– 32.

doi : 10.28984/ct.v2i1.279 .

ISSN 2561-4770 .

^ Badmington, Neil (Winter 2003).

"Theorizing Posthumanism" .

Cultural Critique . Retrieved December 10, 2007 .

^ a b Hayles, N. Katherine (1999).

How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics . University Of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-32146-2 .

OCLC 186409073 .

^ Inniss, Patrick.

"Transhumanism: The Next Step?" . Archived from the original on November 6, 2007 . Retrieved December 10, 2007 .

^ Winner, Langdon (2005).

"Resistance is Futile: The Posthuman Condition and Its Advocates" . In Bailie, Harold; Casey, Timothy (eds.).

Is Human Nature Obsolete?

. Massachusetts Institute of Technology: M.I.T. Press. pp.

385– 411.

ISBN 978-0-262-52428-5 .

^ Management Association, Information Resources (2015).

Public Affairs and Administration: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications . IGI Global. p. 2192.

ISBN 978-1-4666-8359-4 .

^ Lemmons, Phil (April 1985).

"Artificial Intelligence" .

BYTE . p. 125.

Archived from the original on 20 April 2015 . Retrieved 14 February 2015 .

^ a b c Kurzweil, Raymond (2005).

The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology . Viking Adult.

ISBN 978-0-670-03384-3 .

OCLC 224517172 .

^ a b Bostrom, Nick (2002).

"Existential risks: analyzing human extinction scenarios" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology . Retrieved February 21, 2006 .

^ Hawking, Stephen.

"Life in the Universe" .

Public Lectures . University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on April 21, 2006 . Retrieved May 11, 2006 .

^ a b Pellissier, Hank. "Do all Transhumanists Want Immortality? No? Why Not?" Futurist 46.6 (2012): 65-. Web.

^ Bostrom, Nick ; Sandberg, Anders (2007).

"The Wisdom of Nature: An Evolutionary Heuristic for Human Enhancement" (PDF) .

Nick Bostrom . Retrieved September 18, 2007 .

^ a b Hughes, James (2002).

"The politics of transhumanism" .

changesurfer.com . Archived from the original on May 3, 2006 . Retrieved December 14, 2013 .

^ Tennison, Michael (2012). "Moral transhumanism: the next step".

The Journal of Medicine and Philosophy .

37 (4). J Med Philos: 405– 416.

doi : 10.1093/jmp/jhs024 .

PMID 22855738 .

^ a b McNamee, M. J.; Edwards, S. D. (2006).

"Transhumanism, medical technology and slippery slopes" .

Journal of Medical Ethics .

32 (9): 513– 518.

doi : 10.1136/jme.2005.013789 .

JSTOR 27719694 .

PMC 2563415 .

PMID 16943331 .

^ "Transhumanist Values" .

nickbostrom.com . Retrieved December 21, 2022 .

^ a b "The Hedonistic Imperative" .

www.hedweb.com . Retrieved December 21, 2022 .

^ "What currents are there within transhumanism?" .

World Transhumanist Association . 2002–2005. Archived from the original on October 16, 2007 . Retrieved November 3, 2007 .

^ a b Hughes, James (2002).

"Democratic Transhumanism 2.0" . Archived from the original on June 11, 2002 . Retrieved January 26, 2007 .

^ Lee, Newton (2019).

The Transhumanism Handbook . Springer Nature.

^ a b "Immortality Institute" .

^ Dvorsky, George ; Hughes, James (2008).

"Postgenderism: Beyond the Gender Binary" .

Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies .

^ Gayozzo, Piero (September 20, 2018).

Extrapolitical Theory and Postpoliticism - A Transhumanist Political Theory .

^ Raël (2002).

Oui au clonage humain: La vie éternelle grâce à la science . Quebecor.

ISBN 978-1-903571-05-7 .

OCLC 226022543 .

^ Hughes, James (September 22, 2004).

"Technologies of Self-perfection | What would the Buddha do with nanotechnology and psychopharmaceuticals?" .

archives.betterhumans.com . Archived from the original on May 10, 2007.

^ "IEET Cyborg Buddha Project" .

ieet.org . Archived from the original on October 16, 2014 . Retrieved October 14, 2014 .

^ Evans, Woody (2014).

"If You See a Cyborg in the Road, Kill the Buddha: Against Transcendental Transhumanism" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology . Retrieved October 14, 2014 .

^ Sandberg, Anders (March 11, 2000).

"Uploading" .

aleph.se .

^ Tipler, Frank J.

(1994).

The Physics of Immortality . Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-19-282147-8 .

OCLC 16830384 .

^ Steinhart, Eric (December 2008).

"Teilhard de Chardin and Transhumanism" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

20 (1): 1– 22.

^ Burdett, Michael S. (2011).

Transhumanism and Transcendence .

Georgetown University Press . p. 20.

ISBN 978-1-58901-780-1 .

...others have made important contributions as well. For example, Freeman Dyson and Frank Tipler in the twentieth century...

^ Pauls, David.

"Transhumanism: 2000 Years in the Making" .

thecbc.org . Archived from the original on September 11, 2006.

^ a b Giesen, Klaus-Gerd (2004).

"Transhumanisme et génétique humaine" .

L'Observatoire de la génétique (in French). Archived from the original on July 22, 2017.

^ Davis, Erik (1999).

TechGnosis: Myth, Magic, and Mysticism in the Age of Information . Three Rivers Press.

ISBN 978-0-609-80474-2 .

OCLC 42925424 .

^ Campbell, Heidi; Walker, Mark Alan (2005).

"Religion and transhumanism: introducing a conversation" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology . Retrieved March 21, 2006 .

^ "TransVision 2004: Faith, Transhumanism and Hope Symposium" . Archived from the original on January 4, 2007.

^ Bainbridge, William Sims (2005).

"The Transhuman Heresy" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology . Retrieved January 2, 2008 .

^ "Mormon Transhumanist Association" .

YouTube .

^ "CTA Website" . Christian Transhumanist Association.

^ "AAR: Transhumanism and Religion Consultations" . Archived from the original on January 12, 2013.

^ Prisco, Giulio (September 9, 2014).

"Religion as Protection From Reckless Pursuit of Superintelligence and Other Risky Technologies" . Turing Church. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016 . Retrieved May 8, 2016 .

^ Walker, Mark Alan (March 2002).

"Prolegomena to any future philosophy" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

10 (1).

ISSN 1541-0099 . Retrieved March 2, 2006 .

^ Warwick, K.; Gasson, M.; Hutt, B.; Goodhew, I.; Kyberd, P.; Andrews, B.; Teddy, P.; Shad, A. (2003).

"The Application of Implant Technology for Cybernetic Systems" .

Archives of Neurology .

60 (10): 1369– 73.

doi : 10.1001/archneur.60.10.1369 .

PMID 14568806 .

^ Kurzweil, Raymond (1993).

The 10% Solution for a Healthy Life . Three Rivers Press.

^ Kurzweil, Raymond (2004).

Fantastic Voyage: Live Long Enough to Live Forever . Viking Adult.

ISBN 978-1-57954-954-1 .

OCLC 56011093 .

^ Elliott, Carl (2003). "Humanity 2.0".

The Wilson Quarterly .

27 (4): 13– 20.

JSTOR 40260800 .

^ Adams, Tim "When man meets metal: rise of the transhumans" , The Guardian , 29 October 2017 ^ Naam, Ramez (2005).

More Than Human: Embracing the Promise of Biological Enhancement . Broadway Books.

ISBN 978-0-7679-1843-5 .

OCLC 55878008 .

^ Sandberg, Anders .

"Morphological Freedom – Why We not just Want it, but Need it" .

aleph.se . Retrieved June 2, 2025 .

^ Kaku, Michio (2011).

Physics of the Future . United States: Doubleday. p. 389.

^ Nanoscience and nanotechnologies | 6 Social and ethical issues (PDF) (Report). The Royal Society & The Royal Academy of Engineering. July 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 9, 2012.

^ Moreno, Jonathan D.

(2006).

Mind Wars: Brain Research and National Defense . Dana Press.

ISBN 978-1-932594-16-4 .

^ Goldblatt, Michael (2002). "DARPA's programs in enhancing human performance". In Roco, Mihail C.; Bainbridge, William Sims (eds.).

Managing Nano-Bio-Info-Cogno Innovations: Converging Technologies in Society (1 ed.). Arlington, VA: Springer. pp.

339 –340.

ISBN 978-1-4020-4106-8 .

; cited in McIntosh, Daniel (December 2008). "Human, Transhuman, Posthuman: Implications of Evolution-by-design for Human Security".

Journal of Human Security .

4 (3): 4– 20.

doi : 10.3316/JHS0403004 .

ISSN 1835-3800 .

^ Sandberg, Anders ; Boström, Nick (2008).

Whole Brain Emulation: A Roadmap (PDF) . Technical Report #2008-3. Future of Humanity Institute, Oxford University . Retrieved April 5, 2009 .

The basic idea is to take a particular brain, scan its structure in detail, and construct a software model of it that is so faithful to the original that, when run on appropriate hardware, it will behave in essentially the same way as the original brain.

^ Fan, Xue; Markram, Henry (May 7, 2019).

"A Brief History of Simulation Neuroscience" .

Frontiers in Neuroinformatics .

13 : 32.

doi : 10.3389/fninf.2019.00032 .

ISSN 1662-5196 .

PMC 6513977 .

PMID 31133838 .

^ Garreau, Joel (2006).

Radical Evolution: The Promise and Peril of Enhancing Our Minds, Our Bodies – and What It Means to Be Human . Broadway.

ISBN 978-0-7679-1503-8 .

OCLC 68624303 .

^ Sorgner, Stefan Lorenz (2010).

"Beyond Humanism: Reflections on Trans- and Posthumanism" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology . Retrieved May 24, 2023 .

Section 9.

^ a b Levine, Susan B. (2021). "Creating a Higher Breed: Transhumanism and the Prophecy of Anglo-American Eugenics".

Posthuman Bliss? The Failed Promise of Transhumanism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780190051495 .

^ "Ageless Bodies, Happy Souls" .

The New Atlantis . Retrieved October 25, 2023 .

^ Brennan, Cian (June 1, 2023).

"Weak transhumanism: moderate enhancement as a non-radical path to radical enhancement" .

Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics .

44 (3): 229– 248.

doi : 10.1007/s11017-023-09606-6 .

ISSN 1573-1200 .

PMC 10172256 .

PMID 36780070 .

^ Fukuyama, Francis (May 1, 2003).

Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution . Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-374-70618-0 .

^ Casas, Miquel (2017).

El fin del Homo sapiens: La naturaleza y el transhumanismo . Madrid: 2017. p. 112.

ISBN 978-84-16996-35-3 .

^ Cartlidge, Edwin. "One Minute with... Giuseppe Vatinno." New Scientist 215.2882 (2012): 25-. Web.

^ Dublin, Max (1992).

Futurehype: The Tyranny of Prophecy . Plume.

ISBN 978-0-452-26800-5 .

OCLC 236056666 .

^ a b c Stock, Gregory (2002).

Redesigning Humans: Choosing our Genes, Changing our Future . Mariner Books.

ISBN 978-0-618-34083-5 .

OCLC 51756081 .

^ Midgley, Mary (1992).

Science as Salvation . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-06271-8 .

OCLC 181929611 .

^ Rifkin, Jeremy (1983).

Algeny: A New Word--A New World . Viking Adult.

ISBN 978-0-670-10885-5 .

^ a b Newman, Stuart A.

(2003).

"Averting the clone age: prospects and perils of human developmental manipulation" (PDF) .

Journal of Contemporary Health Law & Policy .

19 (2): 431– 63.

PMID 14748253 . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 16, 2008 . Retrieved September 17, 2008 .

^ Smolensky, Kirsten Rabe (2006).

"Parental Liability for Germline Genetic Enhancement: To Be or Not to Be?" . Archived from the original on May 17, 2006.

^ "Communion and Stewardship: Human Persons Created in the Image of God" .

www.vatican.va . International Theological Commission . Retrieved June 2, 2025 .

^ Mitchell, Ben C. & Kilner, John F. (2003).

"Remaking Humans: The New Utopians Versus a Truly Human Future" .

Dignity .

9 (3): 1, 5. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007 . Retrieved December 5, 2006 .

^ Baratt, Helen (2006).

"Transhumanism" .

Christian Medical Fellowship . Archived from the original on April 2, 2012.

^ Cole-Turner, Ronald (1993).

The New Genesis: Theology and the Genetic Revolution . Westminster John Knox Press.

ISBN 978-0-664-25406-3 .

OCLC 26402489 .

^ Peters, Ted (1997).

Playing God?: Genetic Determinism and Human Freedom . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-91522-9 .

OCLC 35192269 .

^ Bordo, Susan (1993).

Unbearable Weight: Feminism, Western Culture and the Body .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-08883-2 .

OCLC 27069938 .

^ Alexander, Brian (2000).

"Don't die, stay pretty: introducing the ultrahuman makeover" .

Wired . Retrieved January 8, 2007 .

^ a b McKibben, Bill (2003).

Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age . Times Books.

ISBN 978-0-8050-7096-5 .

OCLC 237794777 .

^ Otchet, Amy (September 1998).

"Interview with Jeremy Rifkin: Fears of a Brave New World" .

The UNESCO Courier . UNESCO.

^ Lee, Keekok (1999).

The Natural and the Artefactual . Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-0-7391-0061-5 .

OCLC 231842178 .

^ a b Darnovsky, Marcy (2001).

"Health and human rights leaders call for an international ban on species-altering procedures" .

Center for Genetics and Society . Archived from the original on January 26, 2017 . Retrieved February 21, 2006 .

^ Bailey, Ronald (October 2003).

"Enough Already" .

Reason . Retrieved May 31, 2006 .

^ Bailey, Ronald (December 12, 2001).

"Right-Wing Biological Dread: The Subhumans are coming! The Subhumans are coming!" .

Reason . Retrieved January 18, 2007 .

^ Evans, Woody (2015).

"Posthuman Rights: Dimensions of Transhuman Worlds" .

Teknokultura .

12 (2). Universidad Complutense, Madrid: 373– 384.

doi : 10.5209/rev_TK.2015.v12.n2.49072 . Retrieved December 5, 2016 .

^ Glenn, Linda MacDonald (2002).

Biotechnology at the margins of personhood: an evolving legal paradigm (Master of Laws thesis). McGill University . Retrieved March 3, 2006 .

^ Hamp, Douglas (2022).

Corrupting the Image 3: Singularity, Superhumans, and the Second Coming of Jesus . USA: Eskaton Media Group. pp.

129– 130.

ISBN 978-1-63821-417-5 .

^ a b Silver, Lee M.

(1998).

Remaking Eden: Cloning and Beyond in a Brave New World . Harper Perennial.

ISBN 978-0-380-79243-6 .

OCLC 40094564 .

^ Kass, Leon (May 21, 2001). "Preventing a Brave New World: why we must ban human cloning now".

The New Republic .

^ Habermas, Jürgen (2004).

The Future of Human Nature . Polity Press.

ISBN 978-0-7456-2987-2 .

OCLC 49395577 .

^ Platt, Charles (1995).

"Superhumanism" .

Wired . Retrieved December 5, 2006 .

^ Bailey, Ronald (August 25, 2004).

"Transhumanism: the most dangerous idea?" .

Reason . Retrieved February 20, 2006 .

^ Blackford, Russell (2003).

"Who's afraid of the Brave New World?" .

Quadrant .

^ a b Abrams, Jerold J. (2004). "Pragmatism, Artificial Intelligence, and Posthuman Bioethics: Shusterman, Rorty, Foucault".

Human Studies .

27 (3): 241– 258.

doi : 10.1023/B:HUMA.0000042130.79208.c6 .

JSTOR 20010374 .

S2CID 144876752 .

^ Weindling, Paul (June 18, 2024).

"Julian Huxley and the Continuity of Eugenics in Twentieth-century Britain" .

Journal of Modern European History .

10 (4): 480– 499.

doi : 10.17104/1611-8944_2012_4 (inactive July 1, 2025).

PMC 4366572 .

PMID 25798079 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Bashford, A.; Levine, P. (2010).

The Oxford Handbook of The History of Eugenics . Oxford University Press. p. 545.

ISBN 978-0-19-537314-1 .

^ "Do transhumanists advocate eugenics?" .

World Transhumanist Association . 2002–2005. Archived from the original on September 9, 2006 . Retrieved April 3, 2006 .

^ Buchanan, Allen; Brock, Dan W.; Daniels, Norman; Wikler, Daniel (2000).

From Chance to Choice: Genetics and Justice . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-66977-1 .

OCLC 41211380 .

^ Annas, George ; Andrews, Lori ; Isasi, Rosario (2002). "Protecting the endangered human: toward an international treaty prohibiting cloning and inheritable alterations".

American Journal of Law & Medicine .

28 ( 2– 3): 151.

doi : 10.1017/S009885880001162X .

^ Rees, Martin (2003).

Our Final Hour: A Scientist's Warning: How Terror, Error, and Environmental Disaster Threaten Humankind's Future In This Century—On Earth and Beyond . Basic Books.

Bibcode : 2003ofhs.book.....R .

ISBN 978-0-465-06862-3 .

OCLC 51315429 .

^ Arnall, Alexander Huw (2003).

Future technologies, today's choices: nanotechnology, artificial intelligence and robotics (PDF) (Report). Greenpeace U.K. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 14, 2006 . Retrieved April 29, 2006 .

^ Bostrom, Nick (2009).

"The Future of Human Evolution" .

Bedeutung .

284 (3): 8.

Bibcode : 2001SciAm.284c...8R .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0301-8 .

^ Zandbergen, Robbert (December 9, 2021).

"Morality's Collapse: Antinatalism, Transhumanism and the Future of Humankind" .

Journal of Ethics and Emerging Technologies .

31 (1): 1– 16.

doi : 10.55613/jeet.v31i1.76 .

S2CID 248689623 . Retrieved April 5, 2023 .

^ Dodds, Io (April 19, 2023).

"Meet the 'elite' couples breeding to save mankind" .

The Telegraph .

^ Weiss, Suzy (May 24, 2023).

"The Tech Messiahs Who Want to Deliver Us from Death" .

The Free Press .

^ a b c d Linden, Markus (September 11, 2022).

"Ideologischer Kitt für die Querfront" .

Die Zeit (in German) . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Adorno, F. P. (2021).

The Transhumanist Movement . New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

ISBN 978-3-030-82423-5 .

Cole-Turner, Ronald, ed. (2011).

Transhumanism and transcendence: Christian hope in an age of technological enhancement . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 978-1-58901-780-1 .

Frodeman, R. (2019).

Transhumanism, Nature, and the Ends of Science .

United Kingdom : Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-367-18939-6 .

Hansell, Gregory R; Grassie, William, eds. (2011).

H+/-: Transhumanism and Its Critics . Philadelphia: Metanexus Institute.

ISBN 978-1-45681-567-7 .

Oliver Krüger : Virtual Immortality: God, Evolution, and the Singularity in Post- and Transhumanism . Bielefeld: transcript 2021.

ISBN 978-3-8376-5059-4 .

Maher, Derek F.; Mercer, Calvin, eds. (2009).

Religion and the implications of radical life extension (1st ed.). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-230-10072-5 .

Lee, Newton, ed. (2019).

The Transhumanism Handbook .

Springer Cham .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-16920-6 .

ISBN 978-3-030-16920-6 .

Mercer, Calvin; Trothen, Tracy, eds. (2014).

Religion and transhumanism: the unknown future of human enhancement . Westport, CT: Praeger.

ISBN 978-1-4408-3325-0 .

Mercer, Calvin; Maher, Derek, eds. (2014).

Transhumanism and the Body: The World Religions Speak . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-137-36583-5 .

More, Max; Vita-More, Natasha, eds. (2013).

The Transhumanist Reader: Classical and Contemporary Essays on the Science, Technology, and Philosophy of the Human Future (1st ed.). Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-118-33429-4 .

Pilsch, A. (2017).

Transhumanism: Evolutionary Futurism and the Human Technologies of Utopia .

Minneapolis, MN : University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 978-1-4529-5488-2 .

Ranisch, Robert; Sorgner, Stefan Lorenz, eds. (2014).

Post- and Transhumanism . Bruxelles: Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-3-631-60662-9 .

Tirosh-Samuelson, Hava (2012).

"Transhumanism as a securalist faith" .

Zygon: Journal of Religion and Science .

47 (4): 710– 734.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9744.2012.01288.x .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Transhumanism .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Transhumanism .

Listen to this article ( 59 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 22 November 2008 ( 2008-11-22 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) TH-Pedia , transhumanist wiki What is Transhumanism?

v t e Transhumanism Overviews Transhuman Transhumanism in fiction Currents Accelerationism Effective Antinaturalism Cypherpunk Dataism Eradication of suffering Extropianism Immortalism Postgenderism Posthumanism Postpoliticism Russian cosmism Singularitarianism Technogaianism Technolibertarianism Technological utopianism Techno-progressivism Organizations Foresight Institute Humanity+ Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies Future of Humanity Institute LessWrong US Transhumanist Party People Andrews Bostrom Church José Luis Cordeiro K. Eric Drexler Fahy FM-2030 Freitas Fuller Fyodorov de Garis Gasson David Gobel Ben Goertzel de Grey Haldane Hanson Harari Harbisson Harris Huxley Hughes Zoltan Istvan Ray Kurzweil Land Ole Martin Moen Hans Moravec Max More Elon Musk Osborn David Pearce Martine Rothblatt Anders Sandberg Savulescu Sorgner Spencer Stock Gennady Stolyarov II Teilhard de Chardin Vernor Vinge Natasha Vita-More Mark Alan Walker Warwick Eliezer Yudkowsky Category v t e Emerging technologies Topics Automation Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive innovation Ephemeralization Ethics AI Bioethics Cyberethics Neuroethics Robot ethics Exploratory engineering Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Future-oriented technology analysis Horizon scanning Moore's law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology in science fiction Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism List v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transhumanism&oldid=1304822838 " Categories : Transhumanism 1990 introductions Bioethics Body modification Doomsday scenarios Ethics of science and technology Existential risk from artificial intelligence Ideologies Immortality Liberalism Genetic engineering Philosophy of artificial intelligence Philosophy of culture Philosophy of technology Philosophical anthropology Posthumanism Futures studies Science fiction culture Science fiction themes Singularitarianism Singularity theory Social change Social philosophy Social justice Subcultures Syncretic political movements Technological change Technology development Technology forecasting Technology hazards Transhumanist politics Technological utopianism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2016 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 10:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transhumanism 55 languages Add topic

