Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Position Held 3 Awards 4 Published works 5 References Toggle the table of contents Subhash C. Kashyap 1 language മലയാളം Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian political scientist This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Subhash C. Kashyap" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This biographical article is written like a résumé .

Please help improve it by revising it to be neutral and encyclopedic .

( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Subhash C. Kashyap Born ( 1929-05-10 ) 10 May 1929 (age 96) Chandpur, Bijnor Nationality Indian Alma mater Allahabad University Scientific career Fields Political Science Institutions Parliament of India and Centre for Policy Research Subhash C. Kashyap (born 10 May 1929) is a former secretary-general of 7th Lok Sabha , 8th Lok Sabha and 9th Lok Sabha and Lok Sabha Secretariat (Lower House of Parliament of India) from 1984 to 1990. He is also a well known political scientist, an expert in the Indian Constitution, Constitutional Law, Parliamentary Experts and a distinguished scholar, He has been associated with the parliament of India since the year 1953. He also headed an International Centre for Parliamentary Documentation, IPU at Geneva till 1983, He was the first Indian to head an International Organisation. Kashyap was honorary constitutional advisor to the Government of India on Panchayati Raj Laws and Institutions. He is also recipient of several prestigious awards for the Best Books in Constitution, Law and Political Science. At present Dr. Kashyap is an honorary research professor at the Centre for Policy Research (CPR) , New Delhi.
He was also a member of the National Commission to Review the Working of Constitution and chairman of its drafting and editorial committee. He was also one of the key members of the High level committee in the making of One Nation, One Election. Dr. Kashyap also served as the president of Indian national bar association.

Career [ edit ] Kashyap began career at Allahabad as journalist, advocate and university teacher. He joined the Parliament Secretariat in 1953 and  was associated with Parliament of India for over 37 yrs. He became Secretary-General of Lok Sabha on 31 December 1983. He took voluntary retirement in 1990 from the post of secretary-general, Lok Sabha and Lok Sabha Secretariat, Parliament of India. Kashyap had an outstanding academic career with higher education and professional training in India, US, UK, and Switzerland.

Position Held [ edit ] Patron, Integrated Talent Development Mission (ITDM) Honorary Research Professor, Centre for Policy Research (CPR) President, Rashtriya Jagriti Sansthan President Citizenship Development Society Member, governing body Auroville Foundation Advocate and consultant, Supreme Court of India Member of the India International Centre's Committee of Experts on the Constitution Honorary director of the Project on Constitutional Reforms Chairman of the Conferences of Secretaries (1987, 1989) Former director of the institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies on Panchayati Raj laws and institutions.

Chairman, governing body, Deshbandhu College (University Of Delhi).

Awards [ edit ] He was Awarded Honorary title of Commander and degree of H.O.A.S.F. (Honorary Order of the Academy of San Francisco) for services in the field of Constitutional Law. He received Motilal Nehru award two times, and the Coveted Jawaharlal Nehru Fellowship of 1996-98; also received 'Vidur Samman', 'Rajiv Smriti Samman', 'Vidhi Seva Samman' and 'Great Son of the Soil A Award' and many more awards.

Padma Bhushan award in the field of Public Affairs [ 1 ] Published works [ edit ] Kashyap has published more than 500 research articles and papers, and over 100 books. Some of his books are listed here: Framing of India's Constitution -A Study Constitution Making Since 1950 -An Overview (1950-2004) Blueprint of Political Reforms, CPR, Shipra, New Delhi, 2003.

The Speaker's Office, Shipra, Delhi, 2001.

History of the Parliament of India -6 Volumes, (1994-2000) Parliamentary Procedure, Law, Privileges, Practice and Precedents -2 volumes Institutions of Governance in South Asia, Konark, Delhi, 2000.

Understanding the Constitution of India, NCERT, New Delhi, 2000 Citizens and the Constitution (Citizenship values under the Constitution), Publications Division, Ministry of I. & B., Govt. of India, 1997 Anti-defection Law and Parliamentary Privileges Legislative Management Studies, National, Delhi, 1995.

Our Constitution -Introduction to India's Constitution and Constitutional Law, NBT, New Delhi, 1994 History of the Freedom Movement Delinking Religion and Politics Parliamentary Wit and Humour, Shipra, Delhi, 1992.

The Ten Lok Sabhas, Shipra, Delhi, 1992.

History of Parliamentary Democracy, Shipra, Delhi, 1991.

Office of the Speaker and Speakers of Lok Sabha, Shipra, Delhi, 1991.

The Political System and Institution Building Under Jawaharlal Nehru, National, Delhi, 1990.

Jawaharlal Nehru, the Constitution and the Parliament Our Parliament -An introduction to the Parliament of India, NBT, New Delhi, 1989 (2000 edition). The book is also available in many other Indian languages.

Parliament of India -Myths and Realities, National, Delhi, 1988.

Govind Ballath Pant -Parliamentarian, Statesman and Administrator, National, New Delhi, 1988.

The Ministers and the Legislators, Metropolitan, New Delhi, 1982.

Jawaharlal Nehru and the Constitution, Metropolitan, 1982.

Human Rights and Parliament, Metropolitan, New Delhi, 1978.

Politics of Power, National, Delhi, 1974.

Tryst with Freedom, National, 1973.

The Unknown Nietzsche -His socio-political thought and legacy, National, Delhi, 1970.

Politics of Defection -A Study of State Politics in India, National, Delhi, 1969.

Our Political System, National Book Trust, 2008.

References [ edit ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] ^ "Padma Awards 2015" . pib.nic.in . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

^ Review Of ^ Vision Books : Concise Encyclopedia of Indian Polity & Governance : Subhash C. Kashyap : Book ( ISBN 817094774X ) ^ Subhash C. Kashyap Columns, Leading Columnist - The Indian Express ^ Subhash C Kashyap Books - Understanding The Constitution Of India, Subhash C Kashyap books in India, Subhash C Kashyap Books at the Online Book Store of Rediff Books ^ Subhash C. Kashyap Books - List of books by Subhash C. Kashyap ^ Indian Council of Social Science Research ^ Jain Book | Indian Books on SUBHASH C KASHYAP | SUBHASH C KASHYAP books from India | Indian Books | Indian Book Agency | Books from India ^ http://bcud.unipune.ac.in/(S(53bkj355zob3oo324zhcir55))/files/LiveSessionViewing.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ "Centre for Policy Research" . Archived from the original on 7 May 2008 . Retrieved 4 March 2011 .

^ Annexure Ii v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Netherlands Norway Latvia Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subhash_C._Kashyap&oldid=1278081652 " Categories : Secretaries general of the Lok Sabha 1929 births Living people Politicians from Prayagraj Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in public affairs Jawaharlal Nehru Fellows University of Allahabad alumni Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from March 2022 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from March 2020 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with a promotional tone from March 2020 All articles with a promotional tone Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from May 2018 Use Indian English from May 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 11:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subhash C. Kashyap 1 language Add topic

