Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Structure 3 In sea urchins 4 In foraminifera 5 In ascidians 6 In the Fossil Record 7 Effects of Climate Change 8 Other terms 9 References 10 See also Toggle the table of contents Test (biology) 7 languages العربية Català Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hard shell of some spherical marine animals This article is about shell-like structures in living organisms. For assessments in biology and other educational subjects, see Test (assessment) . For the US schools test, see GRE Biology Test . For other uses, see Test .

Test of a shingle urchin ( Colobocentrotus atratus ) Part of a series related to Biomineralization General Mineralized tissues Remineralisation Biocrystallization Biointerface Biofilm Exoskeletons (shells) Arthropod exoskeleton cuticle Brachiopod shell Cephalopod shell cirrate shell cuttlebone gladius Lorica Choanoflagellate lorica Protist shell coccosphere coccolith diatom frustule foraminifera test testate amoebae Seashell echinoderm stereom mollusc shell nacre chiton shell gastropod shell small shelly fauna scaly-foot snail shell estuary shells Sponge spicule Test Turtle shell Endoskeletons ( bones ) Vertebrate skeleton Bone mineral Ossification Teeth, scales, tusks etc Limpet teeth Otolith otolithic membrane Scale microfossils Tusk Calcification amorphous calcium carbonate marine biogenic calcification calcareous nannofossils Aragonite oolitic aragonite sand aragonite sea Calcite microbial calcite precipitation calcite sea Great Calcite Belt Silicification biogenic silica siliceous ooze diatomaceous earth Other forms Bone bed Kerogen alginite oil shale Phosphate phosphorite Pyrena Related Mineral evolution In soil mineralization immobilization Ballast minerals Magnetofossil Magnetosome Magnetotactic bacteria Magnetoreception Microfossils engrailed gene Druse Cupriavidus metallidurans Biomineralising polychaetes Mineral nutrients Microbial mat Fossilization permineralization petrifaction Burgess Shale preservation Category v t e In biology, a test is the hard shell of some spherical aquatic animals and protists , notably sea urchins and microorganisms such as testate foraminiferans , radiolarians , and testate amoebae . The term is also applied to the covering of scale insects . The related Latin term testa is used for the outer layer of the hard seed coat of plant seeds.

Etymology [ edit ] Further information on testa (Latin word), in: Latin The anatomical term "test" derives from the Latin word testa , which refers to an earthenware object, for example, a piece of pottery, a tile, or a potsherd, and by extension, the shell of a mollusc or a skull .

[ 1 ] Structure [ edit ] The test is a skeletal structure, made of hard material such as calcium carbonate , silica , chitin or composite materials .

[ 2 ] As such, it allows the protection of the internal organs and the attachment of soft flesh.

The structure is notable for its ambulacra , alternating in wide and narrow patterns. Small serrations, bumps, ridges or thorns are frequently found along the outer cortex.

[ 2 ] Magnesium calcites in the structures share three common features: lack of uniformity in Mg distribution, calcite minerals that maintain crystallographic orientations, and formation of Mg-calcites that are thermodynamically unstable.

[ 3 ] In sea urchins [ edit ] Test of a sea urchin.

Sea urchin test detail. External plates made of carbonate, silica, and chitin create a dense protective layer that is often covered in serrations, ridges and spines [ 2 ] .

The test of sea urchins is made of calcium carbonate, strengthened by a framework of calcite monocrystals, in a characteristic "stereomic" structure. These two ingredients provide sea urchins with a great solidity and a moderate weight, as well as the capacity to regenerate the mesh from the cuticle. According to a 2012 study, [ 4 ] the skeletal structures of sea urchins consist of 92% of "bricks" of calcite monocrystals (conferring solidity and hardness) and 8% of a "mortar" of amorphous lime (allowing flexibility and lightness). This lime is constituted itself of 99.9% of calcium carbonate, with 0.1% structural proteins, which make sea urchins animals with an extremely mineralized skeleton (which also explains their excellent conservation as fossils).

[ 4 ] . The endoskeletal matrix is formed by spicules of calcite and extracellular matrix proteins that form concentric folded layers.

[ 5 ] In foraminifera [ edit ] Foraminiferan tests.

Main article: Foraminifera test Further information: Foraminifera § Tests The test of foraminifera , a group of single-celled organisms, is extremely evolutionarily diverse. Many different methods of constructing the test are present, from lacking a test in Reticulomyxa , proteinaceous tests in the " allogromiids ", agglomerated tests made from foreign particles in many groups including textulariids , silica tests in silicoloculinids , and aragonite or calcite tests in many forms including miliolids and rotaliids . It can be of many types, including proteinaceous, agglutinated (exogenous agglomerate), porcelain-like (smooth calcite) or hyalin (lens). Foraminifera with multi-chambered tests are referred to as multilocular and develop by building new chambers in their test. These are arranged according to a geometry particular to each species: they can be rectilinear, curved, rolled up or cyclic, uniserial or multiserial. These organizational types can also be mixed, or even more complex. Miliolids have a particular arrangement of chambers known as "milioline". The surface of the test can be smooth or textured and may be perforated with small holes.

[ 6 ] In ascidians [ edit ] In ascidians , the sheath is sometimes called test as well and is composed largely of a particular type of cellulose historically termed "tunicine". From 1845 (when this was discovered by Schmidt ) until 1958 (when cellulose fibres were found in mammalian connective tissue), ascidians were believed to be the only animals that synthesized cellulose.

[ 7 ] In the Fossil Record [ edit ] Tests are valuable tools in the fossil record used as proxies for reconstructing environmental conditions. Urchins appeared in the Phanerozoic and are globally distributed, and the skeletal nature of their tests allowed for consistent conservation in the fossil record.

[ 8 ] The rapid growth and incorporation of isotopes including oxygen, magnesium, calcium and carbon allow scientists to evaluate the relative conditions of the oceans throughout Earth's history.

[ 8 ] Effects of Climate Change [ edit ] The effects of ocean acidification and sea temperature change can be detrimental to test formation and function due to their incorporation of calcium and carbonate. Increase in pCO2 has decreased structural integrity resulting in skeletal failure.

[ 2 ] Alteration and decreased test robustness results in lower growth rates and smaller adult diameters of urchin tests.

[ 2 ] Other studies indicate that there some species able to adapt to long term exposure to higher acidity, due to evidence of enhanced growth after prolonged proximity to a hydrothermal vent [ 9 ] or seasonal hypercapnia events.

[ 10 ] Effects of ocean acidification on calcifying oceanic organisms.  Sea urchin tests are expected to be thinner and smaller in light of changing ocean chemistry [ 10 ] .

Other terms [ edit ] On a strictly scientific point of view, the term "test" should be restricted to the hard shell protecting sea urchins and foraminiferans. Similar conical, tubular, and vase-shaped structures found in some ciliates or in certain microbial animals such as loriciferans and rotifers are referred to as loricas . For sessile echinoderms (like crinoids , but also many fossile groups such as cystoids or blastoids ), the correct word is " theca ". For diatoms , the term in use is " frustule ", and for radiolarians it should be " capsule ". The more common word " shell " is used for mollusks , arthropods and turtles (even if the latter ones belong to the order " Testudines ").

Sea urchin tests ( Coelopleurus exquisitus on a Phyllacanthus imperialis ).

Test of a purple sea urchin .

Test of an irregular sea urchin ( Echinocardium ).

Foraminiferans ' tests from the Adriatic Sea.

References [ edit ] ^ Freund, William; Andrews, E. A.; Lewis, Charlton Thomas; Short, Charles, eds. (1884).

"testa" .

Harpers' Latin Dictionary: A New Latin Dictionary Founded on the Translation of Freund's Latin-German Lexicon . New York: Harper & Brothers. p. 1862.

^ a b c d e Lawrence, John M. (2013-05-31).

Sea Urchins: Biology and Ecology . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-397213-2 .

^ Long, Xia; Ma, Yurong; Qi, Limin (2014-01-01).

"Biogenic and synthetic high magnesium calcite – A review" .

Journal of Structural Biology .

185 (1): 1– 14.

doi : 10.1016/j.jsb.2013.11.004 .

ISSN 1047-8477 .

^ a b J. Seto; Y. Ma; S. Davis; F. Meldrum; A. Gourrier; Y.Y. Kime; U. Schilde; M. Sztucki; M. Burghammer; S. Maltsev; C. Jäger; H. Cölfen (2012).

"Structure-property relationships of a biological mesocrystal in the adult sea urchin spine" .

PNAS .

109 (18): 3699– 4304.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1204261109 .

PMC 3344994 .

PMID 22343283 .

^ Wilt, Fred H. (1999-06-30).

"Matrix and Mineral in the Sea Urchin Larval Skeleton" .

Journal of Structural Biology .

126 (3): 216– 226.

doi : 10.1006/jsbi.1999.4105 .

ISSN 1047-8477 .

^ Saraswati, Pratul Kumar; Srinivasan, M. S. (2016), "Calcareous-Walled Microfossils" , Micropaleontology , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

81– 119, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-14574-7_6 , ISBN 978-3-319-14573-0 , retrieved 2020-09-12 ^ Endean, The Test of the Ascidian, Phallusia mammillata , Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science, Vol. 102, part 1, pp. 107–117, 1961.

^ a b Müller, Peter; Reymond, Claire E.; Siegel, Philipp; Westphal, Hildegard (2017-10-15).

"Paleoenvironmental proxies in echinoid spines (Eucidaris galapagensis, Döderlein 1887) along a natural water temperature gradient" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology . Modern calibration of palaeoenvironmental proxies from biogenic carbonate geochemistry.

484 : 70– 78.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2016.06.024 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ Leung, Jonathan Y. S.; Zhang, Sam; Connell, Sean D. (2022).

"Is Ocean Acidification Really a Threat to Marine Calcifiers? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of 980+ Studies Spanning Two Decades" .

Small .

18 (35): 2107407.

doi : 10.1002/smll.202107407 .

hdl : 2440/136116 .

ISSN 1613-6829 .

^ a b Uboldi, Thomas; Olivier, Frédéric; Chauvaud, Laurent; Tremblay, Réjean (2023).

"How ocean warming and acidification affect the life cycle of six worldwide commercialised sea urchin species: A review" .

Aquaculture, Fish and Fisheries .

3 (3): 219– 236.

doi : 10.1002/aff2.107 .

ISSN 2693-8847 .

See also [ edit ] Frustule Lorica (biology) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Test_(biology)&oldid=1299183187 " Categories : Mollusc shells Echinoidea Marine biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia Student Program This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 23:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Test (biology) 7 languages Add topic

