Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History: Q versus P Toggle History: Q versus P subsection 1.1 Derivatives pricing: the Q world 1.2 Risk and portfolio management: the P world 2 Criticism 3 See also Toggle See also subsection 3.1 Mathematical tools 3.2 Derivatives pricing 3.3 Portfolio modelling 3.4 Other 4 Notes 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Mathematical finance 38 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Finance Markets Assets Asset (economics) Bond Asset growth Capital asset Commodity Derivatives Domains Equity Foreign exchange Money Over-the-counter Private equity Real estate Spot Stock Participants Angel investor Bull (stock market speculator) Financial planner Investor institutional Retail Speculator Locations Financial centres Offshore financial centres Conduit and sink OFCs Instruments Bond Cash Collateralised debt obligation Credit default swap Time deposit ( certificate of deposit ) Credit line Deposit Derivative Futures contract Indemnity Insurance Letter of credit Loan Mortgage Option ( call exotic put ) Performance bonds Repurchase agreement Stock Security Syndicated loan Synthetic CDO Corporate General Accounting Audit Capital budgeting Capital structure Corporate finance Credit rating agency Enterprise risk management Enterprise value Risk management Financial statements Transactions Leveraged buyout Mergers and acquisitions Structured finance Venture capital Taxation Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Corporate tax haven Tax inversion Tax haven Transfer pricing Personal Credit / Debt Employment contract Financial planning Retirement Student loan Public Government spending Final consumption expenditure Operations Redistribution Transfer payment Government revenue Taxation Deficit spending Budget ( balance ) Debt Non-tax revenue Warrant of payment Banking Central bank Deposit account Fractional-reserve Full-reserve Investment banking Loan Money supply Lists of banks Bank regulation Banking license Basel Accords Bank for International Settlements Financial Stability Board Deposit insurance Separation of investment and retail banking Regulation · Financial law International Financial Reporting Standards ISO 31000 Professional certification Fund governance Economic history Private equity and venture capital Recession Stock market bubble Stock market crash Accounting scandals Outline Business and Economics portal Money portal v t e Application of mathematical and statistical methods in finance Mathematical finance , also known as quantitative finance and financial mathematics , is a field of applied mathematics , concerned with mathematical modeling in the financial field .

In general, there exist two separate branches of finance that require advanced quantitative techniques: derivatives pricing on the one hand, and risk and portfolio management on the other.

[ 1 ] Mathematical finance overlaps heavily with the fields of computational finance and financial engineering . The latter focuses on applications and modeling, often with the help of stochastic asset models , while the former focuses, in addition to analysis, on building tools of implementation for the models. 
Also related is quantitative investing , which relies on statistical and numerical models (and lately machine learning ) as opposed to traditional fundamental analysis when managing portfolios .

French mathematician Louis Bachelier 's doctoral thesis, defended in 1900, is considered the first scholarly work on mathematical finance. But mathematical finance emerged as a discipline in the 1970s, following the work of Fischer Black , Myron Scholes and Robert Merton on option pricing theory.

Mathematical investing originated from the research of mathematician Edward Thorp who used statistical methods to first invent card counting in blackjack and then applied its principles to modern systematic investing.

[ 2 ] The subject has a close relationship with the discipline of financial economics , which is concerned with much of the underlying theory that is involved in financial mathematics. While trained economists use complex economic models that are built on observed empirical relationships, in contrast, mathematical finance analysis will derive and extend the mathematical or numerical models without necessarily establishing a link to financial theory, taking observed market prices as input.
See: Valuation of options ; Financial modeling ; Asset pricing . 
The fundamental theorem of arbitrage-free pricing is one of the key theorems in mathematical finance, while the Black–Scholes equation and formula are amongst the key results.

[ 3 ] Today many universities offer degree and research programs in mathematical finance.

History: Q versus P [ edit ] There are two separate branches of finance that require advanced quantitative techniques: derivatives pricing, and risk and portfolio management. One of the main differences is that they use different probabilities such as the risk-neutral probability (or arbitrage-pricing probability), denoted by "Q", and the actual (or actuarial) probability, denoted by "P".

Derivatives pricing: the Q world [ edit ] The Q world Goal "extrapolate the present" Environment risk-neutral probability Q {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} } Processes continuous-time martingales Dimension low Tools Itō calculus, PDEs Challenges calibration Business sell-side Main article: Risk-neutral measure Further information: Black–Scholes model , Brownian model of financial markets , Martingale pricing , and Quantitative analysis (finance) § History The goal of derivatives pricing is to determine the fair price of a given security in terms of more liquid securities whose price is determined by the law of supply and demand . The meaning of "fair" depends, of course, on whether one considers buying or selling the security. Examples of securities being priced are plain vanilla and exotic options , convertible bonds , etc.

Once a fair price has been determined, the sell-side trader can make a market on the security. Therefore, derivatives pricing is a complex "extrapolation" exercise to define the current market value of a security, which is then used by the sell-side community. 
Quantitative derivatives pricing was initiated by Louis Bachelier in The Theory of Speculation ("Théorie de la spéculation", published 1900), with the introduction of the most basic and most influential of processes, Brownian motion , and its applications to the pricing of options.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Brownian motion is derived using the Langevin equation and the discrete random walk .

[ 6 ] Bachelier modeled the time series of changes in the logarithm of stock prices as a random walk in which the short-term changes had a finite variance . This causes longer-term changes to follow a Gaussian distribution .

[ 7 ] The theory remained dormant until Fischer Black and Myron Scholes , along with fundamental contributions by Robert C. Merton , applied the second most influential process, the geometric Brownian motion , to option pricing . For this M. Scholes and R. Merton were awarded the 1997 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences . Black was ineligible for the prize because he died in 1995.

[ 8 ] The next important step was the fundamental theorem of asset pricing by Harrison and Pliska (1981), according to which the suitably normalized current price P 0 of security is arbitrage-free, and thus truly fair only if there exists a stochastic process P t with constant expected value which describes its future evolution: [ 9 ] P 0 = E 0 ( P t ) {\displaystyle P_{0}=\mathbf {E} _{0}(P_{t})} 1 A process satisfying ( 1 ) is called a " martingale ". A martingale does not reward risk. Thus the probability of the normalized security price process is called "risk-neutral" and is typically denoted by the blackboard font letter " Q {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} } ".

The relationship ( 1 ) must hold for all times t: therefore the processes used for derivatives pricing are naturally set in continuous time.

The quants who operate in the Q world of derivatives pricing are specialists with deep knowledge of the specific products they model.

Securities are priced individually, and thus the problems in the Q world are low-dimensional in nature. Calibration is one of the main challenges of the Q world: once a continuous-time parametric process has been calibrated to a set of traded securities through a relationship such as ( 1 ), a similar relationship is used to define the price of new derivatives.

The main quantitative tools necessary to handle continuous-time Q-processes are Itô's stochastic calculus , simulation and partial differential equations (PDEs).

[ 10 ] Risk and portfolio management: the P world [ edit ] The P world Goal "model the future" Environment real-world probability P {\displaystyle \mathbb {P} } Processes discrete-time series Dimension large Tools multivariate statistics Challenges estimation Business buy-side Risk and portfolio management aims to model the statistically derived probability distribution of the market prices of all the securities at a given future investment horizon. This "real" probability distribution of the market prices is typically denoted by the blackboard font letter " P {\displaystyle \mathbb {P} } ", as opposed to the "risk-neutral" probability " Q {\displaystyle \mathbb {Q} } " used in derivatives pricing. Based on the P distribution, the buy-side community takes decisions on which securities to purchase in order to improve the prospective profit-and-loss profile of their positions considered as a portfolio. Increasingly, elements of this process are automated; see Outline of finance § Quantitative investing for a listing of relevant articles.

For their pioneering work, Markowitz and Sharpe , along with Merton Miller , shared the 1990 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences , for the first time ever awarded for a work in finance.

The portfolio-selection work of Markowitz and Sharpe introduced mathematics to investment management . With time, the mathematics has become more sophisticated. Thanks to Robert Merton and Paul Samuelson , one-period models were replaced by continuous time, Brownian-motion models , and the quadratic utility function implicit in mean–variance optimization was replaced by more general increasing, concave utility functions.

[ 11 ] Furthermore, in recent years the focus shifted toward estimation risk, i.e., the dangers of incorrectly assuming that advanced time series analysis alone can provide completely accurate estimates of the market parameters.

[ 12 ] See Financial risk management § Investment management .

Much effort has gone into the study of financial markets and how prices vary with time.

Charles Dow , one of the founders of Dow Jones & Company and The Wall Street Journal , enunciated a set of ideas on the subject which are now called Dow Theory . This is the basis of the so-called technical analysis method of attempting to predict future changes. One of the tenets of "technical analysis" is that market trends give an indication of the future, at least in the short term. The claims of the technical analysts are disputed by many academics.

[ citation needed ] While numerous empirical studies have examined the effectiveness of technical analysis, there remains no definitive consensus on its usefulness in forecasting financial markets.

[ 13 ] Criticism [ edit ] Further information: Financial economics § Challenges and criticism , and Financial engineering § Criticisms See also: Financial models with long-tailed distributions and volatility clustering Over the years, increasingly sophisticated mathematical models and derivative pricing strategies have been developed, but their credibility was damaged by the 2008 financial crisis .

Contemporary practice of mathematical finance has been subjected to criticism from figures within the field notably by Paul Wilmott , and by Nassim Nicholas Taleb , in his book The Black Swan .

[ 14 ] Taleb claims that the prices of financial assets cannot be characterized by the simple models currently in use, rendering much of current practice at best irrelevant, and, at worst, dangerously misleading. Wilmott and Emanuel Derman published the Financial Modelers' Manifesto in January 2009 [ 15 ] which addresses some of the most serious concerns.
Bodies such as the Institute for New Economic Thinking are now attempting to develop new theories and methods.

[ 16 ] In general, modeling the changes by distributions with finite variance is, increasingly, said to be inappropriate.

[ 17 ] In the 1960s it was discovered by Benoit Mandelbrot that changes in prices do not follow a Gaussian distribution , but are rather modeled better by Lévy alpha- stable distributions .

[ 18 ] The scale of change, or volatility, depends on the length of the time interval to a power a bit more than 1/2. Large changes up or down are more likely than what one would calculate using a Gaussian distribution with an estimated standard deviation . But the problem is that it does not solve the problem as it makes parametrization much harder and risk control less reliable.

[ 14 ] Perhaps more fundamental: though mathematical finance models may generate a profit in the short-run, this type of modeling is often in conflict with a central tenet of modern macroeconomics, the Lucas critique - or rational expectations -  which states that observed relationships may not be structural in nature and thus may not be possible to exploit for public policy or for profit unless we have identified relationships using causal analysis and econometrics .

[ 19 ] Mathematical finance models do not, therefore, incorporate complex elements of human psychology that are critical to modeling modern macroeconomic movements such as the self-fulfilling panic that motivates bank runs .

See also [ edit ] See also: Outline of finance § Financial mathematics , Outline of finance § Mathematical tools , Outline of finance § Derivatives pricing , Outline of corporate finance , and Computational finance Mathematical tools [ edit ] Asymptotic analysis Backward stochastic differential equation Calculus Copulas , including Gaussian Differential equations Expected value Ergodic theory Feynman–Kac formula Finance § Quantitative finance Fourier transform Girsanov theorem Itô's lemma Martingale representation theorem Mathematical models Mathematical optimization Linear programming Nonlinear programming Quadratic programming Monte Carlo method Numerical analysis Gaussian quadrature Real analysis Partial differential equations Heat equation Numerical partial differential equations Crank–Nicolson method Finite difference method Probability Probability distributions Binomial distribution Johnson's SU-distribution Log-normal distribution Student's t-distribution Quantile functions Radon–Nikodym derivative Risk-neutral measure Scenario optimization Stochastic calculus Brownian motion Lévy process Stochastic differential equation Stochastic optimization Stochastic volatility Survival analysis Value at risk Volatility ARCH model GARCH model Derivatives pricing [ edit ] The Brownian model of financial markets Rational pricing assumptions Risk neutral valuation Arbitrage -free pricing Valuation adjustments Credit valuation adjustment XVA Yield curve modelling Multi-curve framework Bootstrapping Construction from market data Fixed-income attribution Nelson-Siegel Principal component analysis Forward Price Formula Futures contract pricing Swap valuation Currency swap#Valuation and Pricing Interest rate swap#Valuation and pricing Multi-curve framework Variance swap#Pricing and valuation Asset swap #Computing the asset swap spread Credit default swap #Pricing and valuation Options Put–call parity (Arbitrage relationships for options) Intrinsic value , Time value Moneyness Pricing models Black–Scholes model Black model Binomial options model Implied binomial tree Edgeworth binomial tree Monte Carlo option model Implied volatility , Volatility smile Local volatility Stochastic volatility Constant elasticity of variance model Heston model Stochastic volatility jump SABR volatility model Markov switching multifractal The Greeks Finite difference methods for option pricing Vanna–Volga pricing Trinomial tree Implied trinomial tree Garman-Kohlhagen model Lattice model (finance) Margrabe's formula Carr–Madan formula Pricing of American options Barone-Adesi and Whaley Bjerksund and Stensland Black's approximation Least Square Monte Carlo Optimal stopping Roll-Geske-Whaley Interest rate derivatives Black model caps and floors swaptions Bond options Short-rate models Rendleman–Bartter model Vasicek model Ho–Lee model Hull–White model Cox–Ingersoll–Ross model Black–Karasinski model Black–Derman–Toy model Kalotay–Williams–Fabozzi model Longstaff–Schwartz model Chen model Forward rate -based models LIBOR market model (Brace–Gatarek–Musiela Model, BGM) Heath–Jarrow–Morton Model (HJM) Portfolio modelling [ edit ] Further information: Outline of finance § Portfolio theory , Outline of finance § Quantitative investing , and Outline of finance § Portfolio mathematics Other [ edit ] Computational finance Derivative (finance) , list of derivatives topics Economic model Econophysics Financial economics Financial engineering Financial modeling § Quantitative finance International Association for Quantitative Finance International Swaps and Derivatives Association Index of accounting articles List of economists Master of Quantitative Finance Outline of economics Outline of finance Physics of financial markets Quantitative behavioral finance Quantum finance Rocket science (finance) Statistical finance Technical analysis XVA Notes [ edit ] ^ "Quantitative Finance" . About.com . Retrieved 28 March 2014 .

^ Lam, Leslie P. Norton and Dan.

"Why Edward Thorp Owns Only Berkshire Hathaway" .

www.barrons.com . Retrieved 2021-06-06 .

^ Johnson, Tim (1 September 2009).

"What is financial mathematics?" .

+Plus Magazine . Retrieved 1 March 2021 .

^ E., Shreve, Steven (2004).

Stochastic calculus for finance . New York: Springer.

ISBN 9780387401003 .

OCLC 53289874 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Stephen., Blyth (2013).

Introduction to Quantitative Finance . Oxford University Press, USA. p. 157.

ISBN 9780199666591 .

OCLC 868286679 .

^ B., Schmidt, Anatoly (2005).

Quantitative finance for physicists : an introduction . San Diego, Calif.: Elsevier Academic Press.

ISBN 9780080492209 .

OCLC 57743436 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Bachelir, Louis.

"The Theory of Speculation" . Retrieved 28 March 2014 .

^ Lindbeck, Assar.

"The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 1969-2007" . Nobel Prize . Retrieved 28 March 2014 .

^ Brown, Angus (1 Dec 2008).

"A risky business: How to price derivatives" .

Price+ Magazine . Retrieved 28 March 2014 .

^ For a survey, see "Financial Models" , from Michael Mastro (2013).

Financial Derivative and Energy Market Valuation , John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1118487716 .

^ Karatzas, Ioannis; Shreve, Steve (1998).

Methods of Mathematical Finance . Secaucus, New Jersey, US: Springer-Verlag New York, Incorporated.

ISBN 9780387948393 .

^ Meucci, Attilio (2005).

Risk and Asset Allocation . Springer.

ISBN 9783642009648 .

^ Park, C. H.; Irwin, S. H. (2007).

"What Do We Know About the Profitability of Technical Analysis?" .

Journal of Economic Surveys .

21 (4): 786– 826.

^ a b Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (2007).

The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable . Random House Trade.

ISBN 978-1-4000-6351-2 .

^ "Financial Modelers' Manifesto" . Paul Wilmott's Blog. January 8, 2009. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014 . Retrieved June 1, 2012 .

^ Gillian Tett (April 15, 2010).

"Mathematicians must get out of their ivory towers" .

Financial Times .

^ Svetlozar T. Rachev; Frank J. Fabozzi ; Christian Menn (2005).

Fat-Tailed and Skewed Asset Return Distributions: Implications for Risk Management, Portfolio Selection, and Option Pricing .

John Wiley and Sons .

ISBN 978-0471718864 .

^ B. Mandelbrot , "The variation of certain Speculative Prices" , The Journal of Business 1963 ^ Lucas, Bob.

"ECONOMETRIC POEICY EVALUATION: A CRITIQUE" (PDF) . Retrieved 2022-08-05 .

Further reading [ edit ] Nicole El Karoui , "The future of financial mathematics" , ParisTech Review , 6 September 2013 Harold Markowitz , "Portfolio Selection", The Journal of Finance , 7, 1952, pp. 77–91 William F. Sharpe , Investments , Prentice-Hall, 1985 Pierre Henry Labordere (2017). “Model-Free Hedging A Martingale Optimal Transport Viewpoint”. Chapman & Hall/ CRC.

v t e Major mathematics areas History Timeline Future Lists Glossary Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Type theory Algebra Abstract Commutative Elementary Group theory Linear Multilinear Universal Homological Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Hypercomplex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Harmonic analysis Measure theory Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Arithmetic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology General Algebraic Differential Geometric Homotopy theory Applied Engineering mathematics Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical sociology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Systems science Control theory Game theory Operations research Computational Computer science Theory of computation Computational complexity theory Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Related topics Mathematicians lists Informal mathematics Films about mathematicians Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Mathematics portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e General areas of finance Alternative investment Angel investor Super angel Asset (economics) Asset allocation Bad debt Bond (finance) Bull (stock market speculator) Asset growth Capital asset Capital management Capital structure Climate finance Computational finance Corporate finance Cost of capital Debt Disinvestment Diversification (finance) Divestment Eco-investing Enterprise risk management Environmental finance Equity (finance) ESG Exchange-traded fund Experimental finance Financial analysis analyst asset crime deepening economics engineering inclusion institutions management market plan planner regulation risk services social work system Financial technology Fundamental analysis Government bond Greater fool theory Growth investing Growth stock Hedge (finance) History of banking History of money Impact investing International finance Investment advisory Investment banking Investment management Investment performance Investor profile Market risk Mathematical finance Mutual fund Over-the-counter Pension fund Personal finance Position of trust Public finance Quantitative behavioral finance Quantum finance Risk–return spectrum Social finance Speculation Statistical finance Stock exchange Stockbroker Strategic financial management Statistical finance Stock Structured finance Structured product Sustainability Sustainable Development Goals Sustainable finance Swap (finance) Systematic risk Too big to fail Toxic asset Valuation using discounted cash flows Watered stock v t e Financial risk and financial risk management Categories Credit risk Consumer credit risk Sovereign credit risk Settlement risk Default risk Concentration risk Credit derivative Securitization Market risk Commodity risk (e.g.

Volume risk , Basis risk , Shape risk , Holding period risk , Price area risk ) Equity risk Valuation risk FX risk Margining risk Interest rate risk Inflation risk Volatility risk Liquidity risk (e.g.

Refinancing risk , Deposit risk ) Operational risk Operational risk management Business risk Model risk Reputational risk Country risk Political risk Legal risk Other Execution risk Profit risk Systemic risk Non-financial risk Modeling Arbitrage pricing theory Black–Scholes model Replicating portfolio Cash flow matching Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) Copula Drawdown First-hitting-time model Interest rate immunization Market portfolio Modern portfolio theory Omega ratio RAROC Risk-free rate Risk parity Sharpe ratio Sortino ratio Survival analysis ( Proportional hazards model ) Tracking error Value-at-Risk (VaR) and extensions ( Profit at risk , Margin at risk , Liquidity at risk , Cash flow at risk , Earnings at risk ) Basic concepts Asset allocation Asset and liability management Asset pricing Bad debt Capital asset Capital structure Corporate finance Cost of capital Diversification Economic bubble Enterprise value ESG Exchange traded fund Expected return Financial adviser analysis analyst asset betting crime engineering law risk social work Fundamental analysis Growth investing Hazard Hedge Investment management Risk Risk pool Risk of ruin Systematic risk Mathematical finance Moral hazard Risk-return spectrum Speculation Speculative attack Statistical finance Strategic financial management Stress test (financial) Structured finance Structured product Systemic risk Toxic asset Financial economics Investment management Mathematical finance v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_finance&oldid=1291288786 " Categories : Mathematical finance Applied statistics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 07:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mathematical finance 38 languages Add topic

