Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Academics 3 Finances 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Urban College of Boston Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°21′10″N 71°03′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3529°N 71.0642°W ﻿ / 42.3529; -71.0642 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Private community college in Massachusetts, U.S.

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Urban College of Boston" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Urban College of Boston Urban College of Boston (2011) Type Private community college Established 1993 President Yves Salomon-Fernández Students 1,000 (2014) Location Boston , Massachusetts , United States 42°21′10″N 71°03′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3529°N 71.0642°W ﻿ / 42.3529; -71.0642 Campus 2 Boylston Street, 2nd Floor
Boston, MA 02116 Website urbancollege .edu Urban College of Boston is a private community college in Boston , Massachusetts .

[ 1 ] The college offers Associate of Arts degrees and certificate programs in 11 other areas.

History [ edit ] In 1967 Action for Boston Community Development (ABCD) started the Urban College Program to meet the educational, employment and career development needs for adults, in collaboration with major Boston area colleges and universities. The school enabled students to earn academic credits toward undergraduate and graduate school degrees while acquiring job-related skills.

In 1993, the Higher Education Coordinating Council of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts chartered the Urban College of Boston as a private institution authorized to grant Associate of Arts degrees in three areas of study: Early Childhood Education , Human Services Administration and General Studies.

[ 2 ] In January 1994, UCB enrolled its first degree candidates, both men and women.

In 1995, UCB was granted Candidacy Status for Accreditation by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges (NEASC).

[ 3 ] In 1998, the affiliation with ABCD was re-cast as a partnership when UCB was granted 501(c)(3) status as a tax exempt non-profit organization. In September 2000, it became a fully independent college, while maintaining a partnership with ABCD.

In October 2001, UCB was awarded full accreditation by New England Association of Schools and Colleges.

[ citation needed ] Academics [ edit ] UCB was founded as a "non-traditional, multicultural college" [ 4 ] to enable students from literacy, GED , adult education, Head Start (parents and staff) and youth programs to enroll in a higher education program.

The college offers college courses, as well as degree and certificate programs in the fields of early childhood education, general studies, human services administration, and computer technology.

[ 5 ] It has arrangements helping graduates to attend further degree programs at local colleges.

[ 5 ] The college is the only [ citation needed ] educational institution in the City of Boston that offers full course-loads in other languages, [ 6 ] which attracts minoritized students seeking to advance their education while continuing English as a Second Language ( ESL ) studies. In recent years [ when?

] the college has gained recognition for its services in sex education and drivers education for non-drivers since a high number of graduates take advantage of them in order to graduate.

[ citation needed ] As part of their efforts to reach more traditionally underserved students, Urban College added off-site location programs in suburbs such as Worcester , Lawrence , Fitchburg , and Boston neighborhoods such as Roxbury .

[ citation needed ] Finances [ edit ] The school ran into financial trouble in 2011 when the federal government cut $700,000 in annual funding.

[ 7 ] That same year, the U.S. Department of Education disqualified the school from receiving Pell Grant funding.

[ 7 ] By 2012, Urban College faced a financial deficit and planned to partner with Endicott College .

Urban College had a $250,000 deficit that the school could not directly fill, resulting in complaints from the NEASC about the college's future financial viability. UCB aggressively took steps to remedy this situation.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The school solved its financial troubles without becoming partners with Endicott College.

[ 11 ] Urban College continued serving its students while registering new students and has remained financially stable [ 12 ] since.

[ citation needed ] On March 1, 2015, the Federal Department of Education released the names of "most of the hundreds of colleges, (including the Urban College of Boston) whose federal aid it has restricted because of concerns about their finances or compliance with federal requirements." [ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Urban College of Boston in Boston, MA - US News Education" . Retrieved December 11, 2015 .

^ "About Us" .

www.urbancollege.edu . Archived from the original on March 12, 2013.

^ "Accreditation" . Retrieved December 11, 2015 .

^ "Mission" . Archived from the original on October 31, 2014 . Retrieved September 2, 2014 .

^ a b "ABCD - Urban College of Boston" . Retrieved December 11, 2015 .

^ "Community" . Archived from the original on August 20, 2014 . Retrieved September 2, 2014 .

^ a b Leighton, Paul (July 24, 2012), "Endicott backs off merger with Boston school", Gloucester Daily Times , Gloucester, MA ^ Schworm, Peter, "College for working women faces closure over deficit of $250,000" , The Boston Globe , July 19, 2012 ^ Forry, Ed, "Urban College presses on — in the Coard manner" , Dorchester Reporter , August 9, 2012 ^ Guttenplan, D. D., "Education Briefs: Last-minute support comes to aid of community college" , The New York Times , August 5, 2012 ^ "Urban College receives enough donations to remain open in fall, officials say" . boston.com. July 30, 2012.

^ "Annual Report" . Archived from the original on October 31, 2014 . Retrieved September 2, 2014 .

^ "Education Department names most of the colleges facing heightened scrutiny from federal officials - Inside Higher Ed" . Retrieved December 11, 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urban_College_of_Boston&oldid=1306145263 " Categories : 1993 establishments in Massachusetts Educational institutions established in 1993 Non-profit organizations based in Boston Universities and colleges in Boston Private universities and colleges in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2025 Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references Coordinates not on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2015 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 05:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Urban College of Boston Add languages Add topic

