Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Academic career 1.3 Philosophy, science and consciousness 2 Selected works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Manzoor Ahmad 3 languages বাংলা தமிழ் اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pakistani scientist (born 1934) For the Indian politician, see Manzoor Ahmad (politician) .

This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Manzoor Ahmad" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Manzoor Ahmad Professor Manzoor Ahmad Born ( 1934-03-11 ) 11 March 1934 (age 91) Rampur , Rampur State (present-day India ) Nationality Pakistani Citizenship Pakistan Alma mater University of Karachi University of London Known for His work on Philosophy of space and time , and philosophy of time and science Awards Fulbright Award Scientific career Fields Philosophy of science ( space and time ) Institutions International Islamic University Usman Institute of Technology National Center for Theoretical Physics Manzoor Ahmed , DSc ( Urdu : منظور احمد; born 11 March 1934) is a Pakistani scientist and philosopher of science . He is a professor of philosophy and is currently serving as rector of Usman Institute of Technology (UIT) in Karachi, Sindh Province. He has international prestige for publishing articles, books, and leading edge research on the field of Philosophy of science , particularly the philosophy of space and time .

[ citation needed ] Biography [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Manzoor Ahmed was born into an Urdu-speaking family, in Rampur , Uttar Pradesh on 11 March 1934.

[ 1 ] His parents home schooled him, and he was later enrolled in a local middle school.

[ 2 ] He was a child prodigy, and enrolled in High School at the age of seven, where he excelled.

[ 2 ] Ahmad graduated from high school, and stood first in the matriculation examination for the state.

[ 2 ] He attended Raza Inter-College (RIC) where he studied science and philosophy, and stood first in the college examination for university transfer. Ahmad was persuaded by his family to study medicines ; he therefore applied for three medical schools— King George Medical University in Lucknow , King Edward Medical College in Lahore , and Dow Medical College in Karachi.

[ 2 ] However, Ahmad decided to pursue his inclination for philosophy and did not join any of these institutions. He moved to Karachi, Sindh Province and joined S.M. Arts College.

[ 2 ] In 1947, Ahmad acquired the Pakistani citizenship , joining Karachi University in 1951.

[ 2 ] There he studied physics, mathematics and philosophy, and obtained a minor in Mathematics , and a B.Sc.

(Hons) in Physics and a BA in Philosophy in 1953.

[ 2 ] In 1955, Ahmad obtained a MA in philosophy from the same university.

[ 2 ] With a HEC scholarship , Ahmad went to London , United Kingdom to attend the school of his choice. Ahmad enrolled in a doctoral programme at London University .

[ 2 ] Continuing his interest in physics, Ahmad was awarded a doctorate in philosophy of science , [ 3 ] with a focus on the mathematical and philosophical notion of space and time continuum .

[ 3 ] Academic career [ edit ] Since his return to his country, Ahmad has worked for the Government of Pakistan , as head of various national and international organizations. He is also an active member of the Council of Islamic Ideology in Pakistan. After returning to Pakistan, Ahmad became associated to the Karachi University and has directed their Department of Philosophy ; he was later appointed as the Dean of their faculty of Fine Arts . Ahmad was the President of the Pakistan Philosophical Congress (PPC), which works for the improvement of Philosophical studies in the country. He was a Fulbright scholar , and has lectured on philosophy of science at the University of Chicago , Columbia University , and the University of California . He was also awarded fellowships by the Brown Foundation and the British Council .

Ahmad held the vice-chancellorship of Hamdard University twice and holds the Chairmanship of the Usman Institute of Technology (UIT). He is the Rector of the International Islamic University , Islamabad and Chairman of the Board of Governors for the Indus Valley School of Art and Architecture (IVS).

Philosophy, science and consciousness [ edit ] Ahmad has written important books about the relation between consciousness, science and philosophy. In his article, The Notion of Existence , Ahmad argued that the impact of scientific development has created the problem of the subjectivity of sense qualities and a separation between knowledge and existence.

[ 4 ] Ahmad further noted that, "the picture of the world given by immediate perception is totally different from what the world actually is, leading to an opposition between existence and true knowledge.

Galileo's solution is that this difference between knowledge and existence disappears to a certain extent in the clearest knowledge we possess, i.e.

mathematical knowledge ." [ 4 ] However, Ahmad believes in the theory of general relativity and cited that "without the existence of the Spacetime continuum, the universe would not exist and we would not exist".

[ 5 ] Selected works [ edit ] History of Philosophy Morality and Law Pakistan: Prospects and Perspectives Iqbal Shanasi Islam: Chand Fikri Masail Religious Wisdom References [ edit ] ^ Staff reporter (9 March 2004).

"Manzoor Ahmad assumes charge of Rector IIU" .

Pakistan Tribute . Pakistan Tribute. p. 1 . Retrieved 4 July 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Khan, Bahzad Alam (12 January 2003).

"AUTHOR: Dr Manzoor Ahmad: Impatient iconoclast" . Dawn Group of Media industries. pp.

1– 6 . Retrieved 4 July 2012 .

In Pakistan a teacher is an autocratic giver whose wisdom must never be questioned. By the same token, a student is an acquiescent taker. Curiosity, which is otherwise a praiseworthy virtue, is regarded as a contemptible vice and is severely frowned upon ^ a b Manzoor Ahmad, Ph.D.

"Brief Biosketch" (google docs) . Unknown publisher . Retrieved 4 July 2012 .

^ a b Ahmad, Manzoor (1998).

"The Notion of Existence" . In Naeem Ahmad (ed.).

Philosophy in Pakistan (1 ed.). Lahore: Punjab University Press. Archived from the original on 9 May 2013 . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

^ Ahmad, Manzoor.

"Religion in the light of philosophy of self" . University of Allama Iqbal . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Islamic Nazaryati Council History of UIT Interview Transcript from UITEC Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Greece Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manzoor_Ahmad&oldid=1304040579 " Categories : 1934 births Living people Pakistani scholars Muhajir people Pakistani writers 20th-century Pakistani philosophers People from Rampur, Uttar Pradesh Alumni of the University of London Philosophers of science Scientists from Karachi 21st-century Pakistani philosophers Iqbal scholars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2014 BLP articles lacking sources from October 2012 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 16:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manzoor Ahmad 3 languages Add topic

