Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Selected publications 3 Footnotes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute 5 languages Deutsch Polski Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°24′N 71°06′W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.400°N 71.100°W ﻿ / 42.400; -71.100 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research institute affiliated with Harvard University devoted to Ukrainian studies "HURI" redirects here. For other uses of Huri , see Houri (disambiguation) .

Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute Abbreviation HURI Formation June 1973 ; 52 years ago ( 1973-06 ) [ 1 ] Type Non-profit Purpose To advance knowledge of Ukraine Establishment of Ukrainian Studies Headquarters Cambridge , Massachusetts , United States Coordinates 42°24′N 71°06′W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.400°N 71.100°W ﻿ / 42.400; -71.100 Official languages English Director Serhii Plokhii Parent organization Harvard University Website huri.harvard.edu official URL The Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute ( HURI ) is a research institute affiliated with Harvard University devoted to Ukrainian studies , including the history, culture, language, literature, and politics of Ukraine. Other areas of study include sociology, archaeology, art, economics, and anthropology.

History [ edit ] HURI was formally founded in 1973 by Omeljan Pritsak and other leading scholars in Ukrainian studies. It functions as a focal point for undergraduate and graduate students, fellows, and professors and provides assistance with their research. Prior to the establishment of HURI, its founders organized weekly seminars in Ukrainian studies.

HURI maintains one of the largest collections of Ukrainian books and other media available in the West, both in its own collection and in those stored in the Harvard Library .

[ 2 ] HURI also manages the Harvard Ukrainian Summer Institute, which offers summer courses in Ukrainian language, history, literature, and culture, as part of the Harvard Summer School. The institute publishes the Harvard Ukrainian Studies journal—founded in 1977—and a series of book publications, including the Harvard Series in Ukrainian Studies, the Harvard Library of Early Ukrainian Literature , and Harvard Papers in Ukrainian Studies.

[ 3 ] In the mid-1950s, a group of student activists and members of the Ukrainian-American community sought to preserve Ukraine's unique culture and history, which were suppressed in Soviet Ukraine and unfamiliar to political and intellectual establishments in the West.

[ 4 ] Under the guidance of Omeljan Pritsak at Harvard, the group's general goal was shaped into a vision for three endowed chairs in Ukrainian studies at a major university, along with a research institute to support and broaden the scholarship. With the assistance of the Ukrainian Studies Fund , the Ukrainian studies program was established with three endowed professorships in the departments of History and Slavic Languages and Literatures at Harvard University, beginning on January 22, 1968, the 50th anniversary of Ukraine's first proclamation of independence.

On 25 February 2022, in the face of the Russian invasion of Ukraine , HURI issued a statement against the Russian military invasion and in support of Ukraine and Ukrainians.

[ 5 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Periodicals Harvard Ukrainian Studies (1977-2019) Vol. 1, No. 1 - Vol. 36, No. 3 ISSN 0363-5570 Books Grabowicz, George .

The Poet as Mythmaker: A Study of Symbolic Meaning in Taras Ševčenko (1982) Sysyn, Frank.

Between Poland and the Ukraine: The Dilemma of Adam Kysil, 1600–1653 (1985) Kohut, Zenon .

Russian Centralism and Ukrainian Autonomy: Imperial Absorption of the Hetmanate 1760s-1830s (1988) Pamphlets and Offprint Series Nestor Makhno and the Ukrainian Revolution "Offprint Series No. 4" (1977) Sources and Documents Series Nonconformity and Dissent in the Ukrainian SSR 1955-1975: An Annotated Bibliography , compiled by George Liber and Anna Mostovych (1978) ISBN 0916458016 The Ukrainian Experience in the United States: A Symposium , edited by Paul R. Magocsi (1989) Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "History of the Institute" . Ukrainian Research Institute at Harvard University . Retrieved 27 February 2022 .

^ Kiebuzinski, Ksenya (2007).

"A guide to Ukrainian special collections at Harvard University" .

Harvard Library Bulletin .

18 ( 3– 4): 1– 107.

^ "History of the Institute - Ukrainian Research Institute at Harvard University" .

huri.harvard.edu . Archived from the original on 30 January 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2018 .

^ Sorokowski, A., ed. (1993).

The Ukrainian Research Institute: Twenty Years . Cambridge: Ukrainian Research Institute, Harvard University.

^ "Statement on Russia's War Against Ukraine" . Ukrainian Research Institute at Harvard University.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 February 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute .

Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Ukrainian_Research_Institute&oldid=1285325109 " Categories : Ethnic studies organizations Harvard University research institutes Khazar studies Organizations established in 1973 Research institutes established in 1973 Ukrainian National Association Ukrainian studies Ukrainian-American history Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 13 April 2025, at 01:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute 5 languages Add topic

