Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Career 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Joan Blaeu 24 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 贛語 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch cartographer (1596–1673) Joan Blaeu Joan Blaeu by J. van Rossum Born ( 1596-09-23 ) September 23, 1596 Alkmaar Died 21 December 1673 (1673-12-21) (aged 77) Amsterdam Occupation Cartographer Known for First world map incorporating heliocentric theory Naming of New Zealand Spouse Geertruid Vermeulen (1634-1673) Children Joan II Joan Blaeu ( Dutch pronunciation: [ˈjoːɑm ˈblʌu] ; 23 September 1596 – 21 December 1673), also called Johannes Blaeu , was a Dutch cartographer and the official cartographer of the Dutch East India Company . Blaeu is most notable for his map published in 1648, which was the first map to incorporate the heliocentric theory into a map of the world and was the first map that incorporated the discoveries of Abel Tasman . Blaeu renamed what is now New Zealand as Nieuw Zeeland after the Dutch province of Zeeland ; the anglicized version of the name is still in use today.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Blau was born in Alkmaar , the son of cartographer Willem Blaeu . In 1620, Blaeu became a doctor of law but he joined in the work of his father. In 1635, they published the Atlas Novus (full title: Theatrum orbis terrarum, sive, Atlas novus ) in two volumes. Joan and his brother Cornelius took over the studio after their father died in 1638. Blaeu succeeded his father as the official cartographer of the Dutch East India Company .

Career [ edit ] Americae Nova Tabula , 1614 Discussion of the acquisition and preservation of Archipelagus Orientalis by the National Library of Australia (2013) Blaeu's world map, Nova et Accuratissima Terrarum Orbis Tabula was published in 1648.

[ 3 ] This map was the first that depicted the Solar System according to the heliocentric theories of Nicolaus Copernicus , first printed in 1543, which show the earth revolving around the sun.

[ 4 ] This map was used as a template for the design of the pavement of the Groote Burger-Zaal of the new Amsterdam Town Hall, designed by the Dutch architect Jacob van Campen (now the Amsterdam Royal Palace ), in 1655.

[ 5 ] Blaeu's Hollandia Nova was also depicted in his Archipelagus Orientalis sive Asiaticus published in 1659 in the Kurfürsten Atlas (Atlas of the Great Elector), and was used by Melchisédech Thévenot to produce his map, Hollandia Nova—Terre Australe (1664).

[ 6 ] He also published the 12-volume Le Grand Atlas, ou Cosmographie blaviane, en laquelle est exactement descritte la terre, la mer, et le ciel . One edition is dated 1663, in folio 540 mm × 340 mm (21 in × 13 in), which contained 593 engraved maps and plates.

Around 1649, Blaeu published a collection of Dutch city maps named Toonneel der Steeden ( Views of Cities ). In 1651, he was voted into the Amsterdam council. In 1654, Blaeu published the first atlas of Scotland , devised by Timothy Pont .

Blaeu was fiercely competitive with his contemporary Johannes Janssonius as to which of them could make an atlas with a higher quantity of maps. In 1662, Blaeu published the Atlas Maior , it had 11 volumes and included 600 maps. This atlas became a status symbol for those who owned it and was the most expensive book of the 17th century.

[ 7 ] A cosmology was planned, but a fire destroyed the studio and all of Blaeu's work in December 1672.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Blaeu died a year later, 21 December 1673, in Amsterdam .

[ 10 ] He is buried in the Amsterdam Westerkerk . He was survived by his son, Joan II, who continued his father's work until 1712.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] History of cartography References [ edit ] ^ "Story: Tasman, Abel Janszoon" .

Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand .

^ MacManus, Joel (16 January 2021).

"Was Australia was almost named New Zealand?" .

Stuff .

^ "Maps Through History" .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration .

^ "Willem & Joan Blaeu Wall Maps" .

Royale Maps .

^ "Antique maps by Johannes Blaeu" .

Antique Maps Inc .

^ Helman, Susannah (27 February 2023).

"Rare book highlights – Swimming in 1764" .

National Library of Australia .

^ " 'Atlas maior' by Blaeu - Special Collections" .

Utrecht University .

^ "Blaeu Atlas Maior, 1662-5 - Maps" .

National Library of Scotland .

^ "Framing a Seventeenth Century Map by Joan Blaeu" .

Holton Frames .

^ "Joan Blaeu" .

Biografisch Portaal .

^ "Blaeu, Johannes" .

Geographicus .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Joan Blaeu .

Works by Joan Blaeu at the Biodiversity Heritage Library Works by Joan Blaeu at Open Library Works by or about Joan Blaeu at the Internet Archive Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy 2 Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Artists ULAN RKD Artists Scientific illustrators People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joan_Blaeu&oldid=1303560508 " Categories : 1596 births 1673 deaths 17th-century Dutch businesspeople 17th-century Dutch cartographers Dutch East India Company people People from Alkmaar Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles with hCards Pages with Dutch IPA Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Biodiversity Heritage Library links Articles with Open Library links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 18:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joan Blaeu 24 languages Add topic

