Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 2.1 Silloi 2.2 Poetry 2.3 Prose works 3 Notes 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Timon of Phlius 28 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Mirandés Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek Pyrrhonist philosopher (c.320–c.235 BC) For the inspiration for Shakespeare's Timon of Athens , see Timon of Athens (person) .

Timon of Phlius Timon of Phlius, 17th-century engraving Born c.

325-320 BCE Phlius Died c.

235-230 BCE (aged c. 90) Philosophical work Era Hellenistic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Skepticism Main interests Epistemology Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e Timon of Phlius ( / ˈ t iː .

m ɔː n / ; Ancient Greek : Τίμων ὁ Φλιάσιος , romanized : Tímōn ho Phliásios , gen.

Τίμωνος , Tímōnos ; c.

320 BC – c. 235 BC) was an Ancient Greek philosopher from the Hellenistic period , who was the student of Pyrrho . Unlike Pyrrho, who wrote nothing, Timon wrote satirical philosophical poetry called Silloi ( Σίλλοι ) as well as a number of prose writings. These have been lost, but the fragments quoted in later authors allow a rough outline of his philosophy to be reconstructed.

Life [ edit ] The primary source for Timon's biography is the account in Diogenes Laërtius , [ 1 ] which claims to be taken from earlier authors such as Apollonides of Nicaea , Antigonus of Carystus , and Sotion , whose works have now been lost.

[ 2 ] According to Diogenes, Timon was born in Phlius , and was at first a dancer in the theatre, but he abandoned this profession for the study of philosophy, and, having moved to Megara , he spent some time with Stilpo , returned home to marry, and then moved to Elis with his wife, and heard Pyrrho , whose tenets he adopted. Driven again from Elis by straitened circumstances, he spent some time on the Hellespont and the Propontis , and taught at Chalcedon as a sophist with such success that he made a fortune.

[ 2 ] He then moved to Athens , where he lived until his death, with the exception of a short residence at Thebes .

[ 2 ] According to Diogenes he knew the kings Antigonus and Ptolemy II Philadelphus .

[ 2 ] The Suda also claims he was linked to several literary figures such as: Alexander Aetolus and Homerus , whom he is said to have assisted in the composition of their tragedies; and Aratus , whom he is said to have taught.

[ 3 ] He died at an age of almost ninety.

[ 2 ] Writings [ edit ] According to Diogenes Laërtius, Timon composed "lyric and epic poems, and tragedies and satiric dramas, and thirty comedies, and sixty tragedies and the Silloi and amatory poems." The Silloi has not survived intact, but they are mentioned and quoted by several ancient authors. It has been suggested that Pyrrhonism ultimately originated with Timon rather than Pyrrho.

[ 4 ] Silloi [ edit ] The most celebrated of his poems were the satiric compositions called Silloi , a word of somewhat uncertain etymology, but which undoubtedly describes metrical compositions, of a character at once ludicrous and sarcastic. The invention of this species of poetry is ascribed to Xenophanes of Colophon . The Silloi of Timon were in three books, in the first of which he spoke in his own person, and the other two are in the form of a dialogue between the author and Xenophanes, in which Timon proposed questions, to which Xenophanes replied at length. The subject was a sarcastic account of the tenets of all philosophers, living and dead; an unbounded field for scepticism and satire. They were in hexameter verse, and, from the way in which they are mentioned by the ancient writers, as well as from the few fragments of them which have survived, it is evident that they were admirable productions of their kind.

[ 5 ] Commentaries were written on the Silloi by Apollonides of Nicaea , and also by Sotion of Alexandria .

[ 6 ] Poetry [ edit ] The poem entitled Images ( Greek : Ἰνδαλμοι ) in elegiac verse, appears to have been similar in its subject to the Silloi .

[ 7 ] Diogenes Laërtius also mentions Timon's iamboi , [ 8 ] but perhaps the word is here merely used in the sense of satirical poems in general, without reference to the metre. According to Timon, philosophers are "excessively cunning murderers of many wise saws" (v. 96); the only two whom he spares are Xenophanes, "the modest censor of Homer's lies" (v. 29), and Pyrrho, against whom "no other mortal dare contend" (v. 126).

[ 9 ] No remains of his dramas have survived.  Of his epic poems little is known, but it may be presumed that they were chiefly ludicrous or satirical poems in the epic form. It appears probable that his Funeral Banquet of Arcesilaus was also a satirical poem in epic verse.

[ 10 ] He also wrote parodies on Homer , and some lines from a scepticism-themed poem in elegiac verse have been preserved, as well as one or two fragments which cannot be with certainty assigned to any of his poems.

[ 9 ] Prose works [ edit ] He also wrote in prose, to the quantity, according to Diogenes Laërtius, of twenty thousand lines. These works were no doubt on philosophical subjects, and Diogenes mentions On Sensations , On Inquiries , and Towards Wisdom . Also among his lost works is Against the Physicists , in which he questioned the legitimacy of making hypotheses .

[ 11 ] The longest surviving quote, preserved by Eusebius in Praeparatio evangelica quoting Aristocles is from his work Python ( Greek : Πύθων ), which contained a long account of a conversation with Pyrrho, during a journey to the Delphic oracle .: [ 12 ] 'The things themselves are equally indifferent, and unstable, and indeterminate, and therefore neither our senses nor our opinions are either true or false. For this reason then we must not trust them, but be without opinions, and without bias, and without wavering, saying of every single thing that it no more is than is not, or both is and is not, or neither is nor is not.

[ 13 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Others: Timon" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:9. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

^ a b c d e Bett 2002 .

^ Suda, Aratos .

^ Brunschwig, (1999), pp. 249–251.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 115;  Suda, Sillainei , Timon ; Athenaeus, passim ; Aulus Gellius, iii. 17.

^ Athenaeus, viii. 336 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 65 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 110 ^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 115; Athenaeus, ix. 406 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Against the Geometers , 2. in Sextus Empiricus IV: Against the Professors .

R.G. Bury (trans.) (Harvard University Press, 1949/2000). p. 244 (Greek); 245 (English) ISBN 0-674-99420-5 ^ Aristocles ap.

Eusebius of Caesaria Praeparatio Evangelica Chapter 18 ^ Eusebius.

"Praeparatio Evangelica Book XIV" .

Tertullian Project . Retrieved 27 January 2023 .

References [ edit ] The surviving fragments of Timon's work are published in Diels, Hermann (1901).

Poetarum philosophorum fragmenta (in Latin and Ancient Greek). Berolini Apud Weidmannos.

Bett, Richard (2002).

"Timon of Phlius" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Brunschwig, J., Introduction: The Beginnings of Hellenistic Epistemology , in Algra, Barnes, Mansfeld and Schofield (eds.), The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy (Cambridge University Press, 1999) p. 229-259.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Timon of Phlius ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 989.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Timon".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

Further reading [ edit ] Bett, Richard (2003).

Pyrrho, His Antecedents, and His Legacy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-925661-7 . Retrieved 29 January 2023 .

Clayman, Dee L. (15 December 2009).

Timon of Phlius: Pyrrhonism into Poetry . Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-022081-0 . Retrieved 29 January 2023 .

Long, A. A. (20 August 1986).

Hellenistic Philosophy: Stoics, Epicureans, Sceptics . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-05808-8 . Retrieved 29 January 2023 .

Long, A. A.; Sedley, D. N. (9 April 1987).

The Hellenistic Philosophers: Volume 1, Translations of the Principal Sources with Philosophical Commentary . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-27556-9 . Retrieved 29 January 2023 .

Long, A. A. (14 September 2006). "4.Timon of Phlius: Pyrrhonist and satirist".

From Epicurus to Epictetus: Studies in Hellenistic and Roman Philosophy . Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-927911-1 . Retrieved 29 January 2023 .

v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timon_of_Phlius&oldid=1293131015 " Categories : 3rd-century BC Greek philosophers 3rd-century BC Greek poets Ancient Greek satirists Ancient Phliasians Ancient Skeptic philosophers Ancient Greek epistemologists 320s BC births 230s BC deaths Pyrrhonism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 21:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Timon of Phlius 28 languages Add topic

