Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Books and articles 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Graeme Snooks 2 languages العربية مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Graeme Donald Snooks, newly appointed Coghlan Professor, ANU, September 1989 Graeme Donald Snooks (born 1944 in Perth, Western Australia ) is a systems theorist and cosmologist who has developed a general dynamic theory to explain complex systems in human society, nature, and the cosmos. His resulting " dynamic-strategy theory " (DST) has been employed to analyse the fluctuating fortunes of life over the past 4,000 million years (myrs) and of human society over the past 2 myrs; to analyse contemporary economic problems (inflation, financial crises, climate change); to explore socio-political issues (population expansion, the emergence of democracy, the "clash of civilizations", disease (COVID-19) control, the failure of strategic leadership); to analyse the emergence, operation, and malfunction of the mind; to suggest how machines can acquire human-level intelligence; to design new worlds in space; to make scientific predictions about the future; to explore key philosophical issues, and to explain the dynamics of the cosmos.

[ 1 ] New discoveries emerging from Snooks' publications include: existential schizophrenia, strategic frustration, strategic selection, the growth-inflation curve, the strategy function, the logological constant (akin to the cosmological constant), the Snooks–Panov Vertical (or the singularity), technological paradigm shifts, the Solar Revolution, the 'dynamic-strategist' test for Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), the Strategic Superverse, and the strategic logos .

[ 2 ] His body of work challenges the existing paradigms of orthodox (neo-classical) economics , climate-mitigation economics, Marxism , neo- Darwinism , evolutionary psychology , self-organisation theory, classical cosmology, and all other supply-side systems.

For twenty-one years, from 1989 to 2010, Snooks was the foundation Coghlan Research Professor of Economics in the Institute of Advanced Studies at the Australian National University . Currently he is the executive director of both the Institute of Global Dynamic Systems and IGDS Books [ 3 ] in Canberra. He was educated at Mount Lawley Senior High School (1957–1961), the University of Western Australia (BEc, 1966; MEc, 1968), and the Australian National University (PhD, 1972). Snooks has been elected Fellow of the Australian Academy of Social Sciences (1991), Fellow of the Royal Historical Society (UK) (1990), and Fellow of the Russian Academy of Humanities (elected 2006, resigned in protest 2022).

Books and articles [ edit ] Graeme Donald Snooks, May 2013 Snooks has published more than 35 books and monographs, including: Depression and Recovery (1974), Domesday Economy (with J. McDonald) (1986), Economics Without Time (1993), Historical Analysis in Economics (1993), Portrait of the Family within the Total Economy (1994), Was the Industrial Revolution Necessary?

, (1994), The Dynamic Society (1996), The Ephemeral Civilization (1997), The Laws of History (1998), Longrun Dynamics (1998), Global Transition (1999), The Global Crisis Makers (2000), The Collapse of Darwinism (2003), The Selfcreating Mind (2006), The Coming Eclipse, or The Triumph of Climate Mitigation Over Solar Revolution (2010), [ 4 ] Dead God Rising. Religion and Science in the Universal Life-System (2010).

[ 5 ] The Death of Zarathustra. Notes on Truth for the Risk-Taker (2011), Ark of the Sun: the improbable voyage of life (November 2015), Ultimate Reality & its Dissidents (March 2016), Time's Gateway: a personal quest for ultimate reality (August 2017), Great Myths to Die For: essays on the ship of metaphysical fools (February 2021), Paradox of a Mindless Artificial Intelligence: the compelling case for a general dynamic theory of the mind (2024), Farewell Dear Fritz: a tribute to Friedrich Nietzsche (2025), Colonising Mars: how to create new worlds in space (2025), and Unlocking the Mystery of the Cosmos: A realist general dynamic theory of the Strategic Superverse (2025).

Snooks' book, Ark of the Sun provides an overview of his thinking over five decades on the dynamics of life and human society and reveals the underlying reality of life – the strategic logos – which is the ultimate complex living system.

Ultimate Reality & its Dissidents provides a unique philosophy of life based on his realist general dynamic theory.

Time's Gateway shows how these ideas emerged over the past fifty years.

Great Myths to Die For shows how the metaphysical interventionists are undermining the survival of human civilization.

Colonising Mars argues that the Red Planet will not be successfully settled until the Solar Revolution occurs on Earth to provide the huge demands for power to terraform the environment, and until a viable life-system (or strategic logos) is constructed on Mars - both uniquely predicted by his dynamic-strategy theory (DST). And Unlocking the Mystery of the Cosmos shows how the DST can be used to explore not only the dynamics of the universe and the laws that drive it, but also its origins and future as part of the Strategic Superverse.

Articles on the theory of complex living systems have been published by Snooks in Advances in Space Research (2005), Complexity (the journal of the Santa Fe Institute ) (2008), and Social Evolution & History (2002, 2005, 2007). In a November 2016 article – "The Triumph of Trump and the failure of the intellectuals" – he applies the dynamic-strategy theory to the recent US presidential election and provides suggestions for the type of dynamic strategy that the USA would need to pursue in order to "make America great again" and to position itself at the forefront of a forthcoming technological paradigm shift. And in November 2024, he chartered a Strategic Roadmap that the second Trump Presidency could employ to Make America Great Again.

[ 6 ] Snooks's most recent articles include: "Exploding the great singularity myth" (February 2019), which critically examines the futuristic concept known as the technological singularity – an issue that he first addressed in his 1996 book The Dynamic Society ; "Exploding the Great Climate Mitigation Myth" (May 2019), which claims that the impact of the economic interventions to address climate change have been grossly underestimated; "Fight the Virus (COVID-19), Not the Economy! How to Avoid the 'Interventionist Storm'" (March 2020), which discusses the dangers of complete economic shut-down; "COVID-19 and the Great Lockdown Fiasco" (April 2020), which claims that the emerging 'lockdown depression' is the outcome of a failure of strategic leadership in Western Civilization that has been emerging since the late 20th century; and "Will the world ever recover from the Great Lockdown? Counting the costs of waging war on the economy", which estimates and analyses the impact of massive government intervention on world real GDP and GDP per capita in both the short and long term. In 2022 Snooks published a series of papers on the philosophical implications of his dynamic-strategy theory and his discovery of the strategic logos —including the nature of humanity, freedom, truth, evil, and the meaning of life. More recently (2023 and 2024) he has shown how artificial general intelligence (AGI) will only be achieved once the AI community expands to include the essential science of life-dynamics and adopts a realist general dynamic theory of the mind.

International Response to Snooks's Work.

In international academic circles Snooks is widely recognised as a bold and innovative interdisciplinary thinker. Some argue that his dynamic-strategy theory is able to integrate history, economics, sociology, politics, psychology, evolutionary biology, cosmology, and philosophy into a grand synthesis. He is also viewed as a significant contemporary iconoclastic thinker, deconstructing prevailing intellectual paradigms in the life sciences and replacing them with transformative ideas. Internationally, Snooks's work has sparked a range of discussions in conferences and significant publications in both the social and natural sciences, as well as in systems theory. Further, it is considered by some that his work offers a unique perspective that bridges empirical analysis with philosophical enquiry. The main criticism is that Snooks is intellectually too ambitious, and that his work is too holistic.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Big History Complex systems References [ edit ] ^ See Graeme Snooks, Academia and ResearchGate .

^ McKay, The Strategic Logic ; Nazaretyan, 'Snooks-Panov Vertical'; Sabry, Graeme Snooks, Charting Intellectual Frontiers ; Magee, 'As big as it gets'.

^ See Academia ^ "The Coming Eclipse".

^ "Dead God Rising".

^ "Make America Great Again. The Strategic Roadmap" IGDS Working Papers # 49 (November 2024) ^ F. Sabry, Graeme Snooks. Charting Intellectual Frontiers, Exploring Graeme Snooks's Transformative Ideas (2024); G. Magee, 'As big as it gets', Social Evolution & History , 2006; Chumakov, Global Studies , 2014; Korotayev & LePoire (eds), The 21st Century Singularity (2020); Rodrigue et al (eds), Our Place in the Universe (2015); H. McKay, The Strategic Logic of China's Economy (2024).

Further reading [ edit ] For further details see [1] : together with Who's Who in Australia , and Marquis Who's Who in the World .

Gary B. Magee, "As big as it gets: 'Big Theory' and The Collapse of Darwinism" , in Social Evolution & History , vol. 5, no. 1, March 2006, pp. 164 – 174.

Big History or Big Theory. Uncovering the Laws of Life Social Evolution & History . Vol. 4, no. 1, 2005. Special Issue. Exploring the Horizons of Big History Huw McKay, The Strategic Logic of China's Economy , Springer: 2024.

Akop Nazaretyan, "Snooks-Panov Vertical", The Encyclopaedia of Global Science , ed. I.I. Mazow and A.N. Chumakov, Moscow: Dialog Raduga Publishers, 2005.

Graeme Donald Snooks, Time's Gateway: A personal quest for ultimate reality (IGDS Books, 2017).

v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Graeme Donald Snooks, "Exploding the Great Singularity Myth".

IGDS Working Papers #16, February 2019.

Graeme Donald Snooks, "Is Singularity a Scientific Concept, or the Construct of Metaphysical Historicism? Implications for Big History", IGDS Working Papers # 17, February 2019.

Graeme Donald Snooks, "Fight the Virus (COVID-19), Not the Economy! How to Avoid the 'Interventionist storm'", IGDS Working Papers , #19, March 2020.

Graeme Donald Snooks, "COVID-19 and the Great Lockdown Fiasco", IGDS Working Papers , #20. April 2020.

Graeme Donald Snooks, "Will the world ever recover from the Great Lockdown? Counting the costs of waging war on the economy", IGDS Working Papers # 21. May 2020.

Graeme Donald Snooks, "Is singularity a scientific concept, or the metaphysical construct of historicism? Implications for Big History". In: Andrey V. Korotayev & David J. LePoire (eds), The 21st Century Singularity and Global Futures: A Big History Perspective (Springer, 2020) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Graeme_Snooks&oldid=1296343545 " Categories : Complex systems scientists Living people 1944 births Australian economists Big History Non-Darwinian evolution People educated at Mount Lawley Senior High School People from Perth, Western Australia Scientists from Western Australia University of Western Australia alumni Australian National University alumni Fellows of the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia Fellows of the Royal Historical Society Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from December 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Use dmy dates from September 2015 Use Australian English from September 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 11:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Graeme Snooks 2 languages Add topic

