Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In biochemistry Toggle In biochemistry subsection 1.1 Mechanism of action 2 Non-enzymatic transamination 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Transamination 27 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chemical reaction that transfers an amino group to a ketoacid Aminotransfer reaction between an amino acid and an alpha-keto acid Transamination is a chemical reaction that transfers an amino group .

In biochemistry , the processor occurs extensively during amino acid synthesis , catalyzed by transaminase or aminotransferases , and requires a ketoacid .

α-ketoglutarate acts as the predominant amino-group acceptor and produces glutamate .

Aminoacid + α-ketoglutarate ↔ α-keto acid  + glutamate Glutamate's amino group, in turn, is transferred to oxaloacetate in a second transamination reaction yielding aspartate .

Glutamate +  oxaloacetate  ↔  α-ketoglutarate + aspartate In biochemistry [ edit ] Transamination is responsible for the deamination of most amino acids, and one of the major degradation pathways which convert essential amino acids to non-essential amino acids (amino acids that can be synthesized de novo by the organism).

Transamination is mediated by several types of aminotransferase enzymes. An aminotransferase may be specific for an individual amino acid, or it may be able to process any member of a group of similar ones, for example the branched-chain amino acids, which comprises valine, isoleucine, and leucine. The  two common types of aminotransferases are alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) .

Mechanism of action [ edit ] Transamination catalyzed by aminotransferase occurs in two stages. In the first step, the α amino group of an amino acid is transferred to the enzyme, producing the corresponding α-keto acid and the aminated enzyme. During the second stage, the amino group is transferred to the keto acid acceptor, forming the amino acid product while regenerating the enzyme. The chirality of an amino acid is determined during transamination. For the reaction to complete, aminotransferases require participation of aldehyde containing coenzyme, pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP) , a derivative of Pyridoxine ( Vitamin B 6 ). The amino group is accommodated by conversion of this coenzyme to pyridoxamine-5'-phosphate (PMP). PLP is covalently attached to the enzyme via a Schiff Base linkage formed by the condensation of its aldehyde group with the ε-amino group of an enzymatic Lys residue. The Schiff base, which is conjugated to the enzyme's pyridinium ring, is the focus of the coenzyme activity.

Ping Pong Bi Bi mechanism of  PLP dependent enzyme catalyzed transamination. Aminotransferase reaction occurs in two stages consisting of three steps: Transimination, Tautomerisation and Hydolysis. In the first stage, alpha amino group of the aminoacid is transferred to PLP yielding an alpha ketoacid and PMP. In the second stage of the reaction, in which the amino group of PMP is transferred to a different alpha Ketoacid to yield a new alpha amino acid and PLP.

The product of transamination reactions depend on the availability of α-keto acids. The products usually are either alanine , aspartate or glutamate , since their corresponding alpha-keto acids are produced through metabolism of fuels. Being a major degradative aminoacid pathway, lysine , proline and threonine are the only three amino acids that do not always undergo transamination and rather use respective dehydrogenase.

Non-enzymatic transamination [ edit ] A second type of transamination reaction can be described as a nucleophilic substitution of one amine or amide anion on an amine or ammonium salt.

[ 1 ] For example, the attack of a primary amine by a primary amide anion can be used to prepare secondary amines: RNH 2 + R'NH − → RR'NH + NH 2 − Symmetric secondary amines can be prepared using Raney nickel (2RNH 2 → R 2 NH + NH 3 ). And finally, quaternary ammonium salts can be dealkylated using ethanolamine: R 4 N + + NH 2 CH 2 CH 2 OH → R 3 N + RN + H 2 CH 2 CH 2 OH Aminonaphthalenes also undergo transaminations.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Smith, M. B. and March, J.

Advanced Organic Chemistry: Reactions, Mechanisms, and Structure , 5th ed. Wiley, 2001 , p. 503. ISBN 0-471-58589-0 ^ Booth, Gerald (2000-01-01). "Naphthalene Derivatives".

Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry . Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.

doi : 10.1002/14356007.a17_009 .

ISBN 9783527306732 .

Voet & Voet.

Biochemistry , 4 th edition External links [ edit ] Amino Acid Biosynthesis Archived 2017-04-26 at the Wayback Machine The chemical logic behind aminoacid degradation and the urea cycle Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transamination&oldid=1298824688 " Categories : Amino acids Biochemical reactions Organic reactions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 23:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transamination 27 languages Add topic

