Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Noteworthy relatives 3 Tributes and memorials 4 Research, interests and achievements 5 Mache unit 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Heinrich Mache 6 languages العربية Deutsch Français مصرى 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian physicist This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Heinrich Mache Heinrich Mache Born ( 1876-04-27 ) 27 April 1876 Prague , Austria-Hungary Died 1 September 1954 (1954-09-01) (aged 78) Vienna , Austria Alma mater University of Vienna Known for Mache (unit) Scientific career Fields Physicist Institutions Vienna Academy University of Vienna Technical University Vienna Doctoral advisor Franz Serafin Exner Other academic advisors Ludwig Boltzmann Heinrich Mache (27 April 1876 – 1 September 1954) was an Austrian physicist. He won the Haitinger Prize of the Austrian Academy of Sciences in 1915.

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Born in Prague , after his secondary school studies, Mache completed the first year of physics in Prague, among other things, heard lectures by Ernst Mach and in 1894 moved with his family to Vienna , where he continued his studies with Franz Serafin Exner and continued with Ludwig Boltzmann . He received his doctorate in 1898 working under Exner on the "experimental proof of electrostriction in gases" and worked as a photographic expert during 1900/1901 and participated in the astronomical expedition for the Vienna Academy to India. In connection with his research he conducted  air electrical measurements on the Red Sea, in Delhi, Ceylon and Upper Egypt. In 1901, he habilitated at the University of Vienna . In 1906, he was appointed associate professor at the University of Innsbruck , which he left after two years in order accept the position as a professor at the Technical University Vienna . He was the successor of Friedrich Hasenöhrl . He died in Vienna.

Noteworthy relatives [ edit ] His wife was the granddaughter of the great geologist Eduard Suess .

Tributes and memorials [ edit ] In 1966 in Donau City (22nd District), Vienna, the Makegasse (Mache Alley) was named in his honor.

Research, interests and achievements [ edit ] His research was mainly radioactivity , thermodynamics , atmospheric electricity , and the physics of combustion phenomena. He developed with Ludwig Flamm a theory of combustion of explosive gas mixtures. Due to his work with radon , the now unusual unit Mache was named for describing the activity of radioactive medicinal waters.

Wilhelm Exner Medal , 1927 Mache continued the Zippermayr Group experiments with early Carbon-Oxygen Fuel–air explosives, which SS sought to develop in Austria during the WWII, under the Soviets in late 1945.

[ 2 ] Mache unit [ edit ] The Mache is the amount of radon in one liter that will produce a saturation current of 0.001 electrostatic unit (ESU) of current and is equivalent to 364 p Ci L −1 .

[ 3 ] The eman (emanation) unit, used in the 1920s and 1930s, is equivalent to 100 p Ci L −1 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Hall of Fame: Heinrich Mache" (in German). Vienna, Austria: Technische Universität Wien. 18 December 2015 . Retrieved 9 January 2016 .

^ Karlsch, Rainer (24 September 2007).

"Massenvernichtungswaffe: Großvaters Vakuumbombe" [Weapon of Mass Destruction: Grandfather's Vacuum Bomb].

Faz.net (in German).

Archived from the original on 2020-08-11 . Retrieved 2020-06-03 .

^ Riezler, Wolfgang [in German] (1950).

Einführung in die Kernphysik (in German) (4th ed.). H. Hübener. p. 309.

Further reading [ edit ] Rechenberg, Helmut (1987).

"Mache, Heinrich" .

Neue deutsche Biographie (in German). Volume 15. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

611– 612.

ISBN 3-428-00196-6 . Retrieved 24 May 2014 .

"Heinrich Mache" (in German).

Wilhelm Exner Medal Foundation . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 24 May 2014 .

v t e Scientists whose names are used as units SI base units André-Marie Ampère ( ampere ) Lord Kelvin ( kelvin ) SI derived units Henri Becquerel ( becquerel ) Anders Celsius (degree Celsius ) Charles-Augustin de Coulomb ( coulomb ) Michael Faraday ( farad ) Louis Harold Gray ( gray ) Joseph Henry ( henry ) Heinrich Hertz ( hertz ) James Prescott Joule ( joule ) Isaac Newton ( newton ) Georg Ohm ( ohm ) Blaise Pascal ( pascal ) Werner von Siemens ( siemens ) Rolf Maximilian Sievert ( sievert ) Nikola Tesla ( tesla ) Alessandro Volta ( volt ) James Watt ( watt ) Wilhelm Eduard Weber ( weber ) Non-SI metric ( cgs ) units Anders Jonas Ångström ( angstrom ) Peter Debye ( debye ) Loránd Eötvös ( eotvos ) Galileo Galilei ( gal ) Carl Friedrich Gauss ( gauss ) William Gilbert ( gilbert ) Heinrich Kayser ( kayser ) Johann Heinrich Lambert ( lambert ) Samuel Langley ( langley ) James Clerk Maxwell ( maxwell ) Hans Christian Ørsted ( oersted ) Jean Léonard Marie Poiseuille ( poise ) Sir George Stokes, 1st Baronet ( stokes ) John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh ( rayl ) Imperial and US customary units Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit (degree Fahrenheit ) Johann Heinrich Lambert ( foot-lambert ) William John Macquorn Rankine ( degree Rankine ) Non-systematic units Alexander Graham Bell ( bel/decibel ) Marie Curie & Pierre Curie ( curie ) John Dalton ( dalton ) Michael Faraday ( faraday ) Heinrich Mache ( mache ) John Napier ( neper ) René Antoine Ferchault de Réaumur ( degree Réaumur ) Wilhelm Röntgen ( roentgen ) J. J. Thomson ( thomson ) Evangelista Torricelli ( torr ) List of scientists whose names are used as units · Scientists whose names are used in physical constants · People whose names are used in chemical element names Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany Netherlands Greece Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heinrich_Mache&oldid=1303138281 " Categories : 1876 births 1954 deaths Austrian physicists University of Vienna alumni Academic staff of the University of Innsbruck Academic staff of TU Wien Scientists from Prague Burials at Sievering Cemetery Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 interwiki-linked names Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 08:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heinrich Mache 6 languages Add topic

