Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Stated in terms of von Neumann ordinals 2 Stated more generally 3 Resolutions of the paradox 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Burali-Forti paradox 17 languages Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Paradox in set theory This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In set theory , a field of mathematics , the Burali-Forti paradox demonstrates that constructing "the set of all ordinal numbers " leads to a contradiction and therefore shows an antinomy in a system that allows its construction. It is named after Cesare Burali-Forti , who, in 1897, published a paper proving a theorem which, unknown to him, contradicted a previously proved result by Georg Cantor .

Bertrand Russell subsequently noticed the contradiction, and when he published it in his 1903 book Principles of Mathematics , he stated that it had been suggested to him by Burali-Forti's paper, with the result that it came to be known by Burali-Forti's name.

Stated in terms of von Neumann ordinals [ edit ] We will prove this by contradiction.

Let Ω be a set consisting of all ordinal numbers.

Ω is transitive because for every element x of Ω (which is an ordinal number and can be any ordinal number) and every element y of x (i.e. under the definition of Von Neumann ordinals , for every ordinal number y < x ), we have that y is an element of Ω because any ordinal number contains only ordinal numbers, by the definition of this ordinal construction.

Ω is well ordered by the membership relation because all its elements are also well ordered by this relation.

So, by steps 2 and 3, we have that Ω is an ordinal class and also, by step 1, an ordinal number, because all ordinal classes that are sets are also ordinal numbers.

This implies that Ω is an element of Ω .

Under the definition of Von Neumann ordinals, Ω < Ω is the same as Ω being an element of Ω . This latter statement is proven by step 5.

But no ordinal class is less than itself, including Ω because of step 4 ( Ω is an ordinal class), i.e.

Ω ≮ Ω .

We have deduced two contradictory propositions ( Ω < Ω and Ω ≮ Ω ) from the sethood of Ω and, therefore, disproved that Ω is a set.

Stated more generally [ edit ] The version of the paradox above is anachronistic, because it presupposes the definition of the ordinals due to John von Neumann , under which each ordinal is the set of all preceding ordinals, which was not known at the time the paradox was framed by Burali-Forti.
Here is an account with fewer presuppositions:  suppose that we associate with each well-ordering an object called its order type in an unspecified way (the order types are the ordinal numbers).  The order types (ordinal numbers) themselves are well-ordered in a natural way,
and this well-ordering must have an order type Ω Ω {\displaystyle \Omega } .  It is easily shown in naïve set theory (and remains true in ZFC but not in New Foundations ) that the order
type of all ordinal numbers less than a fixed α α {\displaystyle \alpha } is α α {\displaystyle \alpha } itself.
So the order
type of all ordinal numbers less than Ω Ω {\displaystyle \Omega } is Ω Ω {\displaystyle \Omega } itself.  But
this means that Ω Ω {\displaystyle \Omega } , being the order type of a proper initial segment of the ordinals,  is strictly less than the order type of all the ordinals,
but the latter is Ω Ω {\displaystyle \Omega } itself by definition.  This is a contradiction.

Using the von Neumann definition, under which each ordinal is identified as the set of all preceding ordinals, the paradox is unavoidable:  the offending proposition that the order type of all ordinal numbers less than a fixed α α {\displaystyle \alpha } is α α {\displaystyle \alpha } itself must be true.  The collection of von Neumann ordinals, like the collection in the Russell paradox , cannot be a set in any set theory with classical logic.  But the collection of order types in New Foundations (defined as equivalence classes of well-orderings under similarity) is actually a set, and the paradox is avoided because the order type of the ordinals less than Ω Ω {\displaystyle \Omega } turns out not to be Ω Ω {\displaystyle \Omega } .

Resolutions of the paradox [ edit ] Modern axioms for formal set theory such as ZF and ZFC circumvent this antinomy by not allowing the construction of sets using terms like "all sets with the property P {\displaystyle P} " , as is possible in naive set theory and as is possible with Gottlob Frege 's axioms – specifically Basic Law V – in the "Grundgesetze der Arithmetik." Quine's system New Foundations (NF) uses a different solution . Rosser ( 1942 ) showed that in the original version of Quine's system "Mathematical Logic" (ML), an extension of New Foundations, it is possible to derive the Burali-Forti paradox, showing that this system was contradictory.  Quine's revision of ML following Rosser's discovery does not suffer from this defect, and indeed was subsequently proved equiconsistent with NF by Hao Wang .

See also [ edit ] Absolute infinite References [ edit ] Burali-Forti, Cesare (1897), "Una questione sui numeri transfiniti" , Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo , 11 : 154– 164, doi : 10.1007/BF03015911 , S2CID 121527917 Irving Copi (1958) "The Burali-Forti Paradox", Philosophy of Science 25(4): 281–286, doi : 10.1086/287617 Moore, Gregory H; Garciadiego, Alejandro (1981), "Burali-Forti's paradox: A reappraisal of its origins", Historia Mathematica , 8 (3): 319– 350, doi : 10.1016/0315-0860(81)90070-7 Rosser, Barkley (1942), "The Burali-Forti paradox", Journal of Symbolic Logic , 7 (1): 1– 17, doi : 10.2307/2267550 , JSTOR 2267550 , MR 0006327 , S2CID 13389728 External links [ edit ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : " Paradoxes and Contemporary Logic "—by Andrea Cantini.

v t e Paradoxes Philosophical Analysis Buridan's bridge Dream argument Epicurean Fiction Fitch's knowability Free will Goodman's Hedonism Liberal Meno's Mere addition Moore's Newcomb's Nihilism Omnipotence Preface Rule-following Sorites Theseus' ship White horse Zeno's Logical Barber Berry Bhartrhari's Burali-Forti Court Crocodile Curry's Epimenides Free choice paradox Grelling–Nelson Kleene–Rosser Liar Card No-no Pinocchio Quine's Yablo's Opposite Day Paradoxes of set theory Richard's Russell's Socratic Hilbert's Hotel Temperature paradox Barbershop Catch-22 Chicken or the egg Drinker Entailment Lottery Plato's beard Raven Ross's Unexpected hanging " What the Tortoise Said to Achilles " Heat death paradox Olbers's paradox Economic Allais Antitrust Arrow information Bertrand Braess' Competition Income and fertility Downs–Thomson Easterlin Edgeworth Ellsberg European Gibson's Giffen good Icarus Jevons Leontief Lerner Lucas Mandeville's Mayfield's Metzler Plenty Productivity Prosperity Scitovsky Service recovery St. Petersburg Thrift Toil Tullock Value Decision theory Abilene Apportionment Alabama New states Population Arrow's Buridan's ass Chainstore Condorcet's Decision-making Downs Ellsberg Fenno's Fredkin's Green Hedgehog's Inventor's Kavka's toxin puzzle Morton's fork Navigation Newcomb's Parrondo's Preparedness Prevention Prisoner's dilemma Tolerance Willpower List Category v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Burali-Forti_paradox&oldid=1300455940 " Categories : Ordinal numbers Paradoxes of naive set theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 12:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Burali-Forti paradox 17 languages Add topic

