Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Extent 2 Flowings 3 Conservation 4 Image gallery 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ligurian Sea 105 languages Afrikaans Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Удмурт Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°30′N 9°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.500°N 9.000°E ﻿ / 43.500; 9.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arm of the Mediterranean Sea between the Italian Riviera (Liguria) and the island of Corsica The Ligurian Sea The Ligurian Sea: in red the border according to International Hydrographic Organization , in blue the border according to Istituto Idrografico della Marina The Ligurian Sea [ 1 ] is an arm of the Mediterranean Sea . It lies between the Italian Riviera ( Liguria ) and the island of Corsica . The sea is thought to have been named after the ancient Ligures people.

Geography [ edit ] The sea borders Italy as far as its border with France , and the French island of Corsica . In the east, the sea borders the Tyrrhenian Sea , while in the west it borders the Mediterranean Sea proper.

Genoa is the most prominent city in the area. The northwest coast is noted for its scenery and climate.

[ citation needed ] The Gulf of Genoa is its northernmost part. The ports of Genoa and La Spezia are on its rocky coast. It reaches a maximum depth of more than 2,800 m (9,300 ft) northwest of Corsica.

According to a 1983 study, since 1977 a series of experimental analyses on sea-level variations at Genoa and Imperia highlighted "the existence of a seiche wave with a mean period of 5.8 hours", whose reasons weren't yet explained at that time. The Ligurian Sea was modeled as a rectangular semi-closed basin with a longitudinal length of 40 km (25 mi) and a transversal one of 10 km (6.2 mi), in an average constant depth of 2,000 m (6,600 ft; 1,100 fathoms).

[ 2 ] Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Ligurian Sea as follows: [ 3 ] On the Southwest.

A line joining Cape Corse (Cape Grosso, 9°23′E) the Northern point of Corsica to the frontier between France and Italy (7°31′E).

On the Southeast.

A line joining Cape Corse with Tinetto Island ( 44°01′N 9°51′E ﻿ / ﻿ 44.017°N 9.850°E ﻿ / 44.017; 9.850 ) and thence through Tino and Palmaria Islands to San Pietro Point ( 44°03′N 9°50′E ﻿ / ﻿ 44.050°N 9.833°E ﻿ / 44.050; 9.833 ) on the Coast of Italy.

On the North The Ligurian Coast of Italy.

Flowings [ edit ] The Ligurian Sea is traversed by the Modified Atlantic Water (MAW) on its surface and by the Levantine Intermediate Water in depth. It is also brushed by the two main currents which surround the Corsica island: the Western Corsica Current and the Tyrrenian current that reaches the Corsica Channel .

[ 4 ] Conservation [ edit ] In order to provide protection for the numerous cetacean ( whales and dolphins ; porpoises are not found in this part of the Mediterranean Sea) species in the Ligurian Sea the bordering countries established the sea as a SPAMI in 1999. The International Ligurian Sea Cetacean Sanctuary now covers 84,000 km 2 (32,000 sq mi) covering territorial waters as well as high sea .

Image gallery [ edit ] Rogliano Pietracorbara Portovenere Palmaria La Spezia Vernazza Corniglia Monterosso al Mare Riomaggiore Manarola Sori Genoa Savona Ceriale Alassio Laigueglia Imperia Sanremo Ventimiglia References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ligurian Sea .

^ Italian : Mar Ligure ; French : Mer Ligurienne ; Ligurian : Mâ Ligure ; Corsican : Mari Liguru ^ Papa, Lorenzo (1 December 1983).

"A numerical computation of a seiche oscillation of the Ligurian Sea" .

Geophysical Journal International .

75 (3).

Oxford University Press : 659– 667.

Bibcode : 1983GeoJ...75..659P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-246X.1983.tb05004.x .

ISSN 0956-540X .

OCLC 4640460944 .

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 October 2018 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

^ Vignudelli, S.; Cipollini, P.; Reseghetti, F.; Fusco, G.; Gasparini, G. P.; Manzella, G. M. R. (2003).

"Comparison between XBT data and TOPEX/Poseidon satellite altimetry in the Ligurian-Tyrrhenian area" (pdf) .

Annales Geophysicae .

21 (21). European Geosciences Union: 123– 135.

Bibcode : 2003AnGeo..21..123V .

doi : 10.5194/angeo-21-123-2003 .

ISSN 0992-7689 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 20, 2008.

At the introductory paragraph.

v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal 43°30′N 9°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.500°N 9.000°E ﻿ / 43.500; 9.000 Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ligurian_Sea&oldid=1291572789 " Categories : Ligurian Sea Marginal seas of the Mediterranean European seas Seas of Italy Landforms of Corsica Landforms of Liguria Geography of Europe France–Italy border Hidden categories: Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Ligurian-language text Articles containing Corsican-language text Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 02:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ligurian Sea 105 languages Add topic

