Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Role of the Phanariotes 2 Aftermath 3 Art 4 Notable people and societies 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Modern Greek Enlightenment 10 languages العربية Български Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Italiano Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 18th-century national revival and educational movement in Greece This article's lead section may be too long .

Please read the length guidelines and help move details into the article's body .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hermes o Logios , Greek literary magazine of the 18th and 19th century The Modern Greek Enlightenment (also known as the Neo-Hellenic Enlightenment ; [ 1 ] Greek : Διαφωτισμός , Diafotismós / Νεοελληνικός Διαφωτισμός , Neoellinikós Diafotismós ) was the Greek expression of the Age of Enlightenment , characterized by an intellectual and philosophical movement within the Greek community.  At this time, many Greeks were dispersed across the Ottoman Empire , with some residing on the Ionian Islands , in Venice , and other parts of Italy .

Leonardos Philaras , one of the early advocates for Greek independence, played a significant role before the movement truly gained momentum following his death.

Throughout the Ottoman Empire, Greeks frequently participated in uprisings.  Many Greeks living in Venice fought for the Venetian Empire against the Ottomans.  Notable Greek painters in Venice who took part in these conflicts included Victor (painter) , Philotheos Skoufos , and Panagiotis Doxaras .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] During the Modern Greek Enlightenment, Greek painting underwent a significant transformation.  The traditional Byzantine-Venetian style, which had been dominant in the Cretan School , began to wane in favor of the Heptanese School 's new approach.  Painters like Doxaras pioneered this shift, moving away from the egg tempera technique and embracing oil painting, thus revolutionizing Greek art.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The educational center for the Greek community was Italy where many of the priests were educated and the leadership of the Rum Millet was controlled by Orthodox Christian priests.  The education of the Greek community was subjugated by a strict observance of Korydalism which was taught by priests and sanctioned by the Catholic and Orthodox churches. Korydalism was created by Theophilos Corydalleus and it followed Aristotle and Plato's secular philosophical teachings.

[ 9 ] A central figure in the schism from Korydalism was Methodios Anthrakites who fought to introduce updated European philosophical thought to Greek education.  He was persecuted in Constantinople by the church fathers and a debate ensued among Greek scholars during the later part of the 18th century to change education.  Nonetheless, Greek priest and astronomer Chrysanthus of Jerusalem had an active relationship with Giovanni Domenico Cassini .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] The American War of Independence sent shockwaves throughout the world and most people demanded liberty or death. Between the date of American independence and the dawn of the Greek War of Independence roughly eleven countries in Europe and the Americas fought for independence, from the Haitian Revolution in 1791 to the Peruvian War of Independence in 1811.

The Pamphlet of Rigas Feraios , published in 1797, was an instrument to awaken Greek national consciousness which led to the Greek War of Independence.  Another important pamphlet was Hellenic Nomarchy published in 1806 and advocated the ideals of freedom, social justice, and social equality for the Greek people.  By 1814, the Filiki Eteria (Society of Friends) formed in Odessa, whose purpose was to overthrow the Ottoman rule of Greece and establish an independent Greek State.  Another society called the Philomuse Society was formed with the aim of educating the Greeks and promoting philhellenism.

[ 13 ] Eventually, the Greek community fought in the Greek War of Independence for roughly nine years.  By the 1830s, the enlightenment struggle continued and the Greek community established a state that was still overshadowed by Orthodox ecclesiastical aristocracy.  Orthodox priest Neophytos Vamvas was the dean of the scientific and philosophical school of Athens.  Eventually for the proliferation of the people a secular state was preferred and Otto of Greece was elected King.  Greek academics studied in Germany and France and a German educational system was implemented in Greece.  The major new architecture of Athens was Neoclassical in nature and was a defining characteristic of the Greek Enlightenment and Greek painters represented the Munich School .  The Enlightenment movement continued with news of continued Greek oppression among the Greek community living in the Ottoman Empire.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Greek Women of Souli Running to Their Death (Dance of Zalongo) Regrettably, slavery still overshadowed the Greek people living in the empire.  The Greek slave movement began in the United States with Garafilia Mohalbi and people learned about the horrors of Greek slavery.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Eventually Hiram Powers sculpted The Greek Slave statue which was exhibited all over the world.  The Dance of Zalongo also became a popular movement in art during the Greek Enlightenment and reminded people of the mass suicide of roughly 60 women and children from a cliff in Zalongo in 1803 to avoid capture, enslavement, rape and lifelong torture by Ottoman forces during the Souliote War (1803) .  The Ottomans implemented the Tanzimat reforms to slow nationalistic sentiment but Greek oppression continued until they were fully liberated and wars ensued for over 100 years.  Rhodes, together with the other islands of the Dodecanese, were united with Greece in February 1947.

Origins [ edit ] Further information: Ottoman Greece The Greek Enlightenment was given impetus by the Greek predominance in trade and education in the Ottoman Empire . This allowed Greek merchants to finance a large number of young Greeks to study in universities in Italy and the German states . There, they were introduced to the ideas of the Enlightenment and the French Revolution .

[ 18 ] It was the wealth of the extensive Greek merchant class that provided the material basis for the intellectual revival that was the prominent feature of Greek life in the half century and more leading to 1821.  It was not by chance that on the eve of the Greek War of Independence the epicenters of Greek learning, i.e. schools-cum-universities, were situated in Ioannina , Chios , Smyrna (Izmir) and Ayvalık (Kydonies), were also Greek commercial centers.

[ 19 ] Role of the Phanariotes [ edit ] The Phanariotes were a small caste of Greek families who took their collective name from the Phanar quarter of Constantinople where the Ecumenical Patriarchate is still housed. They held various administrative posts within the Ottoman Empire , the most important of which were those of hospodar , or prince, of the Danubian principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia . Most hospodars acted as patrons of Greek culture, education, and printing. These academies attracted teachers and pupils from throughout the Orthodox commonwealth, and there was some contact with intellectual trends in Habsburg central Europe. For the most part they supported the Ottoman system of government, too much to play a significant part in the emergence of the Greek national movement; however, their support of learning produced many highly educated Greek scholars who benefited from the cosmopolitan environment the Phanariotes cultivated in their principalities.

[ 20 ] This environment was in general a special attraction for young, ambitious and educated Greek people from the Ottoman Empire, contributing to their national enlightenment. The Princely Academies of Bucharest and Iasi also played a crucial role in this movement. Characteristically the authors of the Geographia Neoteriki , one of the most remarkable works of that era, Daniel Philippidis and Grigorios Konstantas , were both educated in this environment.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Aftermath [ edit ] One effect was the creation of an atticized form of Greek by linguistic purists, which was adopted as the official language of the state and came to be known as Katharevousa (purified). This created diglossia in the Greek linguistic sphere, in which Katharevousa and the vernacular idiom known as Dimotiki were in conflict until the latter half of the 20th century.

[ 18 ] The transmission of Enlightenment ideas into Greek thought also influenced the development of a national consciousness. The publication of the journal Hermes o Logios encouraged the ideas of the Enlightenment. The journal's objective was to advance Greek science, philosophy and culture.  Two of the main figures of the Greek Enlightenment, Rigas Feraios and Adamantios Korais , encouraged Greek nationalists to pursue contemporary political thought.

[ 23 ] The Greek Enlightenment concerned not only language and the humanities but also the sciences . Some scholars such as Methodios Anthrakites , Evgenios Voulgaris , Athanasios Psalidas , Balanos Vasilopoulos and Nikolaos Darbaris had a background in mathematics and the Physical Sciences and published scientific books into Greek for use in Greek schools.

Rigas Feraios also published an Anthology of Physics.

Art [ edit ] The Greek Enlightenment also included the art of the Heptanese School .  Notable artists of the Greek Enlightenment in art include: Panagiotis Doxaras , Nikolaos Doxaras , Nikolaos Kantounis , Nikolaos Koutouzis and Gerasimos Pitsamanos .  Greek art began to diverge from the traditional Maniera Greca drastically migrating to the Venetian Maniera Italiana .  The art began to exhibit its own style.  Greek painting eras include the Greek Rocco, Greek Neoclassicism and Greek Romanticism.  The movements carried Greek artists into the era of Modern Greek Art.  Most historians refer to this period as the Neo Hellenikos Diafotismos in painting.

There were many artists associated with the era that were not from the Ionian Islands.  These artists were in different parts of the Ottoman Empire or Venetian Empire.  Some artists were active in the Cyclades such Christodoulos Kalergis and Emmanuel Skordilis .

Ioannis Koronaros migrated from Crete to Egypt and finally settled in Cyprus.  Although the Cretan Renaissance ended, there were still few active workshops on the island.  Many of these artists belonged to the Neo Hellinkos Diafotismos .

The Modern Greek Enlightenment in Art did not only belong to the Heptanese School but all of the Greek communities or the so-called ancestors of Ancient Greek Civilization.  This group lived throughout what is now considered modern Greece.  There were also countless Greek artists active in Constantinople, now called Istanbul.  Research is constantly underway by the Neohellenic Institute , hundreds of Greek painters and other artists have been cataloged from the 15th century until the Greek War of Independence.

Notable people and societies [ edit ] Rigas Feraios Theophilos Kairis Adamantios Korais Theoklitos Farmakidis Eugenios Voulgaris Greek Language Dictionary (1835 edition) by Anthimos Gazis Neophytos Doukas (1760–1845), a scholar and prolific writer, who wrote about 70 books and rendered many ancient texts into Modern Greek .

Rigas Feraios , Greek emigre to Vienna . He was an admirer of the French Revolution and hoped to transplant its humanistic ideas to the Greek world. He imagined a pan-Balkan uprising against the Ottomans.

Adamantios Korais , witness of the French Revolution , Korais took his primary intellectual inspiration from the Enlightenment , and he borrowed ideas copiously from the philosophers Thomas Hobbes , John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau .

Theophilos Kairis , influenced by the French Enlightenment and critical to the Eastern Orthodox Church . He founded a pietistic revivalist movement, known as Theosebism , inspired by the French revolutionary cults, radical Protestantism and deism which was anathematised by the Synod of the Patriarchate of Constantinople . He had a very different vision for the independent Greece, one that was based upon the concept of separation of church and state.

Theoklitos Farmakidis , inspired by the French Revolution , strongly pro-West and critical to the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople .

Filomousos Eteria , the name of two (Athens and Vienna) philological and philhellene organizations.

Filiki Eteria , the Society of Friends in Greek, was a secret society working in the early 19th century, whose purpose was to overthrow Ottoman rule and to establish an independent Greek state founded on the humanist ideals of the Enlightenment . Many young Phanariot Greeks were among its members.

See also [ edit ] Ellinoglosso Xenodocheio References [ edit ] ^ Patiniotis M. (2015) "Neo-Hellenic Enlightenment: In Search of a European Identity," in Arabatzis T., Renn J., Simões A. (eds), Relocating the History of Science. Boston Studies in the Philosophy and History of Science , vol 312. Springer, Cham.

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-14553-2_9 ^ Speake 2021 , p. 443.

^ Hatzidakis 1987 , p. 191.

^ Speake 2021 , pp. 64, 190, 198, 242, 335, 406 478, 480, 481, 547, 548, 630–631, 649, 683, 692–694, 718, 736, 766–767, 779, 796, 865.

^ Drakopoulou 2010 , pp. 272–274.

^ Kitromilides 2013 , pp. 1–60.

^ Ricks & Beaton 2016 , pp. 1–16.

^ Pizanias 2020 , pp. 124–174.

^ Speake 2021 , pp. 405–406.

^ Plested 2012 , pp. 161–162.

^ McGuckin 2011 , pp. 364–365.

^ Israel 2006 , pp. 321–322.

^ Speake 2021 , p. 1264.

^ Savaidou 2010 , p. 50.

^ Stefanidou 1952 , p. 62-66.

^ Staff Writers (September 8, 1829).

"The Slave Market at Constantinople" (PDF) .

Vermont Gazette Volume 20 No 39 September 8, 1829 Page 1 . Genealogy Bank.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 6, 2024 . Retrieved March 26, 2024 .

^ Demetrios Constantinos Andrianis (October 21, 2022).

"Greek Slave Movement" . Worldhistories.org.

Archived from the original on March 27, 2024 . Retrieved March 27, 2024 .

^ a b Encyclopædia Britannica, Greek history, Intellectual Revival , 2008 ed.

^ Encyclopædia Britannica, Greek history, The mercantile middle class , 2008 ed.

^ Encyclopædia Britannica, Greek history, Transformation toward emancipation, The Phanariotes , 2008 ed.

^ Kopeček, Michal (2006).

Discourses of collective identity in Central and Southeast Europe (1770–1945): texts and commentaries . Central European University Press. pp.

73– 79.

ISBN 978-963-7326-52-3 .

^ Sussex, Roland; John Christopher, Eade (1985).

Culture and nationalism in nineteenth-century Eastern Europe . Slavica Publishers. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-89357-146-7 .

^ M. Kitromilides, Paschalis (1979).

The Dialectic of Intolerance: Ideological Dimensions of Ethnic Conflict . Journal of the Hellnice Diaspora. p. 4. Archived from the original on 2013-10-22 . Retrieved 2011-02-07 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Speake, Graham (2021).

Modern Greek Enlightenment Encyclopedia of Greece and the Hellenic Tradition . London And New York: Rutledge Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 9781135942069 .

Kitromilides, Paschalis M. (2013).

Enlightenment and Revolution The Making of Modern Greece . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674727663 .

Ricks, David; Beaton, Roderick (2016).

The Making of Modern Greece Nationalism, Romanticism, and the Uses of the Past (1797–1896) . New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9781317024736 .

Pizanias, Petros T. (2020).

The Making of the Modern Greeks 1400-1820 . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

ISBN 9781527562486 .

Hatzidakis, Manolis (1987).

Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450-1830). Τόμος 1: Αβέρκιος - Ιωσήφ [ Greek Painters after the Fall of Constantinople (1450-1830). Volume 1: Averkios - Iosif ]. Athens: Center for Modern Greek Studies, National Research Foundation.

hdl : 10442/14844 .

ISBN 960-7916-01-8 .

Hatzidakis, Manolis; Drakopoulou, Evgenia (1997).

Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450-1830). Τόμος 2: Καβαλλάρος - Ψαθόπουλος [ Greek Painters after the Fall of Constantinople (1450-1830). Volume 2: Kavallaros - Psathopoulos ]. Athens: Center for Modern Greek Studies, National Research Foundation.

hdl : 10442/14088 .

ISBN 960-7916-00-X .

Drakopoulou, Evgenia (2010).

Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450–1830). Τόμος 3: Αβέρκιος - Ιωσήφ [ Greek Painters after the Fall of Constantinople (1450–1830). Volume 3: Averkios - Joseph ]. Athens, Greece: Center for Modern Greek Studies, National Research Foundation.

ISBN 978-960-7916-94-5 .

Israel, Jonathan I. (2006).

Enlightenment Contested Philosophy, Modernity, and the Emancipation of Man 1670-1752 . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199279227 .

McGuckin, John Anthony, ed. (2011).

"Philosophy" .

The Encyclopedia of Eastern Orthodox Christianity . A-M. Vol. 1. West Sussex, United Kingdom: Wiley Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-118-75933-2 . Retrieved March 26, 2024 .

Plested, Marcus (2012).

Orthodox Readings of Aquinas . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199650651 .

Stefanidou, Micheal K. (1952).

Εθνικόν και Καποδιστριακόν Πανεπιστήμιον Αθηνών Εκατονταετηρίς 1837-1937 Ιστορία της Φυσικομαθηματικής Σχολής [ National and Kapodistrian University of Athens Centenary 1837-1937 History of the Faculty of Physics and Mathematics ] (PDF) . Athens, Greece: National and Kapodistrian University of Athens.

Savaidou, Irini Mergoupi (2010).

Δημόσιος Λόγος περί Επιστήμης στην Ελλάδα, 1870–1900: Εκλαϊκευτικά Εγχειρήματα στο Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών, στους Πολιτιστικούς Συλλόγους και στα Περιοδικά [ Public Discourse about Science in Greece, 1870-1900: Population Projects at the University of Athens, in Cultural Associations and Magazines ] (PDF) . Athens, GR: Department of History and Philosophy of Science of the University of Athens.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 13, 2024 . Retrieved March 26, 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Modern Greek Enlightenment .

Dimitris Michalopoulos, "Aristotle vs Plato. The Balkans' Paradoxical Enlightenment", Bulgarian Journal of Science and Education Policy (BJSEP) , 1 (2007), pp. 7–15. ISSN 1313-1958.

Anna Tabaki, "Enlightenment", Encyclopedia of Greece and the Hellenic Tradition , Editor Graham Speake , Volume vol.1 A-K, Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, London-Chicago, 2000, pp. 547–551.

Anna Tabaki, "Greece", Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment , Alan Charles Kors Editor in Chief, Volume 2, Oxford University Press, 2003, pp. 157–160.

Anna Tabaki, [1] Anna Tabaki, "Les Lumières néo-helléniques. Un essai de définition et de périodisation", The Enlightenment in Europe, Les Lumières en Europe, Aufklärung in Europa. Unity and Diversity, Unité et Diversité, Einheit und Vielfalt .  Edited by /édité par / hrsg. von Werner Schneiders avec l’introduction générale de Roland Mortier, [European Science Foundation] Concepts et Symboles du Dix-huitième Siècle Européen, Concepts and Symbols of the Eighteenth Century in Europe, BWV • Berliner Wissenschafts - Verlag, 2003, pp. 45–56.

v t e Modern Greek Enlightenment Main ideas Greek Independence Nationalism Liberalism Constitutionalism Education Westernization Hellenization Freedom of religion Greek language Publications Asma Polemistirion Salpisma Polemistirion Adelphiki Didaskalia Geographia Neoteriki Hellenic Nomarchy Hellenic Library Ephimeris Calliope Rossaglogallos Hermes o Logios Politika Parallela Thourios or Patriotic hymn Pamphlet of Rigas Feraios Map of Greece New Map of Wallachia and part of Transylvania Real Bliss General Map of Moldavia Gnostike, Stoicheia Philosophias Academies Ottoman Empire : Athonite Academy Evangelical School Kaplaneios Maroutsaia New Academy Phanar Greek Orthodox College Phrontisterion of Trapezous Diaspora : Flanginian School Princely Academy of Bucharest Princely Academy of Iași Representatives Methodios Anthrakites Kosmas Balanos Athanasios Christopoulos Neophytos Doukas Vikentios Damodos Theoklitos Farmakidis Rigas Feraios Anthimos Gazis Georgios Gennadios Theophilos Kairis Theodore Kavalliotis Grigorios Konstantas Adamantios Korais Konstantinos Koumas Stefanos Kanellos Sevastos Leontiadis Benjamin of Lesbos Iosipos Moisiodax Minas Minoidis Konstantinos Michail Konstantinos Nikolopoulos Michail Papageorgiou Christodoulos Pablekis Daniel Philippidis Athanasios Psalidas Theoklitos Polyeidis Athanasios Stageiritis Konstantinos Tzechanis Neophytos Vamvas Ioannis Vilaras Eugenios Voulgaris Related Philomuse Society Filiki Eteria Ionian Academy Orphanage of Kairis Moscopole printing house v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Greek War of Independence (1821–1829) Background Ottoman Greece People Armatoles Proestoi Klephts Dionysius the Philosopher Daskalogiannis Panagiotis Benakis Nikolaos Galatis Konstantinos Kolokotronis Lambros Katsonis Cosmas of Aetolia Ali Pasha Maniots Phanariots Rum Millet Souliotes Gregory V of Constantinople Events Orlov Revolt Souliote War (1789–1793) Souliote War (1803) Greek Enlightenment People John Caradja Athanasios Christopoulos Theoklitos Farmakidis Rigas Feraios Anthimos Gazis Theophilos Kairis Adamantios Korais Eugenios Voulgaris Organizations Ellinoglosso Xenodocheio Filiki Eteria Nikolaos Skoufas Athanasios Tsakalov Emmanuil Xanthos Panagiotis Anagnostopoulos Philomuse Society Society of the Phoenix Publications Adelphiki Didaskalia Asma Polemistirion Hellenic Nomarchy Pamphlet of Rigas Feraios Salpisma Polemistirion Thourios or Patriotic hymn European intervention and Greek involvement in the Napoleonic Wars Russo-Turkish war (1768–1774) Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca Greek Plan of Catherine the Great Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792) French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars Fall of the Republic of Venice Republican French rule in the Ionian Islands Septinsular Republic Greek Legion Imperial French rule in the Ionian Islands Albanian Regiment Adriatic campaign of 1807–1814 1st Regiment Greek Light Infantry United States of the Ionian Islands Ideas Greek nationalism Eastern Orthodox Christianity Liberalism Constitutionalism Monarchism Events Sieges Patras Salona Navarino Livadeia 1st Acropolis Tripolitsa Arta Acrocorinth Nauplia 1st Messolonghi 2nd Messolonghi 3rd Messolonghi 2nd Acropolis Battles Kalamata Wallachian uprising Alamana Gravia Valtetsi Doliana Lalas Vasilika Drăgășani Sculeni Vasilika Trench Peta Dervenakia Karpenisi Greek civil wars Sphacteria Maniaki Morea Lerna Mills Mani Distomo Arachova Kamatero Phaleron Chios expedition Martino Koronisia Petra Massacres Constantinople Thessaloniki Navarino Tripolitsa Naousa Samothrace Chios Psara Kasos Cyprus Naval conflicts Eresos Chios Nauplia Samos Andros Sphacteria Gerontas Souda Alexandria Volos Itea Navarino Ships Agamemnon Aris Hellas Karteria Greek regional councils and statutes Messenian Senate Directorate of Achaea Peloponnesian Senate Senate of Western Continental Greece Areopagus of Eastern Continental Greece Provisional Regime of Crete Military-Political System of Samos Greek national assemblies First (Epidaurus) ( Executive of 1822 ) Second (Astros) Third (Troezen) Fourth (Argos) Fifth (Nafplion) International Conferences, treaties and protocols Congress of Laibach Congress of Verona Protocol of St. Petersburg (1826) Treaty of London Conference of Poros London Protocol of 1828 London Protocol of 1829 Treaty of Adrianople London Protocol of 1830 London Conference Treaty of Constantinople Proposals for the monarch of Greece Related Greek expedition to Syria (1825) Russo-Turkish War (1828–29) Personalities Greece Chian Committee Odysseas Androutsos Fotos Bomporis Kostas Botsaris Markos Botsaris Notis Botsaris Tousias Botsaris Laskarina Bouboulina Constantin Denis Bourbaki Stefanos Chalis Sotiris Charalampis Giannis Chondrogiannis Dimitrios Christidis Panagiotis Danglis Hatzimichalis Dalianis Dimitrios Deligeorgis Dimitrakis Deligiannis Kanellos Deligiannis Athanasios Diakos Dionysis Diakos Konstantinos Dimidis Ioannis Dimoulitsas Adam Doukas Georgios Drakos Yiannis Dyovouniotis Georgios Filippopoulos Asimakis Fotilas Panagiotakis Fotilas Angelis Gatsos Antonios Georgantas Germanos III of Old Patras Georgios Gevidis Konstantinos Gofas Vasileios Goudas Ioannis Gouras Dimitrios Gouvelis Konstantinos Gouvelis Angelis Govios Dimitrios Indares Isaiah of Salona Antonios Kalamogdartis George Kalaras Dimitrios Kallergis Athanasios Kampetis Athanasios Kanakaris Konstantinos Kanaris Stefanos Kanellos Ioannis Kapodistrias Viaros Kapodistrias Stamatios Kapsas Georgakis Kapsokalyvas Anastasios Karatasos Panagiotis Karatzas Georgios Karaiskakis Aristeidis Karnalis Nikolaos Kasomoulis Ioannis Kolettis Apostolis Kolokotronis Ioannis Kolokotronis Panos Kolokotronis Theodoros Kolokotronis Michail Komninos Afentoulief Alexandros Kontostavlos Panos Koronaios Georgios Kountouriotis Lazaros Kountouriotis Michalis Kourmoulis Ioannis Krestenitis Lykourgos Krestenitis Stamatis Krestenitis Antonios Kriezis Nikolaos Kriezotis Kyprianos of Cyprus Konstantinos Lagoumitzis Georgios Lassanis Georgios Lechouritis Leonardos Leonardopoulos Georgios Liologlou Lykourgos Logothetis Andreas Londos Yiannis Makriyiannis Ioannis Mamouris Anastasios Manakis Manto Mavrogenous Alexandros Mavrokordatos Antonios Mavromichalis Demetrios Mavromichalis Georgios Mavromichalis Konstantinos Mavromichalis Kyriakoulis Mavromichalis Petrobey Mavromichalis Dimitrios Meletopoulos Andreas Metaxas Konstantinos Metaxas Hatzigiannis Mexis Andreas Miaoulis Antonios Miaoulis Panagiotis Michanidis Spyros Milios Nikolaos Mykonios Zachos Milios Alexander Negris Konstantinos Negris Theodoros Negris Diamantis Nikolaou Konstantinos Nikolopoulos Ioannis Notaras Antonis Oikonomou Ioannis Orlandos Andronikos Paikos Georgios Panou Dimitrios Panourgias Nakos Panourgias Grigorios Papaflessas Anagnostis Papageorgiou Dimitrios Papanikolis Emmanouel Pappas Christoforos Perraivos Nikolaos Petimezas Vasileios Petimezas Dionysios Petrakis Andreas Pipinos Kyriakos Pittakis Anastasios Polyzoidis Konstantinos Rados Ioannis Rangos Panagiotis Rodios Dionysios Romas Georgios Sachtouris Georgios Sekeris Theofanis Siatisteus Georgios Sisinis Ioannis Skandalidis Zisis Sotiriou Nikitas Stamatelopoulos Georgios Stavros Joseph Stephanini Ioannis Stratos Sotirios Theocharopoulos Zafeirakis Theodosiou Emmanouil Tombazis Iakovos Tombazis Ioannis Trikoupis Anastasios Tsamados Melchisedek Tsouderos Kitsos Tzavellas Theodoros Tzinis Loukas Vagias Thanasoulas Valtinos Dimitrios Varis Meletis Vasileiou Domna Visvizi Alexakis Vlachopoulos Konstantinos Vlachopoulos Pieros Voidis Liolios Xirolivaditis Demetrios Ypsilantis Christoforos Zachariadis Andreas Zaimis Germanos Zapheiropoulos Evangelos Zappas Marigo Zarafopoula Nikolaos Zervas Philhellenes António Figueira d'Almeida Joseph Balestra Samuel Barff Paul Marie Bonaparte Karl Rudolf Brommy Lord Byron François-René de Chateaubriand Richard Church Giuseppe Chiappe Lord Cochrane Giacinto Collegno Charles Fabvier Adam Friedel Vincenzo Gallina Thomas Gordon Constantin Guys Emmanuel Han Frank Abney Hastings Carl von Heideck Samuel Gridley Howe George Jarvis Karl Krazeisen Henrik Nikolai Krøyer Ludwig I of Bavaria Ernst Michael Mangel Sophie de Marbois-Lebrun, Duchess of Plaisance Vasos Mavrovouniotis Johann Jakob Meyer Ellinika Chronika Jonathan Miller Julius Michael Millingen August Myhrberg Karl von Normann-Ehrenfels Hadži-Prodan Maurice Persat Theobald Piscatory Maxime Raybaud Auguste Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély Giuseppe Rosaroll Annibale Santorre di Rossi de Pomarolo, Count of Santarosa Friedrich Thiersch Auguste Hilarion Touret Edward John Trelawny German Legion [ el ] Serbs David Urquhart Olivier Voutier James Jakob Williams Moldavia and Wallachia ( Danubian Principalities ) Sacred Band Athanasios Agrafiotis Anastasios Christopoulos Diamandi Djuvara Stefanos Kanellos Alexandros Kantakouzinos Georgios Kantakouzinos Rallou Karatza Stamatios Kleanthis Georgios Lassanis Constantine Levidis Dimitrie Macedonski Anastasios Manakis Giorgakis Olympios Yiannis Pharmakis Michael Soutzos Roxani Soutzos Athanasios Tsakalov Tudor Vladimirescu Konstantinos Xenokratis Alexander Ypsilantis Demetrios Ypsilantis Nikolaos Ypsilantis Christoforos Zachariadis Ottoman Empire , Algeria , and Egypt Sultan Mahmud II Hurshid Pasha Nasuhzade Ali Pasha Ismael Gibraltar Omer Vrioni Kara Mehmet Mahmud Dramali Pasha Koca Hüsrev Mehmed Pasha Reşid Mehmed Pasha Yussuf Pasha Ibrahim Pasha Soliman Pasha al-Faransawi Britain , France and Russia George Canning Stratford Canning Edward Codrington Henri de Rigny Lodewijk van Heiden Alexander I of Russia Nicholas I of Russia Financial aid London Philhellenic Committee Ludwig I of Bavaria Jean-Gabriel Eynard Lazaros Kountouriotis Ioannis Papafis Georgios Stavros Ioannis Varvakis Rothschild & Co Morea expedition Military Nicolas Joseph Maison Antoine Simon Durrieu Antoine Virgile Schneider Auguste Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély Camille Alphonse Trézel Scientific Jean Baptiste Bory de Saint-Vincent Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois Pierre Peytier Stamatis Voulgaris Guillaume-Abel Blouet Gabriel Bibron Prosper Baccuet Eugène Emmanuel Amaury Duval Pierre-Narcisse Guérin Charles Lenormant Edgar Quinet Historians/Memoirists Dimitrios Ainian Fotis Chrysanthopoulos Ioannis Filimon George Finlay Ambrosios Frantzis Lambros Koutsonikas Konstantinos Metaxas Panoutsos Notaras Panagiotis Papatsonis Anastasios Polyzoidis Georgios Tertsetis Spyridon Trikoupis Art Eugène Delacroix Louis Dupré Peter von Hess Victor Hugo François Pouqueville Alexander Pushkin Karl Krazeisen Andreas Kalvos Dionysios Solomos Theodoros Vryzakis Hellas The Reception of Lord Byron at Missolonghi Greece on the Ruins of Missolonghi Le siège de Corinthe The Massacre at Chios The Free Besieged Hymn to Liberty The Archipelago on Fire Loukis Laras The Apotheosis of Athanasios Diakos Remembrance 25 March (Independence Day) Hymn to Liberty Eleftheria i thanatos Pedion tou Areos Propylaea (Munich) Garden of Heroes (Missolonghi) Royal Phalanx Evzones ( Presidential Guard ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Modern_Greek_Enlightenment&oldid=1298472831 " Categories : Modern Greek Enlightenment Age of Enlightenment Enlightenment philosophy Politics of the Greek War of Independence Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from September 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2024 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles containing Greek-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 18:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Modern Greek Enlightenment 10 languages Add topic

