Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 Objections 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Reliabilism 8 languages Eesti فارسی Polski Português Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory that beliefs are justified when from reliable processes Reliabilism , a category of theories in the philosophical discipline of epistemology , has been advanced as a theory both of justification and of knowledge . Process reliabilism has been used as an argument against philosophical skepticism , such as the brain in a vat thought experiment.

[ 1 ] Process reliabilism is a form of epistemic externalism .

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] A broadly reliabilist theory of knowledge is roughly as follows: Given that p stands for any proposition (such as, the sky is blue ), then one knows that p if and only if p is true, one believes that p is true, and one has arrived at the belief that p is true through some reliable process.

A broadly reliabilist theory of justified belief can be stated as follows: One has a justified belief that p if, and only if, the belief is the result of a reliable process.

Moreover, a similar account can be given (and an elaborate version of this has been given by Alvin Plantinga ) for such notions as 'warranted belief' or 'epistemically rational belief'.

Leading proponents of reliabilist theories of knowledge and justification have included Alvin Goldman , Marshall Swain , Kent Bach and more recently, Alvin Plantinga.  Goldman's article " A Causal Theory of Knowing " ( Journal of Philosophy , 64 (1967), pp. 357–372) is generally credited as being the first full treatment of the theory, though D. M. Armstrong is also regarded as an important source, and (according to Hugh Mellor ) Frank Ramsey was the very first to state the theory, albeit in passing.

One classical or traditional analysis of 'knowledge' is justified true belief . In order to have a valid claim of knowledge for any proposition, one must be justified in believing "p" and "p" must be true. Since Gettier [ 2 ] proposed his counterexamples the traditional analysis has included the further claim that knowledge must be more than justified true belief.  Reliabilist theories of knowledge are sometimes presented as an alternative to that theory: rather than justification, all that is required is that the belief be the product of a reliable process.  But reliabilism need not be regarded as an alternative, but instead as a further explication of the traditional analysis.  On this view, those who offer reliabilist theories of justification further analyze the 'justification' part of the traditional analysis of 'knowledge' in terms of reliable processes.  Not all reliabilists agree with such accounts of justification, but some do.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Reformed epistemology Objections [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some find reliabilisms of justification objectionable because it entails externalism , which is the view that one can have knowledge, or have a justified belief, despite not knowing (having "access" to) the evidence, or other circumstances, that make the belief justified.  Most reliabilists maintain that a belief can be justified, or can constitute knowledge, even if the believer does not know about or understand the process that makes the belief reliable.  In defending this view, reliabilists (and externalists generally) are apt to point to examples from simple acts of perception: if one sees a bird in the tree outside one's window and thereby gains the belief that there is a bird in that tree, one might not at all understand the cognitive processes that account for one's successful act of perception; nevertheless, it is the fact that the processes worked reliably that accounts for why one's belief is justified.  In short, one finds one holds a belief about the bird, and that belief is justified if any is, but one is not acquainted at all with the processes that led to the belief that justified one's having it.

Another of the most common objections to reliabilism, made first to Goldman's reliable process theory of knowledge and later to other reliabilist theories, is the so-called generality problem.

[ 3 ] For any given justified belief (or instance of knowledge), one can easily identify many different (concurrently operating) "processes" from which the belief results.  My belief that there is a bird in the tree outside my window might be accorded a result of the process of forming beliefs on the basis of sense-perception, of visual sense-perception, of visual sense-perception through non-opaque surfaces in daylight, and so forth, down to a variety of different very specifically described processes.  Some of these processes might be statistically reliable, while others might not.  It would no doubt be better to say, in any case, that we are choosing not which process to say resulted in the belief, but instead how to describe the process, out of the many different levels of generality on which it can be accurately described.

An objection in a similar line was formulated by Stephen Stich in The Fragmentation of Reason . Reliabilism usually considers that for generating justified beliefs a process needs to be reliable in a set of relevant possible scenarios. However, according to Stich, these scenarios are chosen in a culturally biased manner. Stich does not defend any alternative theory of knowledge or justification, but instead argues that all accounts of normative epistemic terms  are culturally biased and instead only a pragmatic account can be given.

Another objection to reliabilism is called the new evil demon problem .

[ 4 ] The evil demon problem originally motivated skepticism , but can be repurposed to object to reliabilist accounts as follows:  If our experiences are controlled by an evil demon, it may be the case that we believe ourselves to be doing things that we are not doing.  However, these beliefs are clearly justified.

Robert Brandom has called for a clarification of the role of belief in reliabilist theories. Brandom is concerned that unless the role of belief is stressed, reliabilism may attribute knowledge to things that would otherwise be considered incapable of possessing it. Brandom gives the example of a parrot that has been trained to consistently respond to red visual stimuli by saying 'that's red'. The proposition is true, the mechanism that produced it is reliable, but Brandom is reluctant to say that the parrot knows it is seeing red because he thinks it cannot believe that it is. For Brandom, beliefs pertain to concepts: without the latter there can be no former. Concepts are products of the 'game of giving and asking for reasons'. Hence, only those entities capable of reasoning, through language in a social context, can for Brandom believe and thus have knowledge. Brandom may be regarded as hybridising externalism and internalism , allowing knowledge to be accounted for by reliable external process so long as  a knower possess some internal understanding of why the belief is reliable.

References [ edit ] ^ a b DeRose, Keith (1999).

"Responding to Skepticism" . Archived from the original on 14 November 2000.

^ Gettier, Edmund L. (1963).

"Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?" (PDF) .

Analysis .

23 (6): 121– 123.

doi : 10.1093/analys/23.6.121 .

JSTOR 3326922 .

^ Conee, E.; Feldman, R. (1998). "The Generality Problem for Reliabilism".

Philosophical Studies .

89 (1): 1– 29.

doi : 10.1023/A:1004243308503 .

JSTOR 4320806 .

S2CID 170425156 .

^ Comesaña, Juan (2002).

"The Diagonal and the Demon" (PDF) .

Philosophical Studies .

110 (3): 249– 266.

doi : 10.1023/a:1020656411534 .

S2CID 169069884 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-06-14.

External links [ edit ] Reliabilism at PhilPapers Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Reliabilist Epistemology" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Reliabilism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Reliabilism at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reliabilism&oldid=1300871411 " Categories : Internalism and externalism Theories of justification Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2011 All articles needing additional references Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 21:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reliabilism 8 languages Add topic

