Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Roman Syria 2 Rise of the Caliphate 3 Expedition to Syria 4 Conquest of Syria Toggle Conquest of Syria subsection 4.1 Initial phase 4.2 Southern Syria 5 Conquest under Caliph Umar Toggle Conquest under Caliph Umar subsection 5.1 Dismissal of Khalid from command 5.2 Conquest of the Central Levant 5.3 Conquest of Palestine (634–641) 5.4 Battles for Emesa and Second Battle of Damascus 5.5 Battle of Yarmouk 5.6 Capturing Jerusalem 5.7 Conquest of northern Syria 5.8 Byzantine counterattack 5.9 Campaigns in Armenia and Anatolia 6 Under Caliph Uthman's reign 7 Administration under the Rashidun Caliphate 8 Rise of the Umayyads 9 See also 10 Notes 11 Footnotes 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Muslim conquest of the Levant 30 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu ߒߞߏ پنجابی پښتو Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 7th-century conquest by the Rashidun Caliphate This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Muslim conquest of the Levant" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Muslim conquest of the Levant Part of the Arab–Byzantine wars Scene of the Roman Theatre at Palmyra , 2005 Date 634–638 CE Location Levant : [ a ] at that time Diocese of the East under the Praetorian prefecture of the East Result Muslim victory Territorial changes Annexation of the Levant by the Rashidun Caliphate Belligerents Rashidun Caliphate Byzantine Empire Ghassanids Tanukhids Banu Judham Banu Lakhm Commanders and leaders Abu Bakr Umar ibn al-Khattab Khalid ibn al-Walid Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah Amr ibn al-As Uqba ibn Nafi Yazid ibn Abu Sufyan Shurahbil ibn Hassana Iyad ibn Ghanm Muawiyah I Ikrima ibn Abi Jahl Heraclius Jabalah ibn al-Aiham Theodore Trithyrius † Vahan † Vardan Thomas Buccinator Gregory v t e Early Muslim conquests Arabia Mecca Quraysh Byzantine Empire Syria Egypt Armenia and Georgia North Africa Cyprus Constantinople Crete Sicily and Southern Italy Palestine Sasanian Empire Fars Mesopotamia Kerman Northern Persia Azerbaijan Tabaristan Sistan Khorasan Afghanistan Caucasus Armenia Caucasian Albania Caucasian Iberia Khazar Khaganate Other regions Makurian Nubia ( 1st and 2nd ) Transoxiana Visigothic Hispania Frankish Gaul v t e Arab–Byzantine wars Early conflicts Mu'tah Balqa Firaz Dathin The Levant Marj Rahit al-Qaryatayn Bosra Caesarea Maritima Ajnadayn Yaqusa Marj al-Saffar Sanita-al-Uqab Damascus Maraj-al-Debaj Fahl Marj ar-Rum Emesa Yarmouk Laodicea Jerusalem Hazir 1st Aleppo Iron Bridge 2nd Emesa Germanicia Egypt Heliopolis Babylon Fortress Alexandria Nikiou Darishkur Bahnasa North Africa Sufetula Vescera Mamma Carthage Tabarka Anatolia & Constantinople 1st Constantinople Sebastopolis Tyana 2nd Constantinople Nicaea Akroinon Border conflicts Kamacha Asia Minor (782) Kopidnadon Krasos Asia Minor (806) Anzen Amorium Mauropotamos Faruriyyah Lalakaon Bathys Ryax Sicily and Southern Italy 1st Syracuse Messina Butera Lentini Enna 2nd Syracuse 1st Malta 3rd Syracuse Caltavuturo Campaigns of Leo Apostyppes & Nikephoros Phokas the Elder 1st Milazzo 2nd Milazzo 1st Taormina Garigliano Campaigns of Marianos Argyros 2nd Taormina Rometta Straits of Messina George Maniakes in Sicily 2nd Malta Naval warfare Phoenix Keramaia 1st Crete 2nd Crete Thasos Damietta Ragusa Kardia Gulf of Corinth Cephalonia Euripos Thessalonica 3rd Crete 4th Crete Tyre Byzantine reconquest Campaigns of John Kourkouas Campaigns of Sayf al-Dawla Marash Raban Andrassos Campaigns of Nikephoros II 5th Crete Aleppo Cilicia Antioch Campaigns of John I Alexandretta Syria Campaigns of Basil II Orontes 2nd Aleppo Apamea Azaz The Muslim conquest of the Levant ( Arabic : فَتْحُ الشَّام , romanized : Fatḥ al-šām ; lit.

' Conquest of Syria ' ), or Arab conquest of Syria , [ 1 ] was a 634–638 CE conquest of Byzantine Syria by the Rashidun Caliphate .

A part of the wider Arab–Byzantine wars , the Levant was brought under Arab Muslim rule and developed into the provincial region of Bilad al-Sham . Clashes between the Arabs and Byzantines on the southern Levantine borders of the Byzantine Empire had occurred during the lifetime of Muhammad , with the Battle of Muʿtah in 629 CE. However, the actual conquest did not begin until 634, two years after Muhammad's death. It was led by the first two Rashidun caliphs who succeeded Muhammad: Abu Bakr and Umar ibn al-Khattab . During this time, Khalid ibn al-Walid was the most important leader of the Rashidun army .

It was the first time since the collapse of the Neo-Babylonian Empire in 539 BCE that the region was ruled again by Semitic-speaking people, after centuries of Persian ( Achaemenid Empire ), and then Roman-Greek ( Macedonian Empire , the Roman Empire and Byzantine Empire ) rule.

Roman Syria [ edit ] Main articles: Roman Syria and Diocese of the East Syria had been under Roman rule for seven centuries prior to the Arab Muslim conquest and had been invaded by the Sassanid Persians on a number of occasions during the 3rd, 6th and 7th centuries; it had also been subject to raids by the Sassanids' Arab allies, the Lakhmids .

[ 2 ] During the Roman period , beginning after the fall of Jerusalem in the year 70 , the entire region ( Judea , Samaria , and the Galilee ) was renamed Palaestina , subdivided into Diocese I and II.

[ 3 ] The Romans also renamed an area of land including the Negev , Sinai , and the west coast of the Arabian Peninsula as Palaestina Salutaris , sometimes called Palaestina III or Palaestina Tertia .

[ 3 ] Part of the area was ruled by the Arab vassal state of the Ghassanids ' symmachos .

[ 4 ] During the last of the Roman-Persian Wars , beginning in 603, the Persians under Khosrau II had succeeded in occupying Syria, Palestine and Egypt for over a decade before being forced by the victories of Heraclius to conclude the peace of 628.

[ 5 ] Thus, on the eve of the Muslim conquests the Romans (or Byzantines as modern Western historians conventionally refer to Romans of this period) were still in the process of rebuilding their authority in these territories, which in some areas had been lost to them for almost twenty years.

[ 5 ] Politically, the Syrian region consisted of two provinces: Syria proper stretched from Antioch and Aleppo in the north to the top of the Dead Sea . To the west and south of the Dead Sea lay the province of Palestine .

Syria was mostly made up of Aramaic and Greek speakers with a partly Arab population, especially in its eastern and southern parts. The Arabs of Syria were people of no consequence until the migration of the powerful Ghassanid tribe from Yemen to Syria, who converted to Christianity and thereafter ruled a semi-autonomous state with their own king under Roman vassalage. The Ghassanid Dynasty became one of the honoured princely dynasties of the Empire, with the Ghassanid king ruling over the Arabs in Jordan and Southern Syria from his capital at Bostra . The last of the Ghassanid kings, who ruled at the time of the Muslim invasion, was Jabalah ibn al-Aiham .

The Byzantine Emperor Heraclius , after re-capturing Syria from the Sassanians , set up new defense lines from Gaza to the south end of the Dead Sea. These lines were only designed to protect communications from bandits, and the bulk of the Byzantine defenses were concentrated in Northern Syria facing the traditional foes, the Sassanid Persians. The drawback of this defense line was that it enabled the Muslims , advancing from the desert in the south, to reach as far north as Gaza before meeting regular Byzantine troops.

The 7th century was a time of rapid military change in the Byzantine Empire. The empire was certainly not in a state of collapse when it faced the new challenge from Arabia after being exhausted by recent Roman–Persian Wars , but utterly failed to tackle the challenge effectively.

[ 6 ] Rise of the Caliphate [ edit ] Military confrontations with the Byzantine Empire began during the lifetime of Muhammad . The Battle of Mu'tah was fought in September 629 near the village of Mu'tah , east of the Jordan River and Karak in Karak Governorate , between the forces of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and the forces of the Byzantine Empire and their Arab Christian Ghassanid vassals. In Islamic historical sources, the battle is usually described as the Muslims ' attempt to take retribution against the Ghassanids after a Ghassanid official executed Muhammad's emissary who was en route to Bosra .

[ 7 ] During the battle the Muslim army was routed.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] After three Muslim leaders were killed, the command was given to Khalid ibn al-Walid and he succeeded in saving the rest of the forces.

[ 8 ] The surviving Muslim forces retreated to Medina .

After the Farewell Pilgrimage in 632, Muhammad appointed Usama ibn Zayd as the commander of an expeditionary force which was to invade the region of Balqa in the Byzantine Empire . This expedition was known as the Expedition of Usama bin Zayd and its stated aim was to avenge the Muslim losses at the Battle of Mu'tah , in which Usama's father and Muhammad's former adopted son, Zayd ibn Harithah , had been killed.

[ 10 ] Usama's expedition in May/June 632 was successful and his army was the first Muslim force to successfully invade and raid Byzantine territory.

Muhammad died in June 632, and Abu Bakr was appointed Caliph and political successor at Medina . Soon after Abu Bakr 's succession, several Arab tribes revolted against him in the Ridda wars (Arabic for the Wars of Apostasy). The Campaign of the Apostasy was fought and completed during the eleventh year of the Hijri. The year 12 Hijri dawned, on 18 March 633, with Arabia united under the central authority of the Caliph at Medina.

Whether Abu Bakr intended a full-out imperial conquest or not is hard to say; he did, however, set in motion a historical trajectory that in just a few short decades would lead to one of the largest empires in history , starting with a confrontation with the Persian Empire under the general Khalid ibn al-Walid .

Expedition to Syria [ edit ] Map detailing Rashidun Caliphate's invasion of the Levant.

After successful campaigns against the Sassanids and the ensuing conquest of Iraq , Khalid established his stronghold in Iraq. While engaged with Sassanid forces, he also confronted the Ghassanids, Arab clients of the Byzantines.

Medina soon recruited tribal contingents from all over the Arabian peninsula . Only those who had rebelled during the Ridda wars were excluded from the summons and remained excluded from Rashidun armies until 636, when Caliph Umar fell short of manpower for the Battle of Yarmouk and the Battle of al-Qādisiyyah . The tradition of raising armies from tribal contingents remained in use until 636, when Caliph Umar organised the army as a state department.
Abu Bakr organised the army into four corps, each with its own commander and objective.

Amr ibn al-A'as : Objective Palestine . Move on Elat route, then across Valley of Arabah .

Yazid ibn Abu Sufyan : Objective Damascus . Move on Tabuk route.

Shurahbil ibn Hasana : Objective Jordan . Move on Tabuk route after Yazid.

Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah : Objective Emesa . Move on Tabuk route after Shurahbil.

Abu Bakr ordered the corps to maintain contact for mutual support and appointed Abu Ubaidah as commander-in-chief, with Yazid as his deputy.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] He also appointed Yazid as commander of one of the military districts and gave him detailed ethical and operational instructions: When you meet the enemy, and God leads you to victory, do not manacle, mutilate, maim, or betray, and do not accuse [the defeated] of cowardice. Do not, you all, kill children, old men, or women; do not burn palm trees or uproot them; do not cut down fruitful trees; and do not slaughter cattle except for eating [them]. You will pass by people in their hermitages who claim to have secluded themselves for [worshipping] God; leave them to what they have secluded themselves for. You will also find others in the middle of whose heads Satan has taken up abode, as if the middles of their heads were the sand grouses' nests (afahīs al-qatā) . Strike the nests which they have hollowed in their heads with swords until they turn repentantly to Islam, or until they bring tribute by hand and with humility. God will certainly support those who support Him and His Messengers in absentia (bi-al-ghayb) . I bid farewell to you, and may God's peace and mercy be upon you.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The authenticity of these instructions has been questioned by some modern scholars. James Moreton Wackeley characterises it as a literary construct intended to idealise early Muslim leadership, [ 15 ] while Albrecht Noth interprets such speeches as part of a wider tradition in which later transmitters reworked existing material to promote moral and legal norms, retroactively ascribing it to prominent early figures to strengthen its authority.

[ 16 ] Such interpretations are situated within a broader secular academic discourse that applies historical-critical methods to the Islamic tradition.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Conquest of Syria [ edit ] Initial phase [ edit ] Moving to their assigned target beyond Tabouk, Yazid's corps made contact with a small Christian Arab force that was retreating  after a skirmish with the Muslim advance guard, after which Yazid made for the Valley of Arabah where it meets the southern end of the Dead Sea .

As the main Byzantine defence line started from the coastal regions near Ghazahh, [ dubious – discuss ] Yazid arrived at the Valley of Araba at about the same time as Amr bin Al Aas reached Elat .

[ dubious – discuss ] The two forward detachments sent by the Byzantine army to prevent the entry of Yazid's and Amr's corps, respectively, into Palestine, were easily defeated by them, though they did prevent the Rashidun forces from reaching their assigned objective. Abu Ubaidah and Shurhabil, on the other hand, continued their march, and by early May 634 they reached the region between Bosra and Jabiya .

[ 12 ] The Emperor Heraclius, having received intelligence of the movements of the Muslim armies from his Arab clients, began to plan countermeasures. Upon Heraclius' orders, Byzantine forces from different garrisons in the north started moving to gather at Ayjnadyn. From here they could engage Amr's corps and maneuver against the flank or rear of the rest of the Muslim corps that were in Jordan and Southern Syria. The strength of the Byzantine forces, according to rough estimates, was about 100,000.

[ 21 ] Abu Ubaidah informed the Caliph about the preparations made by the Byzantines in the third week of May 634. Because Abu Ubaida did not have experience as a commander of military forces in such major operations, especially against the powerful Roman Army, Abu Bakr decided to send Khalid ibn Walid to assume command. According to early Muslim chronicles, Abu Bakr said, "By Allah, I shall destroy the Romans and the friends of Satan with Khalid Ibn Al Walid." [ 22 ] Map detailing the route of Khalid ibn Walid's invasion of Syria.

Khalid immediately set out for Syria from Al-Hirah , in Iraq , in early June, taking with him half his army, about 8000 strong.

[ 12 ] There were two routes towards Syria from Iraq: one was via Daumat-ul-Jandal, and the other was through Mesopotamia, passing through Raqqa . The Muslim armies in Syria were in need of urgent reinforcement, so Khalid avoided the conventional route to Syria via Daumat ul Jandal, as it was the longer route, and would take weeks to reach Syria. Khalid avoided the Mesopotamian route because of the presence of Roman garrisons there and in Northern Syria. To engage them at a time when Muslim armies were being outflanked in Syria was not a wise idea. Khalid selected a shorter route to Syria, an unconventional route passing through the Syrian Desert . It is recorded that his soldiers marched for two days without a single drop of water, before reaching a predetermined water source at an oasis . Khalid thus entered Northern Syria and caught the Byzantines on their right flank. According to modern historians, this ingenious strategic maneuver unhinged the Byzantine defences in Syria.

[ 23 ] Southern Syria [ edit ] Ain Tamer , Quraqir, Suwa, Arak , and the historical city of Tadmur were first to fall to Khalid.

Sukhnah , al-Qaryatayn and Hawarin were captured after the Battle of al-Qaryatayn and the Battle of Hawarin. After dealing with all these cities, Khalid moved towards Damascus through a mountain pass which is now known as Sanita-al-Uqab (Uqab Pass) after the name of Khalid's army standard. From here he moved away from Damascus, towards Bosra , the capital of the Ghassanids. He ordered other Muslim commanders to concentrate their armies, still near the Syrian-Arabian border, at Bosra. At Maraj-al-Rahab, Khalid defeated a Ghassanid army in a quick battle, called the Battle of Marj-al-Rahit . Meanwhile, Abu Ubaida ibn al-Jarrah, the supreme commander of the Muslim armies in Syria, had ordered Shurhabil ibn Hasana to attack Bosra. The latter laid siege to Bosra with his small army of 4000. The Roman and Ghassanid Arab garrison, realizing that this might be the advance guard of the larger Muslim army to come, sallied out of the fortified city and attacked Shurhabil, surrounding him from all sides; however, Khalid reached the arena with his cavalry and saved Shurhabil. The combined forces of Khalid, Shurhabil, and Abu Ubaidah then resumed the siege of Bosra , which surrendered some time in mid-July 634 CE, effectively ending the Ghassanid Dynasty.

Geographical map detailing the route of Khalid ibn Walid's invasion of Syria Here Khalid took over the command of the Muslim armies in Syria from Abu Ubaidah, according to the instructions of the Caliph. Massive Byzantine armies were concentrating at Ajnadayn to push the invading armies back to the desert. Early Muslim sources claim the Byzantine strength to have been 90,000, although most modern historians doubt the figures, yet consider this battle to be the key to breaking Byzantine power in Syria. On Khalid's instructions, all Muslim corps concentrated at Ajnadayn, where they won a decisive battle against the Byzantines on 30 July.

This defeat left Syria vulnerable to the Muslim invaders. Khalid decided to capture Damascus, the Byzantine stronghold. At Damascus, Thomas, son-in-law of Emperor Heraclius, was in charge. Having received intelligence of Khalid's march towards Damascus, he prepared for its defence, writing to Emperor Heraclius in Emesa for reinforcements. Moreover, Thomas, in order to get more time for preparation of a siege, sent armies to delay or, if possible, halt Khalid's march to Damascus. One of these armies was defeated at the Battle of Yaqusa in mid-August near Lake Tiberias , 145 kilometres (90 mi) from Damascus. Another was defeated in the Battle of Maraj as Saffer on 19 August. These engagements had the desired effect, delaying Khalid long enough to prepare for a siege. However, by the time Heraclius' reinforcements had reached the city Khalid had begun his siege, having reached Damascus on 20 August. To isolate the city from the rest of the region Khalid placed detachments south on the road to Palestine and in the north at the Damascus-Emesa route, and several other smaller detachments on routes towards Damascus. Heraclius' reinforcements were intercepted and routed at the Battle of Sanita-al-Uqab , 30 kilometres (20 mi) from Damascus. Khalid's forces withstood three Roman sallies that tried to break the siege. Khalid finally attacked and conquered Damascus on 18 September after 30 days, although, according to some sources, the siege had in fact lasted for four or six months. Heraclius, having received the news of the fall of Damascus, left for Antioch from Emesa . The citizens were granted peace on the promise of annual tribute and the Byzantine army was given three days to go as far as they could. After three days, Khalid took a cavalry force, caught up to the Romans using an unknown shortcut, and attacked them at the Battle of Maraj-al-Debaj , 305 kilometres (190 miles) north of Damascus.

Conquest under Caliph Umar [ edit ] v t e Wars of Caliph Umar Conquest of Eastern Roman Empire Conquest of Syria (634–637) Conquest of Palestine (635–636) Campaigns in Eastern Anatolia (638) Conquest of Armenia (638 & 644) Conquest of Upper Egypt (640–641) Conquest of Lower Egypt (641–642) Conquest of Bahnasa (639) Conquest of North Africa (643) Conquest of Sassanid Persian Empire Conquest of Iraq (636–637) Conquest of Isfahan & Tabaristan (642–643) Conquest of Fars (642) Conquest of Kerman & Makran (643–644) Conquest of Sistan (643–644) Conquest of Azerbaijan (643) Conquest of Khurasan (643–644) Dismissal of Khalid from command [ edit ] On 22 August, Abu Bakr, the first caliph, died, having made Umar his successor. Umar's first move was to relieve Khalid from command and appoint Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah as the new commander-in-chief of the Islamic army .  Abu Ubaidah got the letter memorializing this during the siege, but he delayed the announcement until the city had been conquered.   Later on, Khalid pledged his loyalty to the new Caliph and continued to serve as an ordinary commander under Abu Ubaidah. He is reported to have said, "If Abu Bakr is dead and Umar is Caliph, then we listen and obey." [ 24 ] Abu Ubaidah moved more slowly and steadily, which had a concomitant effect on military operations in Syria. Abu Ubaidah, being an admirer of Khalid, made him commander of the cavalry and relied heavily on his advice during the whole campaign.

[ 25 ] Conquest of the Central Levant [ edit ] Map detailing the route of Muslim invasion of central Syria.

Soon after the appointment of Abu-Ubaidah as commander in chief, he sent a small detachment to the annual fair held at Abu-al-Quds, modern day Ablah , near Zahlé 50 kilometres (31 miles) east of Beirut. There was a Byzantine and Christian Arab garrison nearby, but the size of the garrison was miscalculated by the Muslim informants. The garrison quickly encircled the small Muslim detachment, but before it was completely destroyed, Khalid came to the rescue of the Muslim army. Abu Ubaidah, having received new intelligence, had sent Khalid. Khalid reached the battlefield and defeated the garrison on 15 October and returned with tons of looted booty from the fair and hundreds of Roman prisoners.
By capturing central Syria, the Muslims had given a decisive blow to the Byzantines. The communication between Northern Syria and Palestine was now cut off. Abu Ubaidah decided to march to Fahl , which is about 150 metres (500 ft) below sea level, where a strong Byzantine garrison and survivors of the Battle of Ajnadayn were present. The region was crucial because from here the Byzantine army could strike eastwards and cut Muslim communications with Arabia. Moreover, with this large garrison at their rear Palestine could not be invaded.
Khalid, commanding the advance guard, reached Fahl first and found that the Byzantines had flooded the plains by blocking the River Jordan . The Byzantine army was eventually defeated at the Battle of Fahl on 23 January 635.

[ 26 ] Conquest of Palestine (634–641) [ edit ] See also: Islam in Palestine Part of a series on the History of Palestine Prehistory Natufian culture Pre-Pottery Tahunian Ghassulian Jericho Ancient history Canaan Phoenicia Egyptian Empire Ancient Israel and Judah ( Israel , Judah ) Philistia Philistines Neo-Assyrian Empire Neo-Babylonian Empire Achaemenid Empire Classical period Hellenistic Palestine ( Seleucus , Antigonus , Hasmonean kingdom ) Roman Palestine ( Herodian kingdom , Province of Judaea , Syria Palaestina , Diocese of the East ( Palaestina Prima , Secunda , Salutaris )) Islamic rule Muslim conquest Rashidun ( Jund Filastin , Jund al-Urdunn ) Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Crusader Ayyubid Mamluk Ottoman Modern era Balfour Declaration Mandatory Palestine Nakba All-Palestine Jordanian West Bank Egyptian Gaza Strip Israel State of Israel Military Governorate Israeli Civil Administration State of Palestine ( Palestinian enclaves ; Palestinian Authority ; West Bank ; Gaza Strip ) Palestine portal v t e Next, the Muslim armies consolidated their conquest of the Levant as Shurhabil and Amr went deeper into Palestine.

Bet She'an surrendered after a little resistance followed by the surrender of Tiberias in February. Umar, after having learned of the position and strength of the Byzantine army in Palestine, wrote detailed instructions to his corps commanders there and ordered Yazid to capture the Mediterranean coast. Amr and Shurhabil accordingly marched against the strongest Byzantine garrison and defeated them in the Second Battle of Ajnadyn. The two corps then separated, with Amr moving to capture Nablus , Amawas , Jaffa , Haifa , Gaza and Yubna in order to complete the conquest of all Palestine, while Shurahbil moved against the coastal towns of Acre and Tyre . Yazid advanced from Damascus to capture the ports of Sidon , Arqa , Byblos and Beirut .

[ 27 ] By 635 CE , Palestine, Jordan and Southern Syria, with the exception of Jerusalem , Caesarea and Ashkelon , were in Muslim hands. On the orders of Umar, Yazid next besieged Caesarea, which, barring a suspension around the time of the Battle of Yarmouk , lasted until the port fell in 640.

Battles for Emesa and Second Battle of Damascus [ edit ] After the battle, which proved to be the key to Palestine and Jordan, the Muslim armies split up. Shurhabil and Amr's corps moved south to capture Palestine, while Abu Ubaidah and Khalid, with a relatively larger corps, moved north to conquer Northern Syria.
While the Muslims were occupied at Fahl, Heraclius, sensing an opportunity, quickly sent an army under General Theodras to recapture Damascus, where a small Muslim garrison was left. Shortly thereafter, the Muslims, having just won the Battle of Fahl, were on their way to Emesa. In the meantime, the Byzantine army split in two, one deployed at Maraj al Rome ( Beqaa Valley ) led by Schinos; the other, commanded by Theodras, stationed to the west of Damascus ( Al-Sabboura region).

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] During the night, Theodras advanced to Damascus to launch a surprise attack. Khalid's spy informed him about the move and Khalid, having received permission from Abu Ubaidah, galloped towards Damascus with his mobile guard . While Abu Ubaidah fought and defeated the Roman army in the Battle of Marj ar-Rum , Khalid moved to Damascus with his cavalry and attacked and defeated Theodras there.

[ 29 ] [ 28 ] A week later, Abu Ubaida himself moved towards Heliopolis , where the great Temple of Jupiter stood.

[ 30 ] In May 636, Heliopolis surrendered to the Muslims after little resistance and agreed to pay tribute. Abu Ubaidah sent Khalid straight towards Emesa .
Emesa and Chalcis offered a peace treaty for a year. Abu Ubaidah accepted the offer and, rather than invading districts of Emesa and Chalcis, he consolidated his rule in conquered land and captured Hamah , and Maarrat al-Nu'man . Having mustered sizeable armies at Antioch, Heraclius sent them to reinforce strategically important areas of Northern Syria, like Emesa and Chalcis. The Byzantine reinforcement of Emesa violated the treaty, and Abu Ubaidah and Khalid accordingly marched there. A Byzantine army that halted Khalid's advance guard was defeated. The Muslims besieged Emesa which was finally conquered in March 636 CE after two months.

[ citation needed ] Battle of Yarmouk [ edit ] Main article: Battle of Yarmouk Muslim and Byzantine troop movements before the battle of Yarmouk Topographical and strategic map of the Battle of Yarmouk (636 CE), depicting key locations, Roman and Muslim troop positions, roads, rivers, and terrain features. Based on historical sources, including Syvänne (2019), Kaegi (1992), and GIS data.

Rashidun Army Current Geographical Boundary Byzantine army Yarmuk River After capturing Emesa, Khalid moved north to capture Northern Syria, using his cavalry as an advance guard and raiding force. At Shaizar, Khalid intercepted a convoy taking provisions for Chalcis. The prisoners were interrogated and informed him about Emperor Heraclius' ambitious plan to take back Syria with an army possibly two hundred thousand (200,000) strong. Khalid immediately ended the raid.

After his past experiences, Heraclius now avoided pitched battle with the Muslim army. His plans were to send massive reinforcements to all the major cities, isolate the Muslim corps from each other, and then separately encircle and destroy the Muslim armies.

Part of his plan was to coordinate his attacks with those of Yazdgerd III , the Sassanid emperor . While Heraclius prepared for a major offense in the Levant, Yazdegerd was supposed to mount a well-coordinated counterattack on his front in Iraq , while Heraclius attacked in the Levant. However, it was not meant to be. Umar probably had intelligence of this alliance, and started peace negotiations with Yazdegerd III , apparently inviting him to join Islam . When Heraclius launched his offensive in May 636, Yazdegerd, probably owing to the exhaustion of his government, could not coordinate with the Heraclian offensive, frustrating the plan.

Five massive armies were launched in June to recapture Syria. Khalid, having grasped Heraclius' plan, feared that the Muslim armies would become isolated and then destroyed piecemeal. He thus suggested to Abu Ubaidah in a council of war that he consolidate all the Muslim armies at one place to force a decisive battle with the Byzantines. Abu Ubaidah agreed, and concentrated them at Jabiya . This maneuver delivered a decisive blow to Heraclius' plan, since the latter did not wish to engage his troops in open battle with the Muslim light cavalry. From Jabiya, again on Khalid's suggestion, Abu Ubaidah ordered the Muslim troops to withdraw to the Plain of the Yarmouk River, where the cavalry could be used effectively. While the Muslim armies were gathering at Yarmouk, Khalid intercepted and routed the Byzantine advance guard, ensuring a safe path of retreat.

The Muslim armies reached the plain in July. A week or two later, around mid-July, the Byzantine army arrived. The Byzantine commander-in-chief, Vahan, sent Ghassanid forces, under their king, Jabala, to gauge the Muslim strength. Khalid's mobile guard defeated and routed them, the last action before the battle started. For one month negotiations continued between the two armies and Khalid went to meet Vahan in person at the Byzantine camp. Meanwhile, Muslim reinforcements arrived from Umar.

Abu Ubaidah, in another council of war, transferred field command of the Muslim army to Khalid.  Finally, on 15 August, the Battle of Yarmouk was fought, lasting six days and ending in a major defeat for the Byzantines. This battle and subsequent clean-up engagements forever ended Byzantine domination of the Levant.

Meanwhile, Umar occupied Yazdegerd III in a grand deception.

[ citation needed ] Yazdegerd III lost his army at the Battle of Qadisiyyah in November, three months after Yarmouk, ending Sassanid control west of Persia .

Capturing Jerusalem [ edit ] Main article: Siege of Jerusalem (636–637) Further information: Islamization of Jerusalem With the Byzantine army routed, the Muslims quickly recaptured the territory they had conquered prior to Yarmouk. Abu Ubaida held a meeting with his high commanders, including Khalid, and decided to conquer Jerusalem . The Siege of Jerusalem lasted four months, after which the city agreed to surrender, but only to Umar personally. Amr-bin al-Aas suggested that Khalid should be sent to impersonate the caliph , due to his very strong resemblance. However, Khalid was recognized and Umar had to come himself to accept the surrender of Jerusalem in April 637. Umar appointed his close advisor Ali to hold the lieutenancy of Medina.

[ 31 ] After Jerusalem, the Muslim armies broke up once again. Yazid's corps went to Damascus and then captured Beirut . Amr and Shurhabil's corps left to conquer the rest of Palestine, while Abu Ubaidah and Khalid, at the head of a 17,000-strong army, moved north to conquer Northern Syria.

According to lexicographer David ben Abraham al-Fasi (died before 1026 CE), the Muslim conquest of Palestine brought relief to the country's Jewish citizens, who had previously been barred by the Byzantines from praying on the Temple Mount .

[ 32 ] Conquest of northern Syria [ edit ] Map detailing the route of Muslim invasion of northern Syria.

With Emesa already in hand, Abu Ubaidah and Khalid moved towards Chalcis , which was strategically the most significant Byzantine fort. Through Chalcis the Byzantines would be able to guard Anatolia , Heraclius' homeland of Armenia , and the regional capital, Antioch . Abu Ubaidah sent Khalid with his mobile guard towards Chalcis. The virtually impregnable fort was guarded by Greek troops under Menas , reportedly second in prestige only to the Emperor himself. Menas, diverting from conventional Byzantine tactics, decided to face Khalid and destroy the leading elements of Muslim army before the main body could join them at Hazir 5 kilometres (3 mi) east of Chalcis. The resulting Battle of Hazir even reportedly forced Umar to praise Khalid's military genius, saying, "Khalid is truly the commander. May Allah have mercy upon Abu Bakr. He was a better judge of men than I have been." [ 33 ] Abu Ubaidah soon joined Khalid at Chalcis, which surrendered some time in June. With this strategic victory, the territory north of Chalcis lay open to the Muslims. Khalid and Abu Ubaidah continued their march northward and laid siege to Aleppo , which was captured after fierce resistance from desperate Byzantine troops in October.  Before marching towards Antioch, Khalid and Abu Ubaidah decided to isolate the city from Anatolia. They accordingly sent detachments north to eliminate all possible Byzantine forces and captured the garrison town of Azaz , 50 kilometres (30 mi) from Aleppo; from there Muslims attacked Antioch from the eastern side, resulting in the Battle of Iron bridge . The Byzantine army, composed of the survivors of Yarmouk and other Syrian campaigns, was defeated, retreating to Antioch, whereupon the Muslims besieged the city. Having little hope of help from the Emperor, Antioch surrendered on 30 October, on the condition that all Byzantine troops would be given safe passage to Constantinople. Abu Ubaidah sent Khalid towards the north and he himself marched to the south and captured Tartus , Jablah , and finally Latakia and the coastal areas west of the Anti-Lebanon Mountains . Khalid moved north and raided territory up to as far as Kızılırmak River in Anatolia. Emperor Heraclius had already left Antioch for Edessa before the Muslims arrived. He then arranged for the necessary defenses in Jazirah and Armenia and left for Constantinople . On the way, he had a narrow escape when Khalid, who had just captured Marash , was heading south towards Manbij . Heraclius hastily took the mountainous path and, on passing through the Cilician gates , is reported to have said, "Farewell, a long farewell to Syria, my fair province. Thou art an infidel's (enemy's) now. Peace be with you, O, Syria – what a beautiful land you will be for the enemy hands." [ 34 ] Byzantine counterattack [ edit ] Main article: Siege of Emesa (638) Further information: Iyad ibn Ghanm Temple of Jupiter, Lebanon.

After the devastating defeat at Yarmouk, the remainder of the Byzantine empire was left vulnerable. With few military resources left, it was no longer in a position to attempt a military comeback in Syria. To gain time to prepare a defense of the rest of his empire, Heraclius needed the Muslims occupied in Syria. He thus sought help from the Christians (some of whom were Arabs) of Jazirah , mainly from Circesium and Hīt , who mustered a large army and marched against Emesa , Abu Ubaidah's headquarters. Abu Ubaidah withdrew all his forces from northern Syria to Emesa, and the Christians laid in a siege. Khalid was in favor of an open battle outside the fort, but Abu Ubaidah referred the matter to Umar, who sent a detachment from Iraq to invade Jazirah from three different routes. Another detachment was sent to Emesa from Iraq under Qa’qa ibn Amr , a veteran of Yarmouk, who had originally been sent to Iraq for the Battle of al-Qādisiyyah . Umar himself marched from Medina with 1,000 men.

In 638, Muslims attacked Hīt , which they found to be well fortified; thus, they left a fraction of the army to impose a siege on the city, while the rest went after Circesium .

[ 35 ] When the Christians received the news of the Muslim invasion of their homeland, they abandoned the siege and hastily withdrew there. At this point Khalid and his mobile guard came out of the fort and devastated their army by attacking them from the rear. In late 638, Ibn Walid also captured Germanicia .

On the orders of Umar, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, commander of the Muslim army in Iraq, sent an army under Iyad ibn Ghanm to conquer the region between the Tigris and the Euphrates up to Urfa . In 639–640, Raqqa fell into Muslim hands, [ 36 ] followed by most of Jazirah, the last base of the Eastern Roman Empire in the region, which surrendered peacefully and agreed to pay Jizya.

Campaigns in Armenia and Anatolia [ edit ] Map detailing the route of Khalid ibn Walid and Iyad ibn Ghanm's raids into Anatolia.

The conquest of Jazirah was completed by 640 CE, after which Abu Ubaidah sent Khalid and Iyad ibn Ghanm (conqueror of Jazirah) to invade Byzantine territory north of there. They marched independently and captured Edessa , Amida , Melitene (Malatya) and the whole of Armenia up to Ararat and raided northern and central Anatolia. Heraclius had already abandoned all the forts between Antioch and Tartus to create a buffer zone between the Muslim controlled areas and Anatolia.

Umar then called a halt to the expedition and ordered Abu Ubaidah, now governor of Syria, to consolidate his rule there.  This decision can be explained by the dismissal of Khalid from the army, which ended his military career, and a drought followed by a plague the year after.

Under Caliph Uthman's reign [ edit ] Rashidun Empire at its peak under third Rashidun Caliph, Uthman (654) During the reign of Caliph Uthman , Constantine III decided to recapture the Levant , which had been lost to the Muslims during Umar's reign.

[ 37 ] A full-scale invasion was planned and a large force was sent to reconquer Syria.

Muawiyah I , the governor of Syria, called for reinforcements and Uthman ordered the governor of Kufa to send a contingent, which, together with the local garrison, defeated the Byzantine army in Northern Syria.

In 645–646, Sufyan bin Mujib Al-Azdi, appointed by Muawiyah, managed to seize Tripoli to eventually capture the last Byzantine stronghold on the Levantine coast.

[ 38 ] Uthman gave permission to Muawiyah to build a navy. From their base in Syria, the Muslims used this fleet to capture Cyprus in 649, Crete , and Rhodes . Annual raids into western Anatolia dissuaded the Byzantines from further attempts to recapture Syria.

[ 37 ] In 654–655, Uthman ordered the preparation of an expedition to capture Constantinople , but, due to unrest in the caliphate that resulted in his assassination in 655, the expedition was delayed for decades, only to be attempted unsuccessfully under the Umayyads .

Administration under the Rashidun Caliphate [ edit ] Further information: Bilad al-Sham § Administrative history The new rulers divided Syria into four districts ( junds ): Jund Dimashq (Damascus) , Jund Hims , Jund al-Urdunn (Jordan) , and Jund Filastin (Palestine) (to which a fifth, Jund Qinnasrin , was later added) [ 39 ] and the Arab garrisons were kept apart in camps. The Muslims tolerated the Jews and Christians. The taxes instituted were the kharaj , which landowners and peasants paid according to the productivity of their fields, and the jizya , paid by non-Muslims in return for state protection and exemption from military service. The Byzantine civil service was retained until a new system could be instituted; therefore, Greek remained the administrative language in the new Muslim territories for over 50 years after the conquests [ citation needed ] .

Rise of the Umayyads [ edit ] When the first civil war broke out in the Muslim empire as a result of the murder of Uthman and the nomination of Ali as caliph, the Rashidun Caliphate was succeeded by the Umayyad dynasty [ citation needed ] , with Syria as its core and Damascus its capital for the next century to come.

See also [ edit ] Spread of Islam Muslim conquests Byzantine-Arab Wars Ghassanids Iudaea Province Umayyad conquest of North Africa 7th century in Lebanon § Administration History of Lebanon History of Syria History of Jordan History of Palestine History of the Levant Notes [ edit ] ^ Modern-day Israel , Jordan , Lebanon , Palestine , Syria , and eastern Turkey .

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Sharon, M.

(2007). "The decisive battles in the Arab Conquest of Syria".

Studia Orientalia Electronica . Vol. 101. pp.

297– 358.

^ "Syria." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 20 October 2006 Syria – Britannica Online Encyclopedia Archived 14 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Kaegi, 1995, p. 41.

^ "Ghassan." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 18 October 2006 Ghassan (ancient kingdom, Arabia) – Britannica Online Encyclopedia ^ a b "Iran." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 20 October 2006 Iran – Britannica Online Encyclopedia ^ Nicolle, David (1994). Yarmuk CE 636: The Muslim Conquest of Syria. Osprey Publishing.

^ El Hareir & M'Baye 2011 , p. 142.

^ a b Buhl 1993 , pp. 756–757.

^ Kaegi 1992 , p. 67.

^ Razwy, Sayed Ali Asgher.

A Restatement of the History of Islam & Muslims . p. 283.

^ Scheiner, Jens; Hassanein, Hamada (2019).

The Early Muslim Conquest of Syria: An English Translation of al-Azdī’s Futūḥ al-Shām . Routledge. p. 71.

ISBN 978-1000690583 .

^ a b c The Sword of Allah: Khalid bin al-Waleed, His Life and Campaigns: page no:576 by Lieutenant-General Agha Ibrahim Akram , Nat. Publishing. House, Rawalpindi (1970) ISBN 978-0-7101-0104-4 .

^ Scheiner, Jens; Hassanein, Hamada (2019).

The Early Muslim Conquest of Syria: An English Translation of al-Azdī’s Futūḥ al-Shām . Routledge. pp.

75– 76.

ISBN 978-1000690583 .

^ Wakeley, James Moreton (2017).

The Futuḥ al Sham of al Azdi al Basri Syrian narrative history . Oxford–Mainz–Vienna–Princeton Graduate Exchange. University of Oxford. p. 7.

^ Wakeley, James Moreton (2017).

The Futuḥ al Sham of al Azdi al Basri Syrian narrative history . Oxford–Mainz–Vienna–Princeton Graduate Exchange. University of Oxford. pp.

6– 7.

^ Conrad, Lawrence I.; Noth, Albrecht (1994).

The early Arabic historical tradition: a source critical study (Translated by Michael Bonner, 2nd edition) . Princeton: The Darwin Press inc. pp.

87– 90.

ISBN 0-87850-082-0 .

^ Peters, Francis E.

(August 1991). "The Quest for the Historical Muhammad".

International Journal of Middle East Studies .

23 (3): 291– 315.

^ Firestone, Reuven (2008).

An Introduction to Islam for Jews . Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication society. p. 128.

ISBN 978-0-8276-0864-1 .

^ Weiss, Bernard G. (2006).

Spirit of Islamic law . Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press. p. 13.

ISBN 0-8203-2827-8 .

^ Brown, Daniel (2020), The Wiley Blackwell Concise Companion to the Hadith , The Wiley Blackwell companions, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, pp.

39– 52, ISBN 9781118638514 ^ Tabari: Vol. 2, p. 601 ^ Akram, Agha Ibrahim (13 February 2016).

Islamic Historical General Khalid Bin Waleed . Lulu Press, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-312-23371-3 .

^ Tabari: Vol. 2, p. 609 ^ Waqidi: p. 62.

^ Akram, chapter 31.

^ Jann Tibbetts (2016).

"50 Great Military Leaders of All Time" . Vij Books India Pvt.

ISBN 978-93-85505-66-9 .

^ Gil, Moshe; Ethel Broido (1997). A History of Palestine. Cambridge University Press, pp. 634–1099.

ISBN 978-0-521-59984-9 .

^ a b Tabari 1992 , p. 174.

^ a b Akram 2006 , p. 359-417.

^ Allenby 2003 .

^ Vaglieri 1960 , p. 382.

^ Al-Fasi, D.

(1936). Solomon L. Skoss (ed.).

The Hebrew-Arabic Dictionary of the Bible, Known as 'Kitāb Jāmiʿ al-Alfāẓ' (Agron) (in Hebrew). Vol. 1. New Haven: Yale University Press . p. xxxix–xl (Introduction).

^ Tabari: Vol. 3, p. 98.

^ Regan, Geoffrey (2001).

First Crusader: Byzantium's Holy Wars .

Sutton Publishing . p. 167.

ISBN 0-7509-2026-2 .

^ Tabari: Vol. 4, pp. 37–38.

^ Meinecke 1995 , p. 410.

^ a b "Umar (634–644)", The Islamic World to 1600 Multimedia History Tutorials by the Applied History Group, University of Calgary.

Last accessed 20 Oct 2006 Archived 10 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ سيد بن حسين العفاني (2005).

فرسان النهار من الصحابة الأخيار – ج5 (in Arabic). مكتبة الكيان. pp.

309– 311.

^ Yaqut al-Hamawi as cited in le Strange, Guy (1890).

Palestine Under the Moslems: A Description of Syria and the Holy Land from A.D. 650 to 1500 . London: Alexander P. Watt for the Committee of the Palestine Exploration Fund . p.

25 .

OCLC 1004386 . Retrieved 16 September 2010 .

References [ edit ] Akram, Agha Ibrahim (2006).

The Sword of Allah Khalid Bin Al-Waleed, His Life and Campaigns . Mr. Books. pp.

359– 417 . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

Allenby, Viscount (2003), Conquerors of Palestine Through Forty Centuries , Kessinger Publishing , ISBN 0-7661-3984-0 Betts, Robert B. (1978).

Christians in the Arab East: A Political Study (2nd rev. ed.). Athens: Lycabettus Press.

ISBN 978-0-8042-0796-6 .

Buhl, F. (1993).

"Muʾta" . In Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E.

; Heinrichs, W. P.

& Pellat, Ch.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume VII: Mif–Naz . Leiden: E. J. Brill. p. 756.

ISBN 978-90-04-09419-2 .

Charles, Robert H.

(2007) [1916].

The Chronicle of John, Bishop of Nikiu: Translated from Zotenberg's Ethiopic Text . Merchantville, NJ: Evolution Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-889758-87-9 .

El Hareir, Idris; M'Baye, El Hadji Ravane (2011).

The Different Aspects of Islam Culture: Volume 3, The Spread of Islam throughout the World . UNESCO publishing.

Kaegi, Walter E.

(1992).

Byzantium and the Early Islamic Conquests . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521411721 .

Meinecke, M. (1995).

"Al-Rakka" . In Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E.

; Heinrichs, W. P.

& Lecomte, G.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume VIII: Ned–Sam . Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp.

410– 414.

ISBN 978-90-04-09834-3 .

Meyendorff, John (1989).

Imperial unity and Christian divisions: The Church 450–680 A.D.

The Church in history. Vol. 2. Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 978-0-88141-056-3 .

Ostrogorsky, George (1956).

History of the Byzantine State . Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Tabari, Muhammad ibn Jarir (1992).

The history of at-Tabari Vol. 12 (Yohanan Friedmann ed.). SUNY Press. p. 174.

ISBN 9780791407332 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

Vaglieri, Laura Veccia (1960).

"ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib" . In Gibb, H. A. R.

; Kramers, J. H.

; Lévi-Provençal, E.

; Schacht, J.

; Lewis, B.

& Pellat, Ch.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume I: A–B . Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp.

381– 386.

OCLC 495469456 .

External links [ edit ] Multimedia History Tutorials by the Applied History Group, The Islamic World to 1600 , University of Calgary.

The Islamic World to 1600: Tutorial Outline Edward Gibbon, History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire Chapter 51 Bishop John Nikiou The Chronicle of John, Bishop of Nikiu Chapters CXVI-CXXI NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐b526h
Cached time: 20250818092135
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.872 seconds
Real time usage: 1.017 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6076/1000000
Revision size: 51883/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 172746/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17988/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 147875/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.530/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24533873/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  838.804      1 -total
 22.03%  184.775      2 Template:Reflist
 18.92%  158.739     20 Template:Cite_book
 12.76%  107.042      1 Template:Infobox_military_conflict
  9.94%   83.373      1 Template:Langx
  9.46%   79.349      3 Template:Campaignbox
  8.83%   74.105      1 Template:Campaignbox_Early_Muslim_Expansions
  6.44%   53.995     11 Template:Sfn
  6.20%   51.971      1 Template:Short_description
  5.79%   48.577      6 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7533153:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818092135 and revision id 1306542742. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Muslim_conquest_of_the_Levant&oldid=1306542742 " Categories : Muslim conquest of the Levant Arab–Byzantine wars History of the Levant 630s in the Byzantine Empire 630s conflicts 634 635 636 637 Heraclius Military history of the Mediterranean Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from August 2019 Articles containing Arabic-language text All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from August 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 09:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Muslim conquest of the Levant 30 languages Add topic

