Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meta learning model for teams and relationships 2 Ideas for implementation and goals 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Meta-learning 4 languages Català Deutsch فارسی Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aspect of metacognition This article is about meta learning in social psychology. For meta learning in computer science, see meta-learning (computer science) . For metalearning in neuroscience, see metalearning (neuroscience) .

Meta-learning is a branch of metacognition concerned with learning about one's own learning and learning processes.

The term comes from the meta prefix's modern meaning of an abstract recursion , or "X about X", similar to its use in metaknowledge , metamemory , and meta-emotion .

Meta learning model for teams and relationships [ edit ] Marcial Losada and other researchers have attempted to create a meta learning model to analyze teams and relationships.

[ 1 ] A 2013 paper provided a strong critique [ 2 ] of this attempt, arguing that it was based on misapplication of complex mathematical modelling. This led to its abandonment by at least one former proponent.

[ 3 ] The meta learning model proposed by Losada is identical to the Lorenz system , which was originally proposed as a simplified mathematical model for atmospheric convection . It comprises one control parameter and three state variables , which in this case have been mapped to "connectivity", "inquiry-advocacy", "positivity-negativity", and "other-self" (external-internal focus) respectively. The state variables are linked by a set of nonlinear differential equations .

[ 4 ] This has been criticized as a poorly defined, poorly justified, and invalid application of differential equations.

[ 2 ] Losada and colleagues claim to have arrived at the meta learning model from thousands of time series data generated at two human interaction laboratories in Ann Arbor, Michigan , and Cambridge, Massachusetts , [ 1 ] although the details of the collection of this data, and the connection between the time series data and the model is unclear.

[ 2 ] These time series portrayed the interaction dynamics of business teams doing typical business tasks such as strategic planning . These teams were classified into three performance categories: high, medium and low. Performance was evaluated by the profitability of the teams, the level of satisfaction of their clients, and 360-degree evaluations.

One proposed result of this theory is that there is a ratio of positivity-to-negativity of at least 2.9 (called the Losada line ), which separates high from low performance teams as well as flourishing from languishing in individuals and relationships.

[ 5 ] Brown and colleagues pointed out that even if the proposed meta-learning model were valid, this ratio results from a completely arbitrary choice of model parameters carried over from the literature on modeling atmospheric convection by Lorenz and others, without any justification.

[ 2 ] Ideas for implementation and goals [ edit ] Meta learning can also be a very effective tool to assist students in becoming independently self-reflective. Students will require feedback in order to reflect on their learning, strengths, and weaknesses. Meta learning tasks will help students be more proactive and effective learners by focusing on developing self-awareness. Meta learning tasks would provide students with the opportunity to better understand their thinking processes in order to devise custom learning strategies. The goal is to find a set of parameters that work well across different tasks so that learners start with a bias that allows them to perform well despite receiving only a small amount of task-specific data.

See also [ edit ] Learning styles Mentalization Metacognition Metaknowledge Metamemory Meta-emotion Self-regulated learning References [ edit ] ^ a b (Losada, 1999; Losada & Heaphy, 2004; Fredrickson & Losada, 2005) ^ a b c d Brown, N. J. L., Sokal, A. D., & Friedman, H. L. (2013).

The Complex Dynamics of Wishful Thinking: The Critical Positivity Ratio . American Psychologist. Electronic publication ahead of print.

^ Fredrickson, B. L. (2013) Updated thinking on positivity ratios.

American Psychologist. Electronic publication ahead of print.

^ (Losada, 1999; Fredrickson & Losada, 2005; for a graphical representation of the meta learning model see Losada & Heaphy, 2004) ^ (Fredrickson & Losada, 2005; Waugh & Fredrickson, 2006; Fredrickson, 2009) Further reading [ edit ] Norton, L. & Walters, D. (2005).

Encouraging meta-learning through personal development planning: first year students’ perceptions of what makes a really good student [ dead link ] . PRIME (Pedagogical Research In Maximising Education), in-house journal, Liverpool Hope University, 1 (1) 109–124.

Meyer, J. H. F. & Shanahan, M. P. (2004).

Developing metalearning capacity in students — Actionable theory and practical lessons learned in first-year economics . Innovations in Education and Teaching International (Special issue: Meta learning in Higher Education), 41 (4) 443–458.

Losada, M. (1999). The complex dynamics of high performance teams.

Mathematical and Computer Modelling , 30 (9–10), pp. 179–192.

[1] Losada, M. & Heaphy, E. (2004). The role of positivity and connectivity in the performance of business teams: A nonlinear dynamics model.

American Behavioral Scientist , 47 (6), pp. 740–765.

[2] Fredrickson, B. L. & Losada, M. (2005).

Positive affect and the complex dynamics of human flourishing.

American Psychologist, 60 (7) 678–686.

[3] Waugh, C. E. & Fredrickson, B. L. (2006).

Nice to know you: Positive emotions, self-other overlap, and complex understanding in the formation of a new relationship.

The Journal of Positive Psychology , 1 (2), 93–106.

Fredrickson, B. L. (2009).

Positivity . Crown Publishers, New York.

External links [ edit ] Summary of meta learning research by Dr. Losada Comment from Losada about executives implementing the model Article about meta learning from Losada (part 1) Article about meta learning from Losada (part 2) Comment from Losada about negativity in the workplace Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Meta-learning&oldid=1268924105 " Categories : Business models Educational psychology Group processes Learning Positive psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2025 This page was last edited on 12 January 2025, at 05:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Meta-learning 4 languages Add topic

