Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Preindustrial cities 2 Sociology 3 Improvement 4 As a unit in urban design 5 Neighbourhoods around the world Toggle Neighbourhoods around the world subsection 5.1 Asia 5.1.1 China 5.2 Europe 5.2.1 United Kingdom 5.3 North America 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Neighbourhood 61 languages Alemannisch Ænglisc العربية Aragonés تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí भोजपुरी Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Fulfulde 贛語 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lingála مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Português Ripoarisch Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Neighborhood ) Localised community within a larger area For other uses, see Neighbourhood (disambiguation) .

The Chelsea neighbourhood of Manhattan in New York City Ekistics Terms Neighbourhood Town City Conurbation Metropolis Megacity Megalopolis Settlement hierarchy Lists Largest cities Densest neighborhoods Densest cities proper Densest metro areas Cities portal v t e A neighbourhood (Commonwealth English) or neighborhood (American English) is a geographically localized community within a larger town , city , suburb or rural area , sometimes consisting of a single street and the buildings lining it. Neighbourhoods are often social communities with considerable face-to-face interaction among members. Researchers have not agreed on an exact definition, but the following may serve as a starting point: "Neighbourhood is generally defined spatially as a specific geographic area and functionally as a set of social networks. Neighbourhoods, then, are the spatial units in which face-to-face social interactions occur—the personal settings and situations where residents seek to realise common values, socialise youth, and maintain effective social control." [ clarification needed ] [ 1 ] Preindustrial cities [ edit ] In the words of the urban scholar Lewis Mumford , "Neighborhoods, in some annoying, inchoate fashion exist wherever human beings congregate, in permanent family dwellings; and many of the functions of the city tend to be distributed naturally—that is, without any theoretical preoccupation or political direction—into neighborhoods." [ 2 ] Most of the earliest cities around the world as excavated by archaeologists have evidence for the presence of social neighbourhoods.

[ 3 ] Historical documents shed light on neighbourhood life in numerous historical preindustrial or nonwestern cities.

[ 4 ] Neighbourhoods are typically generated by social interaction among people living near one another. In this sense they are local social units larger than households not directly under the control of city or state officials. In some preindustrial urban traditions, basic municipal functions such as protection, social regulation of births and marriages, cleaning and upkeep are handled informally by neighbourhoods and not by urban governments; this pattern is well documented for historical Islamic cities.

[ 5 ] In addition to social neighbourhoods, most ancient and historical cities also had administrative districts used by officials for taxation, record-keeping, and social control.

[ 6 ] Administrative districts are typically larger than neighbourhoods and their boundaries may cut across neighbourhood divisions. In some cases, however, administrative districts coincided with neighbourhoods, leading to a high level of regulation of social life by officials. For example, in the Tang period Chinese capital city Chang'an, neighbourhoods were districts and there were state officials who carefully controlled life and activity at the neighbourhood level.

[ 7 ] Neighbourhoods in preindustrial cities often had some degree of social specialisation or differentiation. Ethnic neighbourhoods were important in many past cities and remain common in cities today. Economic specialists, including craft producers, merchants, and others, could be concentrated in neighbourhoods, and in societies with religious pluralism neighbourhoods were often specialised by religion. One factor contributing to neighbourhood distinctiveness and social cohesion in past cities was the role of rural to urban migration. This was a continual process in preindustrial cities, and migrants tended to move in with relatives and acquaintances from their rural past.

[ 8 ] Sociology [ edit ] Neighbourhood sociology is a subfield of urban sociology which studies local communities [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Neighbourhoods are also used in research studies from postal codes and health disparities , to correlations with school drop out rates or use of drugs.

[ 11 ] Some attention has also been devoted to viewing the neighbourhood as a small-scale democracy , regulated primarily by ideas of reciprocity among neighbours.

[ 12 ] Improvement [ edit ] A neighbourhood watch sign in Jefferson County, Colorado Neighbourhoods have been the site of service delivery or "service interventions" in part as efforts to provide local, quality services, and to increase the degree of local control and ownership.

[ 13 ] Alfred Kahn, as early as the mid-1970s, described the "experience, theory and fads" of neighbourhood service delivery over the prior decade, including discussion of income transfers and poverty.

[ 14 ] Neighbourhoods, as a core aspect of community, also are the site of services for youth, including children with disabilities [ 15 ] and coordinated approaches to low-income populations.

[ 16 ] While the term neighbourhood organisation [ 17 ] is not as common in 2015, these organisations often are non-profit, sometimes grassroots or even core funded community development centres or branches.

Community and economic development activists have pressured for reinvestment in local communities and neighbourhoods. In the early 2000s, Community Development Corporations, Rehabilitation Networks, Neighbourhood Development Corporations, and Economic Development organisations would work together to address the housing stock and the infrastructures of communities and neighbourhoods (e.g., community centres).

[ 18 ] Community and Economic Development may be understood in different ways, and may involve "faith-based" groups and congregations in cities.

[ 19 ] As a unit in urban design [ edit ] In the early 1900s, Clarence Perry described the idea of a neighbourhood unit as a self-contained residential area within a city. The concept is still influential in New Urbanism . Practitioners seek to revive traditional sociability in planned suburban housing based on a set of principles. At the same time, the neighbourhood is a site of interventions to create Age-Friendly Cities and Communities (AFCC) as many older adults tend to have narrower life space. Urban design studies thus use neighbourhood as a unit of analysis.

[ 20 ] Neighbourhoods around the world [ edit ] Asia [ edit ] Segunbagicha , a neighbourhhood in Dhaka , Bangladesh China [ edit ] In mainland China , the term is generally used for the urban administrative division found immediately below the district level, although an intermediate, subdistrict level exists in some cities. They are also called streets (administrative terminology may vary from city to city). Neighbourhoods encompass 2,000 to 10,000 families. Within neighbourhoods, families are grouped into smaller residential units or quarters of 100 to 600 families and supervised by a residents' committee ; these are subdivided into residents' small groups of fifteen to forty families. In most urban areas of China, neighbourhood , community , residential community , residential unit , residential quarter have the same meaning: 社区 or 小区 or 居民区 or 居住区 , and is the direct sublevel of a subdistrict ( 街道办事处 ), which is the direct sublevel of a district ( 区 ), which is the direct sublevel of a city ( 市 ). (See Administrative divisions of the People's Republic of China ) Europe [ edit ] Typical Cypriot neighbourhood in Aglandjia , Nicosia, Cyprus Vuores , a neighbourhood in the city of Tampere , Finland United Kingdom [ edit ] The term has no general official or statistical purpose in the United Kingdom, but is often used by local boroughs for sub-divisions of their area for the provision of services and functions, as for example in Kingston-upon-Thames.

[ 21 ] Kingston-upon-Thames has four neighbourhoods, each containing a number of wards, which are defined geographic areas, based on the electoral system.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Neighbourhood is also used as an informal term to refer to a small area within a town or city. It is commonly used to refer to organisations which relate to a specific local area, such as neighbourhood policing [ 24 ] or Neighbourhood watch schemes.

Another way the term is used, is in relation to planning. Neighbourhood planning is the process for giving communities the ability to contribute to how their area develops.

[ 25 ] The Localism Act 2011 introduced a right for communities to be able to shape their neighbourhoods.

[ 26 ] In addition, government statistics for local areas are often referred to as neighbourhood statistics [ 27 ] , although the data is usually divided into districts and wards for local purposes. In many parts of the UK wards are roughly equivalent to neighbourhoods or a combination of them.

North America [ edit ] In the United States and Canada , neighbourhoods are often given official or semi-official status through neighbourhood associations , neighbourhood watches or block watches. These may regulate such matters as lawn care and fence height, and they may provide such services as block parties , neighbourhood parks and community security . In some other places the equivalent organization is the parish , though a parish may have several neighbourhoods within it depending on the area.

In localities where neighbourhoods do not have an official status, questions can arise as to where one neighbourhood begins and another ends. Many cities use districts and wards as official divisions of the city, rather than traditional neighbourhood boundaries.

ZIP Code boundaries and post office names also sometimes reflect neighbourhood identities.

See also [ edit ] Barangay (Philippines) Barrio (Spanish) Bairro (Portuguese) Block Parent Program (Canada) Borough Census-designated place Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (Cuba) Community Comparison of Home Owners' and Civic Associations Electoral precinct Frazione (Italian) Homeowners' association Kiez (German) Komshi ( Balkan states during the Ottoman Empire ) Mahalle Mister Rogers' Neighborhood Neighbourhood Watch New urbanism Pedestrian village Quarter Residential community Suburbs Unincorporated community Viertel (disambiguation) (German) References [ edit ] Citations ^ Schuck, Amie and Dennis Rosenbuam 2006 "Promoting Safe and Healthy Neighborhoods: What Research Tells Us about Intervention." The Aspen Institute.

^ Mumford, Lewis (1954). The Neighborhood and the Neighborhood Unit. Town Planning Review 24:256–270, p. 258.

^ For example, Spence, Michael W. (1992) Tlailotlacan, a Zapotec Enclave in Teotihuacan. In Art, Ideology, and the City of Teotihuacan, edited by Janet C. Berlo, pp. 59–88. Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, D.C. Stone, Elizabeth C. (1987) Nippur Neighbourhoods. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization vol. 44. Oriental Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago ^ Some examples: Heng, Chye Kiang (1999) Cities of Aristocrats and Bureaucrats: The Development of Medieval Chinese Cityscapes. University of Hawai'i Press, Honolulu. Marcus, Abraham (1989) The Middle East on the Eve of Modernity: Aleppo in the Eighteenth Century. Columbia University Press, New York. Smail, Daniel Lord (2000). Imaginary Cartographies: Possession and Identity in Late Medieval Marseille. Cornell University Press, Ithaca.

^ Abu-Lughod, Janet L. (1987) The Islamic City: Historic Myth, Islamic Essence, and Contemporary Relevance. International Journal of Middle East Studies 19:155–176.

^ Dickinson, Robert E. (1961) The West European City: A Geographical Interpretation. Routledge & Paul, London, p. 529. See also: Jacobs, Jane (1961) The Death and Life of Great American Cities. Random House, New York, p. 117.

^ Xiong, Victor Cunrui (2000) Sui-Tang Chang'an: A Study in the Urban History of Medieval China. Center for Chinese Studies, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

^ Kemper, Robert V. (1977) Migration and Adaptation: Tzintzuntzan Peasants in Mexico City. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills. Greenshields, T. H. (1980) "Quarters" and Ethnicity. In The Changing Middle Eastern City, edited by G. H. Blake and R. I. Lawless, pp. 120–140. Croom Helm, London.

^ Wellman, B. & Leighton, B. (1979, March). Networks, neighbourhoods and communities: Approaches to the study of the community question.

Urban Affairs Quarterly , 14(3): 363-390.

^ Warren, D. (1977). The functional diversity of urban neighbourhoods.

Urban Affairs Quarterly , 13(2): 151-180.

^ Overman, H.G. (2002). Neighborhood effects in large and small neighborhoods.

Urban Studies , 39(1): 117-130.

^ Rosenblum, Nancy L. (2020-12-01).

"The Democracy of Everyday Life in Disaster: Holding Our Lives in Their Hands" .

Democratic Theory .

7 (2): 69– 74.

doi : 10.3167/dt.2020.070209 .

ISSN 2332-8894 .

^ King, B. & Meyers, J. (1996). The Annie E. Casey Foundation's mental health initiative for urban children. (pp. 249-261). In: B. Stroul & R.M. Friedman, Children's Mental Health . Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.

^ Kahn, A.J. (1976). Service delivery at the neighborhood level: Experience, theory and fads.

Social Service Review , 50(1): 23-56.

^ Kutash, K., Duchnowski, A.J., Meyers, J. & King, B. (1997). Ch. 3: Community and neighborhood-based services for youth. In: S. Henggeler & A. B. Santor, Innovative Approaches to Difficult to Treat Populations . Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

^ Riessman, F. (1967). A neighborhood-based mental health approach. (pp.1620184). In: E. Cowen, E. Gardier, & M. Zak, Emergent Approaches to Mental Health Problems . NY, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

^ Cunningham, J V. & Kotler, M. (1983).

Building Neighborhood Organizations . Notre Dame & London: Notre Dame Press.

^ Rubin, H.J. (2000).

Renewing Hope Within Neighborhoods of Despair: The Community-Based Development Model . Albany, NY: State University of New York.

^ Mc Roberts, O.M. (2001, January/February). Black Churches, community and development.

Shelterforce Online . Washington, DC: Author. at nhi.org ^ Gan, Daniel R. Y.; Fung, John Chye; Cho, Im Sik (2019).

"Neighborhood Experiences of People Over Age 50: Factor Structure and Validity of a Scale" .

The Gerontologist .

60 (8): e559 – e571 .

doi : 10.1093/geront/gnz111 .

PMID 31504478 .

^ What is the Neighbourhood system? The Leader of the Council Explains:...

Archived May 23, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Learn more about your neighbourhood" .

www.kingston.gov.uk . Retrieved 2025-08-04 .

^ "Local councils | Electoral Commission" .

www.electoralcommission.org.uk . Retrieved 2025-08-04 .

^ "NHP" .

www.neighbourhoodpolicing.co.uk .

^ "Neighbourhood planning" .

GOV.UK . 2020-09-25 . Retrieved 2025-08-04 .

^ "Neighbourhood planning" .

www.rtpi.org.uk . Retrieved 2025-08-04 .

^ "Statistics: neighbourhood (absence and attainment)" .

GOV.UK . 2015-06-24 . Retrieved 2025-08-04 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Neighborhoods at Wikimedia Commons v t e Designations for types of administrative division English terms Common English terms Area Insular area Local government area Special area Unincorporated area Unorganized area Borough County borough Metropolitan borough Canton Half-canton Capital Federal capital Imperial capital City Autonomous city Charter city Independent city Incorporated city Imperial city Free imperial city Royal free city Community Autonomous community Residential community County Administrative county Autonomous county Consolidated city-county County seat County town Metropolitan county Non-metropolitan county Regional county municipality Viscounty Country Overseas country Department Overseas department District Capital district City district Congressional district Electoral district Federal district Indian government district Land district Local government district Metropolitan district Non-metropolitan district Military district Municipal district Police district Regional district Rural district Sanitary district Service district Educational service district Local service district School district Intermediate school district Special district in the US Urban district Division Census division Police division Subdivision of India Indian reserve/reservation Indian reservation (United States) Indian reserve (Canada) Municipality City municipality County municipality Direct-controlled municipality District municipality Neutral municipality Regional municipality Resort municipality Mountain resort municipality Rural municipality Specialized municipality Prefecture Autonomous prefecture Subprefecture Super-prefecture Praetorian prefecture Province Autonomous province Overseas province Roman province Region Administrative region Special administrative region Autonomous region Capital region National capital region Development region Mesoregion Microregion Overseas region Subregion State Proto-state City-state Federal state Free state Sovereign state Territory Capital territory Federal capital territory National capital territory Dependent territory Federal territory Incorporated territory Organized incorporated territory Overseas territory Union territory Town Census town Market town Township Charter township Civil township Paper township Survey township Urban township Unit Regional unit Zone Economic zone Exclusive economic zone Free economic zone Special economic zone Exclusion zone Military exclusion zone Free speech zone Neutral zone Self-administered zone Trade zone Free-trade zone Other English terms Current Alpine resort Bailiwick Banner Autonomous Block Cadastre Circle Circuit Colony Commune Condominium Constituency Duchy District Eldership Emirate Enclave and exclave Federal dependency Governorate Hamlet Manor Royal Muftiate Neighbourhood Parish Precinct Principality Protectorate Quarter Regency Autonomous republic Riding Sector Autonomous Shire Sultanate Suzerainty Townland Village Summer Ward Historical Agency Barony Burgh Exarchate Hide Hundred Imperial Circle March Monthon Presidency Residency Roman diocese Seat Tenth Tithing Viceroyalty Non-English terms or loanwords Current Amt Apskritis Bakhsh Barangay Bashki Bezirk Regierungsbezirk Comarca Comune Frazione Freguesia Fu Gemeinde Austria Germany South Tyrol Switzerland Gemeente Gmina Hromada Județ Kampong Kommun/Kunta Finland Sweden Län (Sweden) Landskap Finland Località Maakunta Megye Muban Mukim Njësi administrative Obec Oblast Autonomous Okrug Ostān Poblacion Purok Qark Raion Savivaldybė Selsoviet Sitio Seniūnija Shahrestān Sum China Sýsla Tehsil Townlet Vingtaine Historical Commote Gau Heerlijkheid Komunë Köping Korale Län/Lääni Landskap Sweden Landskommun Maalaiskunta Nome Egypt Greece Pagus Pargana Plasă Rreth Satrapy Socken Subah Syssel Zhou Used by ten or more countries or having derived terms. Historical derivations in italics .

See also Autonomous administration Census division Electoral district List of administrative divisions by country Greek administrative divisions Slavic administrative divisions Authority control databases International FAST 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neighbourhood&oldid=1304202259 " Categories : Neighbourhoods Types of populated places Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2019 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 16:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neighbourhood 61 languages Add topic

