Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Proof techniques Toggle Proof techniques subsection 1.1 Contradiction 1.1.1 By descent 1.2 Counterexample 2 Economics Toggle Economics subsection 2.1 Arrow's theorem: Rational ranked-choice voting 2.2 Gibbard's theorem: Non-dictatorial strategyproof games 2.3 Revelation principle: Non-honest solutions 3 Geometry Toggle Geometry subsection 3.1 Expressing m th roots rationally 3.2 Euclidean constructions 3.2.1 Constructing an equilateral n -gon 3.3 Deducing Euclid's parallel postulate 4 Number theory Toggle Number theory subsection 4.1 Impossibility of Fermat triples 4.2 Integer solutions of Diophantine equations: Hilbert's tenth problem 5 Decidability Toggle Decidability subsection 5.1 Richard's paradox 5.2 Complete and consistent axiomatic system 5.3 Proof of halting 6 Information theory Toggle Information theory subsection 6.1 Compression of random strings 7 Natural sciences 8 See also 9 Notes and references 10 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Proof of impossibility 4 languages العربية Español Français Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Category of mathematical proof Part of a series on Mathematics History Index Areas Number theory Geometry Algebra Calculus and Analysis Discrete mathematics Logic Set theory Probability Statistics and Decision theory Relationship with sciences Physics Chemistry Geosciences Computation Biology Linguistics Economics Philosophy Education Mathematics Portal v t e In mathematics , an impossibility theorem is a theorem that demonstrates a problem or general set of problems cannot be solved. These are also known as proofs of impossibility , negative proofs , or negative results . Impossibility theorems often resolve decades or centuries of work spent looking for a solution by proving there is no solution. Proving that something is impossible is usually much harder than the opposite task, as it is often necessary to develop a proof that works in general, rather than to just show a particular example.

[ 1 ] Impossibility theorems are usually expressible as negative existential propositions or universal propositions in logic.

The irrationality of the square root of 2 is one of the oldest proofs of impossibility. It shows that it is impossible to express the square root of 2 as a ratio of two integers . Another consequential proof of impossibility was Ferdinand von Lindemann's proof in 1882, which showed that the problem of squaring the circle cannot be solved [ 2 ] because the number π is transcendental (i.e., non-algebraic), and that only a subset of the algebraic numbers can be constructed by compass and straightedge . Two other classical problems— trisecting the general angle and doubling the cube —were also proved impossible in the 19th century, and all of these problems gave rise to research into more complicated mathematical structures.

Some of the most important proofs of impossibility found in the 20th century were those related to undecidability , which showed that there are problems that cannot be solved in general by any algorithm , with one of the more prominent ones being the halting problem .

Gödel's incompleteness theorems were other examples that uncovered fundamental limitations in the provability of formal systems.

[ 3 ] In computational complexity theory , techniques like relativization (the addition of an oracle ) allow for "weak" proofs of impossibility, in that proofs techniques that are not affected by relativization cannot resolve the P versus NP problem .

[ 4 ] Another technique is the proof of completeness for a complexity class , which provides evidence for the difficulty of problems by showing them to be just as hard to solve as any other problem in the class. In particular, a complete problem is intractable if one of the problems in its class is.

Proof techniques [ edit ] See also: Types of proof Contradiction [ edit ] One of the widely used types of impossibility proof is proof by contradiction . In this type of proof, it is shown that if a proposition, such as a solution to a particular class of equations, is assumed to hold, then via deduction two mutually contradictory things can be shown to hold, such as a number being both even and odd or both negative and positive. Since the contradiction stems from the original assumption, this means that the assumed premise must be impossible.

In contrast, a non-constructive proof of an impossibility claim would proceed by showing it is logically contradictory for all possible counterexamples to be invalid: at least one of the items on a list of possible counterexamples must actually be a valid counterexample to the impossibility conjecture. For example, a conjecture that it is impossible for an irrational power raised to an irrational power to be rational was disproved , by showing that one of two possible counterexamples must be a valid counterexample, without showing which one it is.

By descent [ edit ] Main article: Proof by infinite descent Another type of proof by contradiction is proof by descent, which proceeds first by assuming that something is possible, such as a positive integer [ 5 ] solution to a class of equations, and that therefore there must be a smallest solution (by the Well-ordering principle ). From the alleged smallest solution, it is then shown that a smaller solution can be found, contradicting the premise that the former solution was the smallest one possible—thereby showing that the original premise that a solution exists must be false.

Counterexample [ edit ] The obvious way to disprove an impossibility conjecture is by providing a single counterexample . For example, Euler proposed that at least n different n th powers were necessary to sum to yet another n th power. The conjecture was disproved in 1966, with a counterexample involving a count of only four different 5th powers summing to another fifth power: 27 5 + 84 5 + 110 5 + 133 5 = 144 5 .

Proof by counterexample is a form of constructive proof , in that an object disproving the claim is exhibited.

Economics [ edit ] Arrow's theorem: Rational ranked-choice voting [ edit ] In social choice theory , Arrow's impossibility theorem shows that it is impossible to devise a ranked-choice voting system that is both non-dictatorial and satisfies a basic requirement for rational behavior called independence of irrelevant alternatives .

Gibbard's theorem: Non-dictatorial strategyproof games [ edit ] Gibbard's theorem shows that any strategyproof game form (i.e. one with a dominant strategy ) with more than two outcomes is dictatorial .

The Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem is a special case showing that no deterministic voting system can be fully invulnerable to strategic voting in all circumstances, regardless of how others vote.

Revelation principle: Non-honest solutions [ edit ] The revelation principle can be seen as an impossibility theorem showing the "opposite" of Gibbard's theorem, in a colloquial sense: any game or voting system can be made resistant to strategy by incorporating the strategy into the mechanism . Thus, it is impossible to design a mechanism with a solution that is better than can be obtained by a truthful mechanism .

Geometry [ edit ] Expressing m th roots rationally [ edit ] The proof by Pythagoras about 500 BCE has had a profound effect on mathematics. It shows that the square root of 2 cannot be expressed as the ratio of two integers. The proof bifurcated "the numbers" into two non-overlapping collections—the rational numbers and the irrational numbers .

There is a famous passage in Plato 's Theaetetus in which it is stated that Theodorus (Plato's teacher) proved the irrationality of 3 , 5 , .

.

.

, {\displaystyle {\sqrt {3}},{\sqrt {5}},...,} taking all the separate cases up to the root of 17 square feet ... .

[ 6 ] A more general proof shows that the m th root of an integer N is irrational, unless N is the m th power of an integer n .

[ 7 ] That is, it is impossible to express the m th root of an integer N as the ratio a ⁄ b of two integers a and b , that share no common prime factor , except in cases in which b = 1.

Euclidean constructions [ edit ] Greek geometry was based on the use of the compass and a straightedge (though the straightedge is not strictly necessary). The compass allows a geometer to construct points equidistant from each other, which in Euclidean space are equivalent to implicitly calculations of square roots . Four famous questions asked how to construct: a pair of lines trisecting a given angle ; a cube with a volume twice the volume of a given cube ; a square equal in area to that of a given circle; an equilateral polygon with an arbitrary number of sides.

For more than 2,000 years unsuccessful attempts were made to solve these problems; at last, in the 19th century it was proved that the desired constructions are mathematically impossible without admitting additional tools other than a compass.

[ 8 ] All of these are problems in Euclidean construction , and Euclidean constructions can be done only if they involve only Euclidean numbers (by definition of the latter).

[ 9 ] Irrational numbers can be Euclidean. A good example is the square root of 2 (an irrational number). It is simply the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle with legs both one unit in length, and it can be constructed with a straightedge and a compass. But it was proved centuries after Euclid that Euclidean numbers cannot involve any operations other than addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and the extraction of square roots.

Both trisecting the general angle and doubling the cube require taking cube roots , which are not constructible numbers .

π π {\displaystyle \pi } is not a Euclidean number ... and therefore it is impossible to construct, by Euclidean methods a length equal to the circumference of a circle of unit diameter Because π π {\displaystyle \pi } was proved in 1882 to be a transcendental number , it is not a Euclidean number; Hence the construction of a length π π {\displaystyle \pi } from a unit circle is impossible.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Constructing an equilateral n -gon [ edit ] The Gauss-Wantzel theorem showed in 1837 that constructing an equilateral n -gon is impossible for most values of n .

Deducing Euclid's parallel postulate [ edit ] Main article: Non-Euclidean geometry The parallel postulate from Euclid's Elements is equivalent to the statement that given a straight line and a point not on that line, only one parallel to the line may be drawn through that point. Unlike the other postulates, it was seen as less self-evident. Nagel and Newman argue that this may be because the postulate concerns "infinitely remote" regions of space; in particular, parallel lines are defined as not meeting even "at infinity", in contrast to asymptotes .

[ 12 ] This perceived lack of self-evidence led to the question of whether it might be proven from the other Euclidean axioms and postulates. It was only in the nineteenth century that the impossibility of deducing the parallel postulate from the others was demonstrated in the works of Gauss , Bolyai , Lobachevsky , and Riemann . These works showed that the parallel postulate can moreover be replaced by alternatives, leading to non-Euclidean geometries .

Nagel and Newman consider the question raised by the parallel postulate to be "...perhaps the most significant development in its long-range effects upon subsequent mathematical history".

[ 12 ] In particular, they consider its outcome to be "of the greatest intellectual importance," as it showed that "a proof can be given of the impossibility of proving certain propositions [in this case, the parallel postulate] within a given system [in this case, Euclid's first four postulates]." [ 13 ] Number theory [ edit ] Impossibility of Fermat triples [ edit ] Main article: Fermat's Last Theorem Fermat's Last Theorem was conjectured by Pierre de Fermat in the 1600s, states the impossibility of finding solutions in positive integers for the equation x n + y n = z n {\displaystyle x^{n}+y^{n}=z^{n}} with n > 2 {\displaystyle n>2} .

Fermat himself gave a proof for the n = 4 case using his technique of infinite descent , and other special cases were subsequently proved, but the general case was not proven until 1994 by Andrew Wiles .

Integer solutions of Diophantine equations: Hilbert's tenth problem [ edit ] Main articles: Matiyasevich's theorem and Hilbert's problems The question "Does any arbitrary Diophantine equation have an integer solution?" is undecidable . That is, it is impossible to answer the question for all cases.

Franzén introduces Hilbert's tenth problem and the MRDP theorem (Matiyasevich-Robinson-Davis-Putnam theorem) which states that "no algorithm exists which can decide whether or not a Diophantine equation has any solution at all". MRDP uses the undecidability proof of Turing: "... the set of solvable Diophantine equations is an example of a computably enumerable but not decidable set, and the set of unsolvable Diophantine equations is not computably enumerable".

[ 14 ] Decidability [ edit ] Richard's paradox [ edit ] Main article: Richard's paradox This profound paradox presented by Jules Richard in 1905 informed the work of Kurt Gödel [ 15 ] and Alan Turing. A succinct definition is found in Principia Mathematica : [ 16 ] Richard's paradox ... is as follows. Consider all decimals that can be defined by means of a finite number of words [“words” are symbols; boldface added for emphasis] ; let E be the class of such decimals. Then E has ℵ ℵ 0 {\displaystyle \aleph _{0}} [an infinite number of] terms; hence its members can be ordered as the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, ... Let X be a number defined as follows [Whitehead & Russell now employ the Cantor diagonal method] .

If the n -th figure in the n -th decimal is p , let the n -th figure in X be p + 1 (or 0, if p = 9). Then X is different from all the members of E , since, whatever finite value n may have, the n -th figure in X is different from the n -th figure in the n -th of the decimals composing E , and therefore X is different from the n -th decimal. Nevertheless we have defined X in a finite number of words [i.e. this very definition of “word” above.] and therefore X ought to be a member of E . Thus X both is and is not a member of E.

— Principia Mathematica , 2nd edition 1927, p. 61 Kurt Gödel considered his proof to be “an analogy” of Richard's paradox, which he called " Richard's antinomy " [ 17 ] (see below ) .

Alan Turing constructed this paradox with a machine and proved that this machine could not answer a simple question: will this machine be able to determine if any machine (including itself) will become trapped in an unproductive ‘ infinite loop ’ (i.e. it fails to continue its computation of the diagonal number).

Complete and consistent axiomatic system [ edit ] Main article: Gödel's incompleteness theorems To quote Nagel and Newman (p. 68), "Gödel's paper is difficult. Forty-six preliminary definitions, together with several important preliminary theorems, must be mastered before the main results are reached". In fact, Nagel and Newman required a 67-page introduction to their exposition of the proof. But if the reader feels strong enough to tackle the paper, Martin Davis observes that "This remarkable paper is not only an intellectual landmark but is written with a clarity and vigor that makes it a pleasure to read" (Davis in Undecidable, p. 4).

Gödel proved, in his own words: "It is reasonable... to make the conjecture that ...[the] axioms [from Principia Mathematica and Peano ] are ... sufficient to decide all mathematical questions which can be formally expressed in the given systems. In what follows it will be shown that this is not the case, but rather that ... there exist relatively simple problems of the theory of ordinary whole numbers which cannot be decided on the basis of the axioms" (Gödel in Undecidable, p. 4).

Gödel compared his proof to "Richard's antinomy" (an " antinomy " is a contradiction or a paradox; for more see Richard's paradox ): "The analogy of this result with Richard's antinomy is immediately evident; there is also a close relationship [14] with the Liar Paradox (Gödel's footnote 14: Every epistemological antinomy can be used for a similar proof of undecidability) ... Thus, we have a proposition before us which asserts its own unprovability [15]. (His footnote 15: Contrary to appearances, such a proposition is not circular, for, to begin with, it asserts the unprovability of a quite definite formula)".

[ 17 ] Proof of halting [ edit ] Main article: Turing's proof The Entscheidungsproblem , the decision problem , was first answered by Church in April 1935 and preceded Turing by over a year, as Turing's paper was received for publication in May 1936.

[ 18 ] Turing's proof is made difficult by number of definitions required and its subtle nature. See Turing machine and Turing's proof for details.

Turing's first proof (of three) follows the schema of Richard's paradox: Turing's computing machine is an algorithm represented by a string of seven letters in a "computing machine". Its "computation" is to test all computing machines (including itself) for "circles", and form a diagonal number from the computations of the non-circular or "successful" computing machines. It does this, starting in sequence from 1, by converting the numbers (base 8) into strings of seven letters to test. When it arrives at its own number, it creates its own letter-string. It decides it is the letter-string of a successful machine, but when it tries to do this machine's ( its own ) computation it locks in a circle and can't continue. Thus, we have arrived at Richard's paradox. (If you are bewildered see Turing's proof for more).

A number of similar undecidability proofs appeared soon before and after Turing's proof: April 1935: Proof of Alonzo Church ("An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory"). His proof was to "...propose a definition of effective calculability ... and to show, by means of an example, that not every problem of this class is solvable" (Undecidable p. 90)) 1946: Post correspondence problem (cf Hopcroft and Ullman [ 19 ] p. 193ff, p. 407 for the reference) April 1947: Proof of Emil Post ( Recursive Unsolvability of a Problem of Thue ) (Undecidable p. 293). This has since become known as "The Word problem of Thue" or "Thue's Word Problem" ( Axel Thue proposed this problem in a paper of 1914 (cf References to Post's paper in Undecidable, p. 303)).

Rice's theorem : a generalized formulation of Turing's second theorem (cf Hopcroft and Ullman [ 19 ] p. 185ff) [ 20 ] Greibach's theorem : undecidability in language theory (cf Hopcroft and Ullman [ 19 ] p. 205ff and reference on p. 401 ibid: Greibach [1963] "The undecidability of the ambiguity problem for minimal lineal grammars," Information and Control 6:2, 117–125, also reference on p. 402 ibid: Greibach [1968] "A note on undecidable properties of formal languages", Math Systems Theory 2:1, 1–6.) Penrose tiling questions.

Information theory [ edit ] Compression of random strings [ edit ] Main article: Chaitin's incompleteness theorem For an exposition suitable for non-specialists, see Beltrami p. 108ff. Also see Franzen Chapter 8 pp. 137–148, and Davis pp. 263–266. Franzén's discussion is significantly more complicated than Beltrami's and delves into Ω— Gregory Chaitin 's so-called "halting probability". Davis's older treatment approaches the question from a Turing machine viewpoint. Chaitin has written a number of books about his endeavors and the subsequent philosophic and mathematical fallout from them.

A string is called (algorithmically) random if it cannot be produced from any shorter computer program. While most strings are random , no particular one can be proved so, except for finitely many short ones: "A paraphrase of Chaitin's result is that there can be no formal proof that a sufficiently long string is random..." [ 21 ] Beltrami observes that "Chaitin's proof is related to a paradox posed by Oxford librarian G. Berry early in the twentieth century that asks for 'the smallest positive integer that cannot be defined by an English sentence with fewer than 1000 characters.' Evidently, the shortest definition of this number must have at least 1000 characters. However, the sentence within quotation marks, which is itself a definition of the alleged number is less than 1000 characters in length!" [ 22 ] Natural sciences [ edit ] Main article: No-go theorem In natural science , impossibility theorems are derived as mathematical results proven within well-established scientific theories . The basis for this strong acceptance is a combination of extensive evidence of something not occurring, combined with an underlying theory, very successful in making predictions, whose assumptions lead logically to the conclusion that something is impossible.

Two examples of widely accepted impossibilities in physics are perpetual motion machines , which violate the law of conservation of energy , and exceeding the speed of light , which violates the implications of special relativity . Another is the uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics , which asserts the impossibility of simultaneously knowing both the position and the momentum of a particle. There is also Bell's theorem : no physical theory of local hidden variables can ever reproduce all of the predictions of quantum mechanics.

While an impossibility assertion in natural science can never be absolutely proved, it could be refuted by the observation of a single counterexample . Such a counterexample would require that the assumptions underlying the theory that implied the impossibility be re-examined.

See also [ edit ] List of unsolved problems in mathematics – Solutions of these problems are still being searched for. In contrast, the above problems are known to have no solution.

Paradoxes of set theory Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Pudlák, pp. 255–256.

^ Weisstein, Eric W.

"Circle Squaring" .

mathworld.wolfram.com . Retrieved 2019-12-13 .

^ Raatikainen, Panu (2018), "Gödel's Incompleteness Theorems" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2019-12-13 ^ Baker, Theodore; Gill, John; Solovay, Robert (1975).

"Relativizations of the P=?NP Question" .

SIAM Journal on Computing .

4 (4): 431– 442.

doi : 10.1137/0204037 . Retrieved 2022-12-11 .

^ More generally, proof by infinite descent is applicable to any well-ordered set .

^ Hardy and Wright, p. 42 ^ Hardy and Wright, p. 40 ^ Nagel and Newman p. 8 ^ Hardy and Wright p. 159 ^ Hardy and Wright p. 176 ^ Hardy and Wright p. 159 referenced by E. Hecke. (1923).

Vorlesungen über die Theorie der algebraischen Zahlen . Leipzig: Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft ^ a b Nagel and Newman, p. 9 ^ Nagel and Newman, p. 10 ^ Franzén p.71 ^ Nagel, Ernest; Newman, James R. (1958).

Gödel's proof . Lulu.com. pp. 60 ff.

ISBN 0-359-07926-1 .

OCLC 1057623639 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Principia Mathematica , 2nd edition 1927, p. 61, 64 in Principia Mathematica online , Vol.1 at University of Michigan Historical Math Collection ^ a b Gödel in Undecidable , p. 9 ^ Also received for publication in 1936 (in October, later than Turing) was a short paper by Emil Post that discussed the reduction of an algorithm to a simple machine-like "method" very similar to Turing's computing machine model (see Post–Turing machine for details).

^ a b c John E. Hopcroft , Jeffrey D. Ullman (1979).

Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation . Addison-Wesley.

ISBN 0-201-02988-X .

^ "...there can be no machine E which ... will determine whether M [an arbitrary machine] ever prints a given symbol (0 say)" (Undecidable p. 134). Turing makes an odd assertion at the end of this proof that sounds remarkably like Rice's Theorem: "...each of these "general process" problems can be expressed as a problem concerning a general process for determining whether a given integer n has a property G(n)... and this is equivalent to computing a number whose nth figure is 1 if G(n) is true and 0 if it is false" (Undecidable p 134). Unfortunately he doesn't clarify the point further, and the reader is left confused.

^ Beltrami p. 109 ^ Beltrami, p. 108 Bibliography [ edit ] G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright , An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers , Fifth Edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford England, 1979, reprinted 2000 with General Index (first edition: 1938). The proofs that e and pi are transcendental are not trivial, but a mathematically adept reader will be able to wade through them.

Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell , Principia Mathematica to *56, Cambridge at the University Press, 1962, reprint of 2nd edition 1927, first edition 1913. Chap. 2.I. "The Vicious-Circle Principle" p. 37ff, and Chap. 2.VIII. "The Contradictions" p. 60ff.

Turing, A.M. (1936), "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem", Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society , 2, vol. 42, no. 1 (published 1937), pp.

230– 65, doi : 10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230 , S2CID 73712 (and Turing, A.M. (1938), "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem: A correction", Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society , 2, vol. 43, no. 6 (published 1937), pp.

544– 6, doi : 10.1112/plms/s2-43.6.544 ).

online version This is the epochal paper where Turing defines Turing machines and shows that it (as well as the Entscheidungsproblem ) is unsolvable.

Martin Davis , The Undecidable, Basic Papers on Undecidable Propositions, Unsolvable Problems And Computable Functions , Raven Press, New York, 1965. Turing's paper is #3 in this volume. Papers include those by Godel, Church, Rosser, Kleene, and Post.

Martin Davis's chapter "What is a Computation" in Lynn Arthur Steen's Mathematics Today , 1978, Vintage Books Edition, New York, 1980. His chapter describes Turing machines in the terms of the simpler Post–Turing machine , then proceeds onward with descriptions of Turing's first proof and Chaitin's contributions.

Andrew Hodges , Alan Turing: The Enigma , Simon and Schuster, New York. Cf Chapter "The Spirit of Truth" for a history leading to, and a discussion of, his proof.

Hans Reichenbach , Elements of Symbolic Lo gic, Dover Publications Inc., New York, 1947. A reference often cited by other authors.

Ernest Nagel and James Newman , Gödel's Proof , New York University Press, 1958.

Edward Beltrami , What is Random? Chance and Order in Mathematics and Life , Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 1999.

Torkel Franzén , Godel's Theorem, An Incomplete Guide to Its Use and Abuse , A.K. Peters, Wellesley Mass, 2005. A recent take on Gödel's Theorems and the abuses thereof. Not so simple a read as the author believes it is. Franzén's (blurry) discussion of Turing's 3rd proof is useful because of his attempts to clarify terminology. Offers discussions of Freeman Dyson's, Stephen Hawking's, Roger Penrose's and Gregory Chaitin's arguments (among others) that use Gödel's theorems, and useful criticism of some philosophic and metaphysical Gödel-inspired dreck that he's found on the web.

Pavel Pudlák, Logical Foundations of Mathematics and Computational Complexity. A Gentle Introduction , Springer 2013. (See Chapter 4 "Proofs of impossibility".) v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐lkzmv
Cached time: 20250814232821
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.559 seconds
Real time usage: 0.746 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2015/1000000
Revision size: 29942/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 94407/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2756/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61076/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.329/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15209355/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  570.065      1 -total
 23.82%  135.785      1 Template:Reflist
 18.42%  105.023      1 Template:Annotated_link
 15.47%   88.214      1 Template:Cite_web
 14.67%   83.649      1 Template:Math_topics_sidebar
 14.38%   81.986      1 Template:Sidebar
 12.20%   69.546      4 Template:Navbox
 11.59%   66.049      1 Template:Short_description
 10.48%   59.743      1 Template:Mathematical_logic
  9.85%   56.140      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3710507:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814232821 and revision id 1297559801. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proof_of_impossibility&oldid=1297559801 " Categories : Mathematical logic Mathematical proofs Methods of proof Possibility Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Broad-concept articles This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 00:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Proof of impossibility 4 languages Add topic

