Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses 2 Gnomon 3 Examples 4 References Toggle the table of contents Shadow square 2 languages العربية Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia An astrolabe like the one pictured would commonly include a Shadow Box on the back.

The shadow square , also known as an altitude scale , [ 1 ] was an instrument used to determine the linear height of an object, in conjunction with the alidade , for angular observations. An early example was described in an Arabic treatise likely dating to 9th or 10th-century Baghdad .

[ 2 ] Shadow squares are often found on the backs of astrolabes .

Uses [ edit ] The main use of a shadow square is to measure the linear height of an object using its shadow. It does so by simulating the ratio between an object, generally a gnomon , and its shadow. If the Sun's ray is between 0 degrees and 45 degrees the umbra versa (Vertical axis) is used, between 45 degrees and 90 degrees the umbra recta (Horizontal axis) is used and when the Sun's ray is at 45 degrees its shadow falls exactly on the umbra media (y=x) [ 3 ] It was used during the time of medieval astronomy to determine the height of, and to track the movement of celestial bodies such as the Sun when more advanced measurement methods were not available. These methods can still be used today to determine the altitude, with reference to the horizon, of any visible celestial body.

A gnomon works as a tool to produce a shadow for measurement.

Gnomon [ edit ] A gnomon is used along with a shadow box commonly. A gnomon is a stick placed vertically in a sunny place so that it casts a shadow that can be measured. Studying the shadow of the gnomon provides information about the motion of the Sun. Gnomons were most likely independently discovered by many ancient civilizations, but it is known that they were used in the 5th century BC in Greece. Most likely for the measurement of the winter and summer solstices. " Herodotus says in his Histories written around 450 B.C., that the Greeks learned the use of the gnomon from the Babylonians .

[ 4 ] Examples [ edit ] If a shadow of a human being is 4 feet long then what is the altitude of the sun? This problem can be solved through the use of the shadow box. The shadow box is divided in half, one half is calibrated by sixes the other by tens. Because it is a shadow cast by the human body the sixes are more convenient. By moving the alidade to the four (the same as the shadows length) and then reading the altitude scale shows the Sun is at an altitude of 56.3 degrees.

[ 5 ] The Shadow box can also be used with long shadows using a slightly modified method. If a human's shadow is 18 feet long, then what is the altitude of the Sun? Using the sixes side of the shadow box (using a human body as measurement) the longest shadow marked on a shadow box is six feet. This creates a problem any time the shadow is longer than the gnomon that casts it.  By performing a simple calculation, by figuring out how tall a gnomon would be if it cast a six-foot shadow in the same situation, in this situation the gnomon would be only two feet tall in order to cast a six-foot shadow. If the shadow is longer than the gnomon, first turn the astrolabe upside down then set the alidade at two, the height of the projected gnomon, then read off the altitude from the altitude scale. It should read that the Sun is at 19 degrees above the horizon.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Shadow Square" . Retrieved 2009-07-18 .

^ King, David A. (2002). "A Vetustissimus Arabic Text on the Quadrans Vetus".

Journal for the History of Astronomy .

33 (112): 237– 255.

Bibcode : 2002JHA....33..237K .

doi : 10.1177/002182860203300302 .

S2CID 125329755 .

^ "Shadow Square" . Museo Galilieo . Retrieved March 12, 2014 .

^ Evans, James (1998).

The history and Practice of Ancient Astronomy . Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 27.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 .

^ Evans, James (1998).

The history and Practice of Ancient Astronomy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 149.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 .

^ Evans, James (1998).

The history and Practice of Ancient Astronomy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 149.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 .

v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shadow_square&oldid=1277247922 " Categories : Astronomical instruments History of astronomy Historical scientific instruments Mathematical tools Theory of computation Analog computers This page was last edited on 23 February 2025, at 15:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shadow square 2 languages Add topic

