Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses 2 Scientific hypothesis 3 Working hypothesis 4 Hypotheses, concepts and measurement Toggle Hypotheses, concepts and measurement subsection 4.1 Statistical hypothesis testing 5 Honours 6 List 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Hypothesis 96 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Corsu Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Scientific hypothesis ) Proposed explanation for an observation, phenomenon, or scientific problem For other uses, see Hypothesis (disambiguation) and Hypothetical (disambiguation) .

The hypothesis of Andreas Cellarius , showing the planetary motions in eccentric and epicyclical orbits A hypothesis ( pl.

: hypotheses ) is a proposed explanation for a phenomenon . A scientific hypothesis must be based on observations and make a testable and reproducible prediction about reality , in a process beginning with an educated guess or thought. 
If a hypothesis is repeatedly independently demonstrated by experiment to be true, it becomes a scientific theory .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In colloquial usage, the words "hypothesis" and "theory" are often used interchangeably, but this is incorrect in the context of science.

A working hypothesis is a provisionally-accepted hypothesis used for the purpose of pursuing further progress in research . Working hypotheses are frequently discarded, and often proposed with knowledge (and warning ) that they are incomplete and thus false, with the intent of moving research in at least somewhat the right direction, especially when scientists are stuck on an issue and brainstorming ideas.

In formal logic , a hypothesis is the antecedent in a proposition . For example, in the proposition "If P , then Q ", statement P denotes the hypothesis (or antecedent) of the consequent Q . Hypothesis P is the assumption in a (possibly counterfactual ) " what if " question. The adjective "hypothetical" (having the nature of a hypothesis or being assumed to exist as an immediate consequence of a hypothesis), can refer to any of the above meanings of the term "hypothesis".

Uses In its ancient usage, hypothesis referred to a summary of the plot of a classical drama . The English word hypothesis comes from the ancient Greek word ὑπόθεσις ( hypothesis ), whose literal or etymological sense is "putting or placing under" and hence in extended use has many other meanings including "supposition".

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] In Plato 's Meno (86e–87b), Socrates dissects virtue with a method which he says is used by mathematicians, [ 6 ] that of "investigating from a hypothesis".

[ 7 ] In this sense, 'hypothesis' refers to a clever idea or a short cut, or a convenient mathematical approach that simplifies cumbersome calculations .

[ 8 ] Cardinal Robert Bellarmine gave a famous example of this usage in the warning issued to Galileo in the early 17th century: that he must not treat the motion of the Earth as a reality, but merely as a hypothesis.

[ 9 ] In common usage in the 21st century, a hypothesis refers to a provisional idea whose merit requires evaluation. For proper evaluation, the framer of a hypothesis needs to define specifics in operational terms. A hypothesis requires more work by the researcher in order to either confirm or disprove it. In due course, a confirmed hypothesis may become part of a theory or occasionally may grow to become a theory itself. Normally, scientific hypotheses have the form of a mathematical model .

[ 10 ] Sometimes, but not always, one can also formulate them as existential statements , stating that some particular instance of the phenomenon under examination has some characteristic and causal explanations, which have the general form of universal statements , stating that every instance of the phenomenon has a particular characteristic.

[ clarification needed ] In entrepreneurial setting, a hypothesis is used to formulate provisional ideas about the attributes of products or business models. The formulated hypothesis is then evaluated, where the hypothesis is proven to be either "true" or "false" through a verifiability - or falsifiability -oriented experiment .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Any useful hypothesis will enable predictions by reasoning (including deductive reasoning ). It might predict the outcome of an experiment in a laboratory setting or the observation of a phenomenon in nature . The prediction may also invoke statistics and only talk about probabilities.

Karl Popper , following others, has argued that a hypothesis must be falsifiable , and that one cannot regard a proposition or theory as scientific if it does not admit the possibility of being shown to be false. Other philosophers of science have rejected the criterion of falsifiability or supplemented it with other criteria, such as verifiability (e.g., verificationism ) or coherence (e.g., confirmation holism ). The scientific method involves experimentation to test the ability of some hypothesis to adequately answer the question under investigation. In contrast, unfettered observation is not as likely to raise unexplained issues or open questions in science, as would the formulation of a crucial experiment to test the hypothesis. A thought experiment might also be used to test the hypothesis.

In framing a hypothesis, the investigator must not currently know the outcome of a test or that it remains reasonably under continuing investigation. Only in such cases does the experiment, test or study potentially increase the probability of showing the truth of a hypothesis.

[ 13 ] : pp17, 49–50 If the researcher already knows the outcome, it counts as a "consequence" — and the researcher should have already considered this while formulating the hypothesis. If one cannot assess the predictions by observation or by experience , the hypothesis needs to be tested by others providing observations. For example, a new technology or theory might make the necessary experiments feasible.

Scientific hypothesis A trial solution to a problem is commonly referred to as a hypothesis—or, often, as an " educated guess " [ 14 ] [ 2 ] —because it provides a suggested outcome based on the evidence. However, some scientists reject the term "educated guess" as incorrect. Experimenters may test and reject several hypotheses before solving the problem.

According to Schick and Vaughn, [ 15 ] researchers weighing up alternative hypotheses may take into consideration: Testability (compare falsifiability as discussed above) Parsimony (as in the application of " Occam's razor ", discouraging the postulation of excessive numbers of entities ) Scope – the apparent applicability of the hypothesis to multiple known phenomena Fruitfulness – the prospect that the hypothesis may explain further phenomena in the future Conservatism – the degree of "fit" with existing recognized knowledge-systems.

Working hypothesis Main article: Working hypothesis A working hypothesis is a hypothesis that is provisionally accepted as a basis for further research [ 16 ] in the hope that a tenable theory will be produced, even if the hypothesis ultimately fails.

[ 17 ] Like all hypotheses, a working hypothesis is constructed as a statement of expectations, which can be linked to the exploratory research purpose in empirical investigation. Working hypotheses are often used as a conceptual framework in qualitative research.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The provisional nature of working hypotheses makes them useful as an organizing device in applied research. Here they act like a useful guide to address problems that are still in a formative phase.

[ 20 ] In recent years, philosophers of science have tried to integrate the various approaches to evaluating hypotheses, and the scientific method in general, to form a more complete system that integrates the individual concerns of each approach. Notably, Imre Lakatos and Paul Feyerabend , Karl Popper's colleague and student, respectively, have produced novel attempts at such a synthesis.

Hypotheses, concepts and measurement Concepts in Hempel's deductive-nomological model play a key role in the development and testing of hypotheses. Most formal hypotheses connect concepts by specifying the expected relationships between propositions . When a set of hypotheses are grouped together, they become a type of conceptual framework . When a conceptual framework is complex and incorporates causality or explanation, it is generally referred to as a theory. According to noted philosopher of science Carl Gustav Hempel , An adequate empirical interpretation turns a theoretical system into a testable theory: The hypothesis whose constituent terms have been interpreted become capable of test by reference to observable phenomena. Frequently the interpreted hypothesis will be derivative hypotheses of the theory; but their confirmation or disconfirmation by empirical data will then immediately strengthen or weaken also the primitive hypotheses from which they were derived.

[ 21 ] : 36 Hempel provides a useful metaphor that describes the relationship between a conceptual framework and the framework as it is observed and perhaps tested (interpreted framework).  "The whole system floats, as it were, above the plane of observation and is anchored to it by rules of interpretation. These might be viewed as strings which are not part of the network but link certain points of the latter with specific places in the plane of observation. By virtue of those interpretative connections, the network can function as a scientific theory." [ 21 ] : 36 Hypotheses with concepts anchored in the plane of observation are ready to be tested. In "actual scientific practice the process of framing a theoretical structure and of interpreting it are not always sharply separated, since the intended interpretation usually guides the construction of the theoretician".

[ 21 ] : 33 It is, however, "possible and indeed desirable, for the purposes of logical clarification, to separate the two steps conceptually".

[ 21 ] : 33 Statistical hypothesis testing Main article: Statistical hypothesis testing When a possible correlation or similar relation between phenomena is investigated, such as whether a proposed remedy is effective in treating a disease, the hypothesis that a relation exists cannot be examined the same way one might examine a proposed new law of nature. In such an investigation, if the tested remedy shows no effect in a few cases, these do not necessarily falsify the hypothesis. Instead, statistical tests are used to determine how likely it is that the overall effect would be observed if the hypothesized relation does not exist. If that likelihood is sufficiently small (e.g., less than 1%), the existence of a relation may be assumed. Otherwise, any observed effect may be due to pure chance.

In statistical hypothesis testing, two hypotheses are compared. These are called the null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis . The null hypothesis is the hypothesis that states that there is no relation between the phenomena whose relation is under investigation, or at least not of the form given by the alternative hypothesis. The alternative hypothesis, as the name suggests, is the alternative to the null hypothesis: it states that there is some kind of relation. The alternative hypothesis may take several forms, depending on the nature of the hypothesized relation; in particular, it can be two-sided (for example: there is some effect, in a yet unknown direction) or one-sided (the direction of the hypothesized relation, positive or negative, is fixed in advance).

[ 22 ] Conventional significance levels for testing hypotheses (acceptable probabilities of wrongly rejecting a true null hypothesis) are .10, .05, and .01. The significance level for deciding whether the null hypothesis is rejected and the alternative hypothesis is accepted must be determined in advance, before the observations are collected or inspected. If these criteria are determined later, when the data to be tested are already known, the test is invalid.

[ 23 ] The above procedure is actually dependent on the number of the participants (units or sample size ) that are included in the study. For instance, to avoid having the sample size be too small to reject a null hypothesis, it is recommended that one specify a sufficient sample size from the beginning. It is advisable to define a small, medium and large effect size for each of a number of important statistical tests which are used to test the hypotheses.

[ 24 ] Honours Mount Hypothesis in Antarctica is named in appreciation of the role of hypotheses in scientific research.

List Main category: Hypotheses Several hypotheses have been put forth, in different subject areas: Astronomical hypotheses Authorship debates Biological hypotheses Documentary hypothesis Hypothetical documents Hypothetical impact events Hypothetical laws Linguistic theories and hypotheses Meteorological hypotheses Hypothetical objects Origin hypotheses of ethnic groups Hypothetical processes Hypothetical spacecraft Statistical hypothesis testing Hypothetical technology See also Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Hypothesis ".

Axiom Bold hypothesis Case study Conjecture Explanandum Hypothesis theory – a research area in cognitive psychology Hypothetical question Logical positivism Operationalization Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica – for Newton's position on hypotheses Reductionism Research design Sociology of scientific knowledge Theorem#Hypothesis Thesis statement References ^ a b Hilborn, Ray; Mangel, Marc (1997).

The ecological detective: confronting models with data . Princeton University Press. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-691-03497-3 . Retrieved 22 August 2011 .

^ a b "In general we look for a new law by the following process. First we guess it. ...", — Richard Feynman (1965) The Character of Physical Law p.156 ^ Supposition is itself a Latinate analogue of hypothesis as both are compound words constructed from words meaning respectively "under, below" and "place, placing, putting" in either language, Latin or Greek.

^ Harper, Douglas.

"hypothesis" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ ὑπόθεσις .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ Wilbur R. Knorr , "Construction as existence proof in ancient geometry", p. 125, as selected by Jean Christianidis (ed.), Classics in the history of Greek mathematics , Kluwer.

^ Gregory Vlastos , Myles Burnyeat (1994) Socratic studies , Cambridge ISBN 0-521-44735-6 , p. 1 ^ "Neutral hypotheses, those of which the subject matter can never be directly proved or disproved, are very numerous in all sciences." — Morris Cohen and Ernest Nagel (1934), An Introduction to Logic and Scientific Method , p. 375. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company.

^ "Bellarmine (Ital.

Bellarmino ), Roberto Francesco Romolo", Encyclopædia Britannica , Eleventh Edition: "Bellarmine did not proscribe the Copernican system ... all he claimed was that it should be presented as a hypothesis until it should receive scientific demonstration." This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Hypothesis ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 208.

^ Crease, Robert P.  (2008) The Great Equations ISBN 978-0-393-06204-5 , p.112 lists the conservation of energy as an example of accounting a constant of motion . Hypothesized by Sadi Carnot , truth demonstrated by James Prescott Joule , proven by Emmy Noether .

^ Blank, Steve (May 2013).

"Harvard Business Review (2013) "Why Lean Startup Changes Everything" " .

Harvard Business Review .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-28 . Retrieved 2015-07-16 .

^ "Lean Startup Circle "What is Lean Startup?" " .

Archived from the original on 2015-07-16 . Retrieved 2015-07-16 .

^ Popper 1959 ^ "When it is not clear under which law of nature an effect or class of effect belongs, we try to fill this gap by means of a guess. Such guesses have been given the name conjectures or hypotheses .", Hans Christian Ørsted (1811) "First Introduction to General Physics" ¶18.

Selected Scientific Works of Hans Christian Ørsted , ISBN 0-691-04334-5 p.297 ^ Schick, Theodore ; Vaughn, Lewis (2002).

How to think about weird things: critical thinking for a New Age . Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

ISBN 0-7674-2048-9 .

^ Oxford Dictionary of Sports Science & Medicine .

Eprint Archived 2011-11-27 at the Wayback Machine via Answers.com.

^ See in "hypothesis", Century Dictionary Supplement , v. 1, 1909, New York: The Century Company . Reprinted, v. 11, p. 616 (via Internet Archive ) of the Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia , 1911.

hypothesis [...]— Working hypothesis , a hypothesis suggested or supported in some measure by features of observed facts, from which consequences may be deduced which can be tested by experiment and special observations, and which it is proposed to subject to an extended course of such investigation, with the hope that, even should the hypothesis thus be overthrown, such research may lead to a tenable theory.

^ Patricia M. Shields , Hassan Tajalli (2006).

"Intermediate Theory: The Missing Link in Successful Student Scholarship" .

Journal of Public Affairs Education .

12 (3): 313– 334.

doi : 10.1080/15236803.2006.12001438 .

S2CID 141201197 .

^ Patricia M. Shields (1998). "Pragmatism As a Philosophy of Science: A Tool For Public Administration". In Jay D. White (ed.).

Research in Public Administration . Vol. 4. Emerald Group Publishing Limited. pp. 195–225 [211].

ISBN 1-55938-888-9 . Archived from the original on 2012-03-20 . Retrieved 2011-07-07 .

^ Patricia M. Shields and Nandhini Rangarajan. 2013.

A Playbook for Research Methods: Integrating Conceptual Frameworks and Project Management [ permanent dead link ] . Stillwater, OK: New Forums Press. pp. 109–157 ^ a b c d Hempel, C. G. (1952).

Fundamentals of Concept Formation in Empirical Science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

^ Altman. DG., Practical Statistics for Medical Research , CRC Press, 1990, Section 8.5 , ^ Mellenbergh, G.J.(2008). Chapter 8: Research designs: Testing of research hypotheses. In H.J. Adèr & G.J. Mellenbergh (eds.) (with contributions by D.J. Hand), Advising on Research Methods: A consultant's companion (pp. 183–209). Huizen, The Netherlands: Johannes van Kessel Publishing ^ Altman. DG., Practical Statistics for Medical Research , CRC Press, 1990, Section 15.3 , Bibliography Popper, Karl R.

(1959), " The Logic of Scientific Discovery ", Physics Today , 12 (11): 53, Bibcode : 1959PhT....12k..53P , doi : 10.1063/1.3060577 1934, 1959.

External links The dictionary definition of hypothesis at Wiktionary Learning materials related to Hypothesis at Wikiversity Media related to Hypotheses at Wikimedia Commons "How science works" , Understanding Science by the University of California Museum of Paleontology.

Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐5mqq7
Cached time: 20250814215620
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.528 seconds
Real time usage: 0.648 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3592/1000000
Revision size: 21706/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 46455/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4304/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61512/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.343/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15421047/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  588.594      1 -total
 33.37%  196.396      1 Template:Reflist
 14.04%   82.625      2 Template:Lang
 13.45%   79.194      4 Template:Cite_book
 12.74%   75.002      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.72%   39.556      1 Template:Short_description
  6.16%   36.253      1 Template:Clarify
  5.88%   34.605      1 Template:Pp-semi-indef
  5.67%   33.361      1 Template:Fix-span
  5.05%   29.699      5 Template:Rp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21073209:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215620 and revision id 1299499129. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypothesis&oldid=1299499129#Scientific_hypothesis " Categories : Hypotheses Philosophy of science Scientific method Guessing Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles containing Niwer Mil-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 19:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypothesis 96 languages Add topic

