Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History 3 Paganism and Christianity in the Renaissance Toggle Paganism and Christianity in the Renaissance subsection 3.1 Description 3.2 Epicureanism 3.3 Neo-Platonism 4 Evolution and reception Toggle Evolution and reception subsection 4.1 Individual freedom 4.2 Sixteenth century and beyond 5 Historiography Toggle Historiography subsection 5.1 Baron thesis 5.2 Garin and Kristeller 5.3 I. R. Grigulevich 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Renaissance humanism 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Кыргызча Lingua Franca Nova Македонски Nederlands Norsk bokmål Patois Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tagalog ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Renaissance Humanism ) Revival in the study of Classical antiquity This article is about the study of the humanities during the Renaissance and is not to be confused with the broader human-centered philosophy, Humanism or the specifically religious approach, Christian humanism .

Leonardo da Vinci 's Vitruvian Man ( c.

1490 ) shows the correlations of ideal human body proportions with geometry described by the ancient Roman architect Vitruvius in his De Architectura .

"In his explicit turn back to an ancient model in search of knowledge and wisdom, Leonardo follows early humanist practice. What he finds in Vitruvius is a mathematical formula for the proportions of all parts of the human body, which results in its idealized representation as the true microcosmic measure of all things. [...]The perfection of this ideal human form corresponds visually to the early humanist belief in the unique central placement of human beings within the divine universal order and their consequent human grandeur and dignity, expressed in the philosopher Pico della Mirandola 's Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486), known as the manifesto of the Renaissance." — Anne Hudson Jones [ 1 ] Part of a series on Humanism History Renaissance humanism Northern Europe France Humanist Manifesto Forms Buddhist Christian Existential Integral Jewish Marxist Neo- Pan- Personism Rationalist Religious Secular Super- Theistic Trans- Transcendental Universal Organizations Humanist International Humanists International American Humanist Association Humanists UK Humanistischer Verband Deutschlands Humanist Society Scotland Norwegian Humanist Association Icelandic Ethical Humanist Association Humanists Sweden Humanist Society (Singapore) Center for Inquiry See also Antihumanism Posthumanism Confucianism Religion of Humanity Ethical movement Humanistic psychology Humanistic capitalism Humanistic economics Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Renaissance humanism is a worldview centered on the nature and importance of humanity that emerged from the study of Classical antiquity .

Renaissance humanists sought to create a citizenry able to speak and write with eloquence and clarity, and thus capable of engaging in the civic life of their communities and persuading others to virtuous and prudent actions. Humanism, while set up by a small elite who had access to books and education, was intended as a cultural movement to influence all of society. It was a program to revive the cultural heritage, literary legacy, and moral philosophy of the Greco-Roman civilization .

It first began in Italy and then spread across Western Europe in the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries. During the period, the term humanist ( Italian : umanista ) referred to teachers and students of the humanities , known as the studia humanitatis , which included the study of Latin and Ancient Greek literatures, grammar , rhetoric , history , poetry , and moral philosophy . It was not until the 19th century that this began to be called humanism instead of the original humanities , and later by the retronym Renaissance humanism to distinguish it from later humanist developments.

[ 2 ] During the Renaissance period most humanists were Christians , so their concern was to "purify and renew Christianity ", not to do away with it. Their vision was to return ad fontes ("to the pure sources") to the Gospels , the New Testament and the Church Fathers , bypassing the complexities of medieval Christian theology .

[ 3 ] Definition [ edit ] Medieval and Renaissance Italian writers portrayed by Giorgio Vasari in Six Tuscan Poets (1544). From left to right: Cristoforo Landino , Marsilio Ficino , Francesco Petrarca , Giovanni Boccaccio , Dante Alighieri , and Guido Cavalcanti .

[ 4 ] Very broadly, the project of the Italian Renaissance humanists of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries was the studia humanitatis : the study of the humanities , "a curriculum focusing on language skills." [ 5 ] This project sought to recover the culture of ancient Greece and Rome through its literature and philosophy and to use this classical revival to imbue the ruling classes with the moral attitudes of said ancients—a project James Hankins calls one of "virtue politics." [ 6 ] But what this studia humanitatis actually constituted is a subject of much debate. According to one scholar of the movement, Early Italian humanism, which in many respects continued the grammatical and rhetorical traditions of the Middle Ages, not merely provided the old Trivium with a new and more ambitious name ( Studia humanitatis ), but also increased its actual scope, content and significance in the curriculum of the schools and universities and in its own extensive literary production. The studia humanitatis excluded logic, but they added to the traditional grammar and rhetoric not only history, Greek , and moral philosophy, but also made poetry, once a sequel of grammar and rhetoric, the most important member of the whole group.

[ 7 ] However, in investigating this definition in his article "The changing concept of the studia humanitatis in the early Renaissance," Benjamin G. Kohl provides an account of the various meanings the term took on over the course of the period.

[ 8 ] Around the middle of the fourteenth century, when the term first came into use among Italian literati , it was used in reference to a very specific text: as praise of the cultural and moral attitudes expressed in Cicero 's Pro Archia poeta (62 BCE).

Tuscan humanist Coluccio Salutati popularized the term in the 1370s, using the phrase to refer to culture and learning as a guide to moral life, with a focus on rhetoric and oration. Over the years, he came to use it specifically in literary praise of his contemporaries, but later viewed the studia humanitatis as a means of editing and restoring ancient texts and even understanding scripture and other divine literature.

But it was not until the beginning of the quattrocento (15th century) that the studia humanitatis began to be associated with particular academic disciplines, when Pier Paolo Vergerio , in his De ingenuis moribus , stressed the importance of rhetoric, history, and moral philosophy as a means of moral improvement.

By the middle of the century, the term was adopted more formally, as it started to be used in Bologna and Padua in reference to university courses that taught these disciplines as well as Latin poetry, before then spreading northward throughout Italy.

But the first instance of it as encompassing grammar, rhetoric, history, poetry, and moral philosophy all together only came when Tommaso Parentucelli wrote to Cosimo de' Medici with recommendations regarding his library collection, saying, "de studiis autem humanitatis quantum ad grammaticam, rhetoricam, historicam et poeticam spectat ac moralem" ("concerning studies of the humanities, insofar as they [consist of] grammar, rhetoric, history and poetry, and also ethics").

[ 9 ] And so, the term studia humanitatis took on a variety of meanings over the centuries, being used differently by humanists across the various Italian city-states as one definition got adopted and spread across the country. Still, it has referred consistently to a mode of learning—formal or not—that results in one's moral edification.

[ 8 ] Under the influence and inspiration of the classics , Renaissance humanists developed a new rhetoric and new learning. Some scholars also argue that humanism articulated new moral and civic perspectives, and values offering guidance in life to all citizens . Renaissance humanism was a response to what came to be depicted by later whig historians as the "narrow pedantry" associated with medieval scholasticism .

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e Frontispiece depicting Dante Alighieri , Giovanni Boccaccio , and Francesco Petrarca with the coat of arms of the Medici – Toledo family on top In the last years of the 13th century and in the first decades of the 14th century , the cultural climate was changing in some European regions. The rediscovery, study, and renewed interest in authors who had been forgotten, and in the classical world that they represented, inspired a flourishing return to linguistic, stylistic and literary models of antiquity. There emerged a consciousness of the need for a cultural renewal, which sometimes also meant a detachment from contemporary culture. Manuscripts and inscriptions were in high demand and graphic models were also imitated. This "return to the ancients" was the main component of so-called "pre-humanism", which developed particularly in Tuscany , in the Veneto region, and at the papal court of Avignon , through the activity of figures such as Lovato Lovati and Albertino Mussato in Padua, Landolfo Colonna in Avignon, Ferreto de' Ferreti in Vicenza, Convenevole from Prato in Tuscany and then in Avignon , and many others.

[ 11 ] By the 14th century some of the first humanists were great collectors of antique manuscripts , including Petrarch , Giovanni Boccaccio , Coluccio Salutati , and Poggio Bracciolini . Of the four, Petrarch was dubbed the "Father of Humanism," as he was the one who first encouraged the study of pagan civilizations and the teaching of classical virtues as a means of preserving Christianity.

[ 6 ] He also had a library , of which many manuscripts did not survive.

[ 12 ] [ citation needed ] Many worked for the Catholic Church and were in holy orders , like Petrarch, while others were lawyers and chancellors of Italian cities, and thus had access to book copying workshops, such as Petrarch's disciple Salutati , the Chancellor of Florence .

In Italy, the humanist educational program won rapid acceptance and, by the mid-15th century, many of the upper classes had received humanist educations, possibly in addition to traditional scholastic ones. Some of the highest officials of the Catholic Church were humanists with the resources to amass important libraries. Such was Cardinal Basilios Bessarion , a convert to the Catholic Church from Greek Orthodoxy , who was considered for the papacy , and was one of the most learned scholars of his time. There were several 15th-century and early 16th-century humanist Popes [ 13 ] one of whom, Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini (Pope Pius II), was a prolific author and wrote a treatise on The Education of Boys .

[ 14 ] These subjects came to be known as the humanities, and the movement which they inspired is shown as humanism.

The migration waves of Byzantine Greek scholars and émigrés in the period following the Crusader sacking of Constantinople and the end of the Byzantine Empire in 1453 was a very welcome addition to the Latin texts scholars like Petrarch had found in monastic libraries [ 15 ] for the revival of Greek literature and science via their greater familiarity with ancient Greek works.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] They included Gemistus Pletho , George of Trebizond , Theodorus Gaza , and John Argyropoulos .

There were important centres of Renaissance humanism in Bologna , Ferrara , Florence , Genoa , Livorno , Mantua , Padua , Pisa , Naples , Rome , Siena , Venice , Vicenza , and Urbino .

Italian humanism spread to Spain , with Francisco de Vitoria becoming its first great exponent.

[ 18 ] He founded the School of Salamanca , of which Antonio de Nebrija became one of its main members. A circle of humanists also formed around King of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor Charles I and V , with names like Alfonso and Juan de Valdés , Juan Luis Vives and Luisa Sigea .

[ 19 ] Charles appointed another noted humanist, Mercurino di Gattinara , his chancellor.

[ 20 ] The Valdés brothers, Gattinara and Antonio de Guevara were proponents of working towards the restoration of a Christian , universal Roman Empire , an idea originally inspired by Dante Alighieri in his Monarchia .

[ 21 ] Spain's participation in the Italian Wars and the Ottoman-Habsburg conflicts also gave birth to a militant strain of humanism known as las armas y las letras , first codified in Charles' court by Baldassare Castiglione .

[ 22 ] Humanism also spread northward to France , Germany , the Low Countries , Poland-Lithuania, Hungary and England with the adoption of large-scale printing after 1500, and it became associated with the Reformation . In France, pre-eminent humanist Guillaume Budé (1467–1540) applied the philological methods of Italian humanism to the study of antique coinage and to legal history , composing a detailed commentary on Justinian's Code . Budé was a royal absolutist (and not a republican like the early Italian umanisti ) who was active in civic life, serving as a diplomat for Francis I and helping to found the Collège des Lecteurs Royaux (later the Collège de France ). Meanwhile, Marguerite de Navarre , the sister of Francis I, was a poet , novelist , and religious mystic [ 23 ] who gathered around her and protected a circle of vernacular poets and writers, including Clément Marot , Pierre de Ronsard , and François Rabelais .

Paganism and Christianity in the Renaissance [ edit ] Many humanists were churchmen, most notably Pope Pius II, Sixtus IV , and Leo X , [ 24 ] [ 25 ] and there was often patronage of humanists by senior church figures.

[ 26 ] Much humanist effort went into improving the understanding and translations of Biblical and early Christian texts, both before and after the Reformation, which was greatly influenced by the work of non-Italian, Northern European figures such as Erasmus , Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples , William Grocyn , and Swedish Catholic Archbishop in exile Olaus Magnus .

Description [ edit ] The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy describes the rationalism of ancient writings as having tremendous impact on Renaissance scholars: Here, one felt no weight of the supernatural pressing on the human mind, demanding homage and allegiance. Humanity—with all its distinct capabilities, talents, worries, problems, possibilities—was the center of interest. It has been said that medieval thinkers philosophised on their knees, but, bolstered by the new studies, they dared to stand up and to rise to full stature.

[ 27 ] In 1417, for example, Poggio Bracciolini discovered the manuscript of Lucretius , De rerum natura , which had been lost for centuries and which contained an explanation of Epicurean doctrine , though at the time this was not commented on much by Renaissance scholars, who confined themselves to remarks about Lucretius's grammar and syntax .

Only in 1564 did French commentator Denys Lambin (1519–72) announce in the preface to the work that "he regarded Lucretius's Epicurean ideas as 'fanciful, absurd, and opposed to Christianity'." Lambin's preface remained standard until the nineteenth century.

[ 28 ] Epicurus's unacceptable doctrine that pleasure was the highest good "ensured the unpopularity of his philosophy".

[ 29 ] Lorenzo Valla , however, puts a defense of epicureanism in the mouth of one of the interlocutors of one of his dialogues.

Epicureanism [ edit ] Charles Trinkhaus regards Valla's "epicureanism" as a ploy, not seriously meant by Valla, but designed to refute Stoicism, which he regarded together with epicureanism as equally inferior to Christianity.

[ 30 ] Valla's defense, or adaptation, of Epicureanism was later taken up in The Epicurean by Erasmus , the "Prince of humanists:" If people who live agreeably are Epicureans , none are more truly Epicurean than the righteous and godly.  And if it is names that bother us, no one better deserves the name of Epicurean than the revered founder and head of the Christian philosophy Christ , for in Greek epikouros means "helper".  He alone, when the law of Nature was all but blotted out by sins, when the law of Moses incited to lists rather than cured them, when Satan ruled in the world unchallenged, brought timely aid to perishing humanity.  Completely mistaken, therefore, are those who talk in their foolish fashion about Christ's having been sad and gloomy in character and calling upon us to follow a dismal mode of life.  On the contrary, he alone shows the most enjoyable life of all and the one most full of true pleasure.

[ 31 ] This passage exemplifies the way in which the humanists saw pagan classical works , such as the philosophy of Epicurus , as being in harmony with their interpretation of Christianity .

Neo-Platonism [ edit ] Renaissance Neo-Platonists such as Marsilio Ficino (whose translations of Plato's works into Latin were still used into the 19th century) attempted to reconcile Platonism with Christianity, according to the suggestions of early Church Fathers Lactantius and Saint Augustine . In this spirit, Pico della Mirandola attempted to construct a syncretism of religions and philosophies with Christianity, but his work did not win favor with the church authorities, who rejected it because of his views on magic.

[ 32 ] Evolution and reception [ edit ] The historian of the Renaissance Sir John Hale cautions against too direct a linkage between Renaissance humanism and modern uses of the term humanism: "Renaissance humanism must be kept free from any hint of either 'humanitarianism' or 'humanism' in its modern sense of rational, non-religious approach to life ... the word 'humanism' will mislead ... if it is seen in opposition to a Christianity its students in the main wished to supplement, not contradict, through their patient excavation of the sources of ancient God-inspired wisdom." [ 33 ] Individual freedom [ edit ] Historian Steven Kreis expresses a widespread view (derived from the 19th-century Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt ), when he writes that: The period from the fourteenth century to the seventeenth worked in favor of the general emancipation of the individual. The city-states of northern Italy had come into contact with the diverse customs of the East, and gradually permitted expression in matters of taste and dress. The writings of Dante, and particularly the doctrines of Petrarch and humanists like Machiavelli, emphasized the virtues of intellectual freedom and individual expression. In the essays of Montaigne the individualistic view of life received perhaps the most persuasive and eloquent statement in the history of literature and philosophy.

[ 34 ] Two noteworthy trends in some Renaissance humanists were Renaissance Neo-Platonism and Hermeticism , which through the works of figures like Nicholas of Kues , Giordano Bruno , Cornelius Agrippa , Campanella and Giovanni Pico della Mirandola sometimes came close to constituting a new religion itself.

[ according to whom?

] Of these two, Hermeticism has had great continuing influence in Western thought, while the former mostly dissipated as an intellectual trend, leading to movements in Western esotericism such as Theosophy and New Age thinking.

[ 35 ] The "Yates thesis" of Frances Yates holds that before falling out of favour, esoteric Renaissance thought introduced several concepts that were useful for the development of scientific method, though this remains a matter of controversy.

Sixteenth century and beyond [ edit ] Reformation -era literature Overview 16th-century Renaissance humanism Reformation-era propaganda 16th century in poetry 16th century in literature British Elizabethan Welsh Scottish Anglo-Irish Metaphysical poets English Renaissance theatre Pastoral Morality History Tragedy Revenge Continental Czech German Swiss Slovak Sorbian Romanian Bohorič alphabet Dutch Renaissance and Golden Age Folklore of the Low Countries Scandinavian Danish Faroese Norwegian Swedish Finnish Icelandic v t e Though humanists continued to use their scholarship in the service of the church into the middle of the sixteenth century and beyond, the sharply confrontational religious atmosphere following the Reformation resulted in the Counter-Reformation that sought to silence challenges to Catholic theology , [ 36 ] with similar efforts among the Protestant denominations . Some humanists, even moderate Catholics such as Erasmus , risked being declared heretics for their perceived criticism of the institutional church.

[ 37 ] A number of humanists joined the Reformation movement and took over leadership functions, for example, Philipp Melanchthon , Ulrich Zwingli , Henry VIII , John Calvin , and William Tyndale . Others, like Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples , were favorable to it although they remained Catholic.

With the Counter-Reformation initiated by the Council of Trent (1545–1563), positions hardened and a strict Catholic orthodoxy based on scholastic philosophy was imposed. However the education systems developed by Jesuits ran on humanist lines.

Historiography [ edit ] Baron thesis [ edit ] Hans Baron (1900–1988) was the inventor of the now ubiquitous term "civic humanism." First coined in the 1920s and based largely on his studies of Leonardo Bruni, Baron's "thesis" proposed the existence of a central strain of humanism, particularly in Florence and Venice, dedicated to republicanism.

As argued in his chef-d'œuvre , The Crisis of the Early Italian Renaissance: Civic Humanism and Republican Liberty in an Age of Classicism and Tyranny , the German historian thought that civic humanism originated in around 1402, after the great struggles between Florence and Visconti-led Milan in the 1390s. He considered Petrarch's humanism to be a rhetorical, superficial project, and viewed this new strand to be one that abandoned the feudal and supposedly "otherworldly" (i.e., divine) ideology of the Middle Ages in favour of putting the republican state and its freedom at the forefront of the "civic humanist" project.

[ 38 ] Already controversial at the time of The Crisis ' publication, the "Baron Thesis" has been met with even more criticism over the years.

Even in the 1960s, historians Philip Jones and Peter Herde [ 39 ] found Baron's praise of "republican" humanists naive, arguing that republics were far less liberty-driven than Baron had believed, and were practically as undemocratic as monarchies. James Hankins adds that the disparity in political values between the humanists employed by oligarchies and those employed by princes was not particularly notable, as all of Baron's civic ideals were exemplified by humanists serving various types of government. In so arguing, he asserts that a "political reform program is central to the humanist movement founded by Petrarch. But it is not a 'republican' project in Baron's sense of republic; it is not an ideological product associated with a particular regime type." [ 6 ] Garin and Kristeller [ edit ] Two renowned Renaissance scholars, Eugenio Garin and Paul Oskar Kristeller collaborated with one another throughout their careers. But while the two historians were on good terms, they fundamentally disagreed on the nature of Renaissance humanism.

Kristeller affirmed that Renaissance humanism used to be viewed just as a project of Classical revival, one that led to great increase in Classical scholarship. But he argued that this theory "fails to explain the ideal of eloquence persistently set forth in the writings of the humanists," asserting that "their classical learning was incidental to" their being "professional rhetoricians." [ 40 ] Similarly, he considered their influence on philosophy and particular figures' philosophical output to be incidental to their humanism, viewing grammar, rhetoric, poetry, history, and ethics to be the humanists' main concerns.

Garin, on the other hand, viewed philosophy itself as being ever-evolving, each form of philosophy being inextricable from the practices of the thinkers of its period. He thus considered the Italian humanists' break from Scholasticism and newfound freedom to be perfectly in line with this broader sense of philosophy.

[ 41 ] During the period in which they argued over these differing views, there was a broader cultural conversation happening regarding Humanism: one revolving around Jean-Paul Sartre and Martin Heidegger .

In 1946, Sartre published a work called "L'existentialisme est un humanisme ," in which he outlined his conception of existentialism as revolving around the belief that " existence comes before essence "; that man "first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world – and defines himself afterwards," making himself and giving himself purpose.

[ 42 ] Heidegger, in a response to this work of Sartre's, declared: "For this is humanism: meditating and caring, that human beings be human and not inhumane, "inhuman", that is, outside their essence." [ 43 ] He also discussed a decline in the concept of humanism, pronouncing that it had been dominated by metaphysics and essentially discounting it as philosophy. He also explicitly criticized Italian Renaissance humanism in the letter.

[ 44 ] While this discourse was taking place outside the realm of Renaissance Studies (for more on the evolution of the term "humanism," see Humanism ), this background debate was not irrelevant to Kristeller and Garin's ongoing disagreement. Kristeller—who had at one point studied under Heidegger [ 45 ] —also discounted (Renaissance) humanism as philosophy, and Garin's Der italienische Humanismus was published alongside Heidegger's response to Sartre—a move that Rubini describes as an attempt "to stage a pre-emptive confrontation between historical humanism and philosophical neo-humanisms." [ 46 ] Garin also conceived of the Renaissance humanists as occupying the same kind of "characteristic angst the existentialists attributed to men who had suddenly become conscious of their radical freedom," further weaving philosophy with Renaissance humanism.

[ 41 ] Hankins summarizes the Kristeller v. Garin debate as: Kristeller conceives of professional philosophers as being very formal and method-focused.

[ 41 ] Renaissance humanists, on the other hand, he viewed to be professional rhetoricians who, using their classically-inspired paideia or institutio , did improve fields such as philosophy, but without the practice of philosophy being their main goal or function.

[ 40 ] Garin, instead, wanted his "humanist-philosophers to be organic intellectuals," not constituting a rigid school of thought, but having a shared outlook on life and education that broke with the medieval traditions that came before them.

[ 41 ] I. R. Grigulevich [ edit ] According to Russian historian and Stalinist assassin Iosif Grigulevich two characteristic traits of late Renaissance humanism were "its revolt against abstract, Aristotelian modes of thought and its concern with the problems of war, poverty, and social injustice." [ 47 ] See also [ edit ] Christian humanism Greek scholars in the Renaissance Legal humanists List of Renaissance humanists New Learning Renaissance Latin Renaissance humanism in Northern Europe Notes [ edit ] ^ Hudson Jones, Anne.

"Neh Institute" .

uva.theopenscholar.com .

^ The term la rinascita (rebirth) first appeared, however, in its broad sense in Giorgio Vasari 's Vite de' più eccellenti architetti, pittori, et scultori Italiani (The Lives of the Artists, 1550, revised 1568) Panofsky, Erwin .

Renaissance and Renascences in Western Art , New York: Harper and Row, 1960.
"The term umanista was used in fifteenth-century Italian academic slang to describe a teacher or student of classical literature and the arts associated with it, including that of rhetoric. The English equivalent 'humanist' makes its appearance in the late sixteenth century with a similar meaning. Only in the nineteenth century, however, and probably for the first time in Germany in 1809, is the attribute transformed into a substantive: humanism , standing for devotion to the literature of ancient Greece and Rome, and the humane values that may be derived from them" Nicholas Mann "The Origins of Humanism", Cambridge Companion to Humanism , Jill Kraye, editor [Cambridge University Press, 1996], p. 1–2). The term " Middle Ages " for the preceding period separating classical antiquity from its "rebirth" first appears in Latin in 1469 as media tempestas .  For humanities as the original term for Renaissance humanism, see James Fieser, Samuel Enoch Stumpf "Philosophy during the Renaissance", Philosophy: A Historical Survey with Essential Readings (9th ed.) [McGraw-Hill Education, 2014] ^ McGrath, Alister (2011).

Christian Theology: An Introduction (5th ed.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. p. 30.

ISBN 978-1-4443-3514-9 .

^ "Six Tuscan Poets, Giorgio Vasari" .

collections.artsmia.org .

Minneapolis, Minnesota : Minneapolis Institute of Art . 2023.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2023 . Retrieved 28 August 2023 .

^ Rummel, Erika (1992).

"Et cum theologo bella poeta gerit: The Conflict between Humanists and Scholastics Revisited" .

The Sixteenth Century Journal .

23 (4): 713– 726.

doi : 10.2307/2541729 .

ISSN 0361-0160 .

JSTOR 2541729 .

^ a b c Hankins, James (2019).

Virtue Politics: Soulcraft and Statecraft in Renaissance Italy.

The Belknap Press of Harvard University.

^ Paul Oskar Kristeller, Renaissance Thought II: Papers on Humanism and the Arts (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1965), p. 178. See also Kristeller's Renaissance Thought I , "Humanism and Scholasticism In the Italian Renaissance", Byzantion 17 (1944–45), pp. 346–74. Reprinted in Renaissance Thought (New York: Harper Torchbooks), 1961.

^ a b Kohl, Benjamin G. (1992). "The Changing Concept of the "Studia Humanitatis" in the Early Renaissance".

Renaissance Studies .

6 (2): 185– 209.

doi : 10.1111/1477-4658.t01-1-00116 .

ISSN 0269-1213 .

JSTOR 24412493 .

^ Sforza, Giovanni (1884). "La patria, la famiglia e la giovinezza di papa Niccolò V".

Atti della Reale Accademia Lucchese di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti .

XXIII : 380.

^ Craig W. Kallendorf, introduction to Humanist Educational Treatises , edited and translated by Craig W. Kallendorf (Cambridge, Massachusetts and London England: The I Tatti Renaissance Library, 2002) p. vii.

^ "Return to the style of the ancients and the anti-gothic reaction" .

www.vatlib.it . Latin Paleography.

^ Fredi Chiappelli (January 1981).

"Petrarch and Innovation: A Note on a Manuscript" .

MLN .

96 (1): 138– 143.

doi : 10.2307/2906433 .

JSTOR 2906433 .

Retrieved 2023-02-14 .

^ They include Innocent VII , Nicholas V , Pius II , Sixtus IV , Alexander VI , Julius II and Leo X . Innocent VII, patron of Leonardo Bruni, is considered the first humanist Pope. See James Hankins, Plato in the Italian Renaissance (New York: Columbia Studies in the Classical Tradition, 1990), p. 49 ; for the others, see their respective entries in Sir John Hale's Concise Encyclopaedia of the Italian Renaissance (Oxford University Press, 1981).

^ See Humanist Educational Treatises , (2001) pp. 126–259. This volume (pp. 92–125) contains an essay by Leonardo Bruni , entitled "The Study of Literature", on the education of girls.

^ Cartwright, Mark.

"Renaissance Humanism" .

World History Encyclopedia . The Classical Ideal . Retrieved March 23, 2021 .

^ "Byzantines in Renaissance Italy" . Archived from the original on 2018-08-31 . Retrieved 2016-03-28 .

^ Greeks in Italy ^ Frayle Delgado (2004) , p. 28-29.

^ Jones, Richard O., El Renacimiento en España: ideas y actitudes , en Historia de la literatura española, vol. 2: Siglo de Oro: prosa y poesía., Barcelona, Ariel, 2000 (14ª ed. rev.), chap. 1, pgs. 17-54 ^ Callado Estela (2022) , p. 58-59.

^ Callado Estela (2022) , p. 97-99.

^ Fernández Hoyos, M. A. (1998).

Las armas y las letras en Felipe II . "Felipe II (1598-1998), Europa dividida, la monarquía católica de Felipe II", Vol. 4, ISBN 84-8230-025-3, págs. 117-132 ^ She was the author of Miroir de l'ame pecheresse ( The Mirror of a Sinful Soul ), published after her death, among other devotional poetry. See also "Marguerite de Navarre: Religious Reformist" in Jonathan A. Reid, King's sister--queen of dissent: Marguerite of Navarre (1492–1549) and her evangelical network [ dead link ] ( Studies in medieval and Reformation traditions, 1573–4188 ; v. 139). Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2009. (2 v.: (xxii, 795 p.) ISBN 978-90-04-17760-4 (v. 1), 9789004177611 (v. 2) ^ Löffler, Klemens (1910). "Humanism".

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. VII. New York: Robert Appleton Company. pp.

538– 542.

^ See note two, above.

^ Davies, 477 ^ "Humanism".

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy , Second Edition . Cambridge University Press. 1999.

p.397 quotation: The unashamedly humanistic flavor of classical writings had a tremendous impact on Renaissance scholar.

^ See Jill Kraye's essay, "Philologists and Philosophers" in the Cambridge Companion to Renaissance Humanism [1996], p. 153.) ^ (Kraye [1996] p. 154.) ^ See Trinkaus, In Our Image and Likeness Vol. 1 (University of Chicago Press, 1970), pp. 103–170 ^ John L. Lepage (5 December 2012).

The Revival of Antique Philosophy in the Renaissance . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 111.

ISBN 978-1-137-28181-4 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Daniel O'Callaghan (9 November 2012).

The Preservation of Jewish Religious Books in Sixteenth-Century Germany: Johannes Reuchlin's Augenspiegel . BRILL. pp. 43–.

ISBN 978-90-04-24185-5 .

^ Hale, 171.

See also Davies, 479–480 for similar caution.

^ Kreis, Steven (2008).

"Renaissance Humanism" . Retrieved 2009-03-03 .

^ Plumb, 95 ^ "Rome Reborn: The Vatican Library & Renaissance Culture: Humanism" . The Library of Congress. 2002-07-01 . Retrieved 2009-03-03 .

^ "Humanism" .

Encyclopedic Dictionary of Religion . Vol.

F– N. Corpus Publications. 1979. pp.

1733 .

ISBN 978-0-9602572-1-8 .

^ Hankins, James (1995).

"The "Baron Thesis" after Forty Years and Some Recent Studies of Leonardo Bruni" .

Journal of the History of Ideas .

56 (2): 309– 338.

doi : 10.2307/2709840 .

ISSN 0022-5037 .

JSTOR 2709840 .

^ See Philip Jones, "Communes and Despots: The City-State in Late-Medieval Italy," Transactions of the Royal Historical Society , 5th ser., 15 (1965), 71–96, and review of Baron's Crisis (2nd ed.), in History , 53 (1968), 410–13; Peter Herde, "Politik und Rhetorik in Florenz am Vorabend der Renaissance," Archiv far Kulturgeschichte , 50 (1965), 141–220; idem , "Politische Verhaltensweise der Florentiner Oligarchie,1382–1402," in Geschichte und Verfassungsgefüge: Frankfurter Festgabe für Walter Schlesinger (Wiesbaden, 1973).

^ a b Kristeller, Paul Oskar (1944).

"Humanism and Scholasticism in the Italian Renaissance" .

Byzantion .

17 : 346– 374.

ISSN 0378-2506 .

JSTOR 44168603 .

^ a b c d Hankins, James. 2011. "Garin and Paul Oskar Kristeller: Existentialism, Neo-Kantianism, and the Post-war Interpretation of Renaissance Humanism". In Eugenio Garin: Dal Rinascimento all'Illuminismo , ed. Michele Ciliberto, 481–505. Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura.

^ Sartre, Jean-Paul. "Existentialism Is a Humanism". In Existentialism from Dostoevsky to Sartre , tr. Walter Kaufmann, 287–311. New York: Meridian Books, 1956.

^ Heidegger, Martin. "Letter on 'Humanism ' ". In Pathmarks , ed. William McNeill, 239–276. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

^ Kakkori, Leena; Huttunen, Rauno (June 2012).

"The Sartre-Heidegger Controversy on Humanism and the Concept of Man in Education" .

Educational Philosophy and Theory .

44 (4): 351– 365.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-5812.2010.00680.x .

ISSN 0013-1857 .

S2CID 145476769 .

^ R. Popkin, The History of Scepticism: From Savonarola to Bayle rev. ed. (Oxford University Press, 2003), p. viii.

^ Rubini, Rocco (2011). "The Last Italian Philosopher: Eugenio Garin (with an Appendix of Documents)." Intellectual History Review .

21 (2): 209–230. DOI: 10.1080/17496977.2011.574348 ^ Keen, Benjamin (1977).

"The Legacy of Bartolomé de las Casas" (PDF) .

Ibero-Americana Pragensia .

11 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bolgar, R. R.

The Classical Heritage and Its Beneficiaries: from the Carolingian Age to the End of the Renaissance . Cambridge, 1954.

Callado Estela, Emilio (2022).

Tiempos de reforma: Pensamiento y religión en la época de Carlos V . ESIC.

ISBN 9788411228411 .

Cassirer, Ernst .

Individual and Cosmos in Renaissance Philosophy . Harper and Row, 1963.

Cassirer, Ernst (Editor), Paul Oskar Kristeller (Editor), John Herman Randall (Editor).

The Renaissance Philosophy of Man . University of Chicago Press, 1969.

Cassirer, Ernst.

Platonic Renaissance in England . Gordian, 1970.

Celenza, Christopher S.

The Lost Italian Renaissance: Humanism, Historians, and Latin's Legacy . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 2004 ISBN 978-0-8018-8384-2 Celenza, Christopher S.

Petrarch: Everywhere a Wanderer . London: Reaktion. 2017 Celenza, Christopher S.

The Intellectual World of the Italian Renaissance: Language, Philosophy, and the Search for Meaning . New York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2018 Erasmus, Desiderius . "The Epicurean". In Colloquies .

Frayle Delgado, Luis (2004).

Pensamiento humanista de Francisco de Vitoria . San Esteban.

ISBN 9788482601458 .

Garin, Eugenio .

Science and Civic Life in the Italian Renaissance . New York: Doubleday, 1969.

Garin, Eugenio.

Italian Humanism: Philosophy and Civic Life in the Renaissance.

Basil Blackwell, 1965.

Garin, Eugenio.

History of Italian Philosophy.

(2 vols.) Amsterdam/New York: Rodopi, 2008.

ISBN 978-90-420-2321-5 Grafton, Anthony .

Bring Out Your Dead: The Past as Revelation . Harvard University Press, 2004 ISBN 0-674-01597-5 Grafton, Anthony.

Worlds Made By Words: Scholarship and Community in the Modern West . Harvard University Press, 2009 ISBN 0-674-03257-8 Hale, John .

A Concise Encyclopaedia of the Italian Renaissance . Oxford University Press, 1981, ISBN 0-500-23333-0 .

Kallendorf, Craig W, editor.

Humanist Educational Treatises . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The I Tatti Renaissance Library, 2002.

Kraye, Jill (Editor).

The Cambridge Companion to Renaissance Humanism . Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Kristeller, Paul Oskar .

Renaissance Thought and Its Sources . Columbia University Press, 1979 ISBN 978-0-231-04513-1 Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni .

Oration on the Dignity of Man . In Cassirer, Kristeller, and Randall, eds.

Renaissance Philosophy of Man . University of Chicago Press, 1969.

Skinner, Quentin .

Renaissance Virtues: Visions of Politics: Volume II . Cambridge University Press, [2002] 2007.

Makdisi, George .

The Rise of Humanism in Classical Islam and the Christian West: With Special Reference to Scholasticism , 1990: Edinburgh University Press McManus, Stuart M. "Byzantines in the Florentine Polis: Ideology, Statecraft and Ritual during the Council of Florence".

Journal of the Oxford University History Society , 6 (Michaelmas 2008/Hilary 2009).

Melchert, Norman (2002).

The Great Conversation: A Historical Introduction to Philosophy . McGraw Hill.

ISBN 978-0-19-517510-3 .

Nauert, Charles Garfield.

Humanism and the Culture of Renaissance Europe (New Approaches to European History).

Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Plumb, J. H.

ed.: The Italian Renaissance 1961, American Heritage, New York, ISBN 0-618-12738-0 (page refs from 1978 UK Penguin edn).

Rossellini, Roberto .

The Age of the Medici : Part 1, Cosimo de' Medici ; Part 2, Alberti 1973.  (Film Series). Criterion Collection.

Symonds, John Addington .

The Renaissance in Italy . Seven Volumes. 1875–1886.

Trinkaus, Charles (1973). "Renaissance Idea of the Dignity of Man". In Wiener, Philip P (ed.).

Dictionary of the History of Ideas . Scribner.

ISBN 978-0-684-13293-8 . Retrieved 2009-12-02 .

Trinkaus, Charles.

The Scope of Renaissance Humanism . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1983.

Wind, Edgar .

Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance . New York: W.W. Norton, 1969.

Witt, Ronald. "In the footsteps of the ancients: the origins of humanism from Lovato to Bruni." Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2000 External links [ edit ] Humanism 1: An Outline by Albert Rabil, Jr.

Paganism in the Renaissance , BBC Radio 4 discussion with Tom Healy, Charles Hope & Evelyn Welch ( In Our Time , June 16, 2005) v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e European Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Decline of the Western Roman Empire Barbarian kingdoms Late antiquity Decline of Hellenistic religion Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Rise of Islam Papal States First Bulgarian Empire Frankish Empire Principality of Serbia Duchy of Croatia Kingdom of Croatia Anglo-Saxon England Viking Age Carolingian Empire Old Church Slavonic Rise of the Venetian Republic Civitas Schinesghe Kievan Rus' Growth of the Eastern Roman Empire Reconquista High Middle Ages Norman Conquest Holy Roman Empire Second Bulgarian Empire Georgian Empire Kingdom of Poland Croatia in personal union with Hungary Kingdom of Serbia Feudalism Rise of the Republic of Genoa Great Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Republic of Florence Scholasticism Capet–Plantagenet feud Monasticism Communalism Manorialism Medieval Warm Period Mongol invasion of Europe Kingdom of Portugal Late Middle Ages Hundred Years' War Wars of the Roses Hussite Wars Burgundy Milan France England Serbian Empire Castile Western Schism Fall of Constantinople Rise of the Ottoman Empire Swiss mercenaries Chivalry Renaissance Humanism Universities Crisis of the late Middle Ages Great Famine Little Ice Age Culture Agriculture Architecture Art Church and State Cuisine Crusading movement Dance Demography Domes Hastilude Household Hunting In popular culture Itinerant court Literature Medicine Minstrel Music Instruments Philosophy Poetry Science Slavery Technology Theatre Warfare Women Related Medieval anthropology Dark Ages Disability in the Middle Ages Basic topics list Land terms Medievalism Medieval reenactment Medieval studies Misconceptions Neo-medievalism Peasant Wars Post-classical history Timeline Historiography in the Middle Ages Medieval archaeology Portal Category WikiProject Authority control databases : National France BnF data Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gs55l
Cached time: 20250816101343
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.742 seconds
Real time usage: 0.928 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4810/1000000
Revision size: 45747/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 252022/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9003/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 225231/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.406/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17055716/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  712.319      1 -total
 28.95%  206.195      1 Template:Reflist
 14.00%   99.707      7 Template:Cite_web
 11.29%   80.441      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.02%   78.474      1 Template:Langx
 10.81%   77.002      1 Template:Humanism
  8.94%   63.648      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  8.69%   61.915      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.73%   55.089      1 Template:Short_description
  5.39%   38.363      7 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:290237:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816101343 and revision id 1305351021. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Renaissance_humanism&oldid=1305351021 " Categories : Medieval philosophy Philosophical schools and traditions Renaissance Renaissance humanism Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2018 Articles with dead external links from April 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Articles containing French-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2024 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 15:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Renaissance humanism 40 languages Add topic

