Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Stages Toggle Stages subsection 1.1 Bare rocks 1.2 Foliose and fruticose lichen stage 1.3 Moss stage 1.4 Herb stage 1.5 Shrub stage 1.6 Tree stage 1.7 Climax stage 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Xerosere 1 language Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Plant succession limited by water availability This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Xerosere" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Xerosere is a plant succession that is limited by water availability. It includes the different stages in a xerarch succession . Xerarch succession of ecological communities originated in extremely dry situation such as sand deserts , sand dunes, salt deserts, rock deserts etc. A xerosere may include lithoseres (on rock) and psammoseres (on sand).

[ 1 ] Stages [ edit ] Bare rocks [ edit ] Lava enters the Pacific at the Big Island of Hawaii Bare rocks are produced when glaciers recede or volcanoes erupt. The erosion of these rocks is caused by rainwater and wind, which are loaded with soil particles. The rainwater combines with atmospheric carbon dioxide that corrodes the surface of the rocks and produces crevices. Water enters these crevices, freezes, and expands to separate boulders. These boulders move down by gravity and wear particles from the rocks. Also, when the wind loaded with soil particles strikes against the rocks, it removes soil particles. All these processes lead to the formation of a bit of soil at the surface of these bare rocks. Animals such as spiders which can hide between boulders or stones invade these rocks. These animals live by feeding on insects that have been blown in or flown in.

Algal and fungal spores reach these rocks by air from the surrounding areas. These spores grow and form symbiotic associations, lichen , which act as pioneer species of bare rocks. The succession process starts when autotrophic organisms start living in the rocks.

Foliose and fruticose lichen stage [ edit ] Flavoparmelia caperata , a species of foliose lichen , on a tree branch.

Foliose lichens have leaf-like thalli, while the fruticose lichens are like small bushes. They are attached to the substratum at one point only, therefore, do not cover the soil completely. They can absorb and retain more water and are able to accumulate more dust particles. Their dead remains are decomposed to humus which mixes with soil particles and help building substratum and improving soil moisture contents further. The shallow depressions in the rocks and crevices become filled with soil and topsoil layer increases further. These autogenic changes favor growth and establishment of mosses.

Moss stage [ edit ] See also: Moss The spores of xerophytic mosses, such as Polytrichum , Tortula , and Grimmia , are brought to the rock where they succeed lichens. Their rhizoids penetrate soil among the crevices, secrete acids and corrode the rocks. The bodies of mosses are rich in organic and inorganic compounds. When these die they add these compounds to the soil, increasing the fertility of the soil. As mosses develop in patches they catch soil particles from the air and help increase the amount of substratum. The changing environment leads to migration of lichens and helps invasion of herbaceous vegetation that can out-compete mosses.

Herb stage [ edit ] Encroaching herbs and shrubs See also: Herb Herbaceous weeds, mostly annuals such as asters , evening primroses , and milk weeds , invade the rock. Their roots penetrate deep down, secrete acids and enhance the process of weathering. Leaf litter and death of herbs add humus to the soil. Shading of soil results in decrease in evaporation and there is a slight increase in temperature. As a result, the xeric conditions begin to change and biennial and perennial herbs and xeric grasses such as Aristida , Festuca , and Poa , begin to inhabit. These climatic conditions favor growth of bacterial and fungal populations, resulting in increase in decomposition activities.

Shrub stage [ edit ] The herb and grass mixture is invaded by shrub species, such as Rhus and Physocarpus . Early invasion of shrub is slow, but once a few bushes have become established, birds invade the area and help disperse scrub seeds. This results in dense scrub growth shading the soil and making conditions unfavorable for the growth of herbs, which then begin to migrate. The soil formation continues and its moisture content increases.

Tree stage [ edit ] See also: Tree Change in environment favors colonization of tree species. The tree saplings begin to grow among the scrubs and establish themselves. The kind of tree species inhabiting the area depends upon the nature of the soil. In poorly drained soils oaks establish themselves. The trees form canopy and shade the area. Shade-loving scrubs continue to grow as secondary vegetation. Leaf litter and decaying roots weather the soil further and add humus to it making the habitat more favorable for growth to trees. Mosses and ferns make their appearance and fungi population grows abundantly.

Climax stage [ edit ] The succession culminates in a climax community, the forest. Many intermediate tree stages develop prior to establishment of a climax community. The forest type depends upon climatic conditions. The climax forest may be: Oak-hickory climax forest In dry habitat oaks and hickories are climax vegetation. There is only one tree stage and forests are characterized by presence of scrubs, herbs, ferns, and mosses.

Beech-hemlock climax forest These climax forests develop in mesic climates. The dominant vegetation is beech and hemlock . There are many intermediate tree stages. The other vegetation types include herbs, ferns, and mosses.

Beech-maple climax forest These climax forests develop in mesic climates in the Northeastern United States. The dominant vegetation is American beech and sugar maple .

Spruce-alpine fir climax forest At high altitudes in Rocky Mountains the climax forest is dominated by spruces and alpine firs .

See also [ edit ] Hydrosere Lithosere Psammosere Seral community References [ edit ] ^ Cooper, W.S.

(January 1, 1913).

The climax forest of Isle Royale, Lake Superior, and its development . Bot. gazette.

External links [ edit ] Look up xerosere in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6k4gv
Cached time: 20250812061700
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.327 seconds
Real time usage: 0.427 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 861/1000000
Revision size: 6830/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 72393/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8511/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 28757/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.212/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4232311/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  332.704      1 -total
 24.42%   81.258      1 Template:Modelling_ecosystems
 23.76%   79.066      2 Template:Navbox
 22.78%   75.805      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 22.12%   73.601      1 Template:Cite_book
 17.03%   56.654      1 Template:Short_description
 15.40%   51.246      2 Template:Ambox
 12.06%   40.128      1 Template:Technical
  9.81%   32.646      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.87%   22.865      1 Template:Wiktionary Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2979676:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812061700 and revision id 1296929818. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xerosere&oldid=1296929818 " Category : Community ecology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are too technical from April 2017 All articles that are too technical Articles needing additional references from July 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 05:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xerosere 1 language Add topic

