Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Objective 2 Analysis of available information on the site 3 Selection of techniques and mode of diving Toggle Selection of techniques and mode of diving subsection 3.1 Diving without breathing apparatus 3.2 Scuba diving 3.2.1 Open circuit 3.2.2 Rebreathers 3.3 Surface supplied diving 3.4 Saturation diving 3.5 Atmospheric diving suits 4 Diving team selection 5 Depth and time 6 Environmental factors 7 Hazards of the proposed diving operation Toggle Hazards of the proposed diving operation subsection 7.1 Risk assessment 8 Dive profile 9 Route 10 Choice of equipment 11 Decompression planning 12 Gas planning Toggle Gas planning subsection 12.1 Scuba gas planning 12.2 Surface supplied gas planning 12.2.1 Low pressure compressor delivery 12.2.2 Free flow helmets 12.3 Saturation gas planning 13 Contingency plans 14 Emergency plans 15 Permits and permission 16 Schedule of operational tasks 17 Budget 18 Dive planning software Toggle Dive planning software subsection 18.1 Real time computer aided contingency management 19 References Toggle the table of contents Dive planning Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of planning an underwater diving operation A shotline with decompression trapeze provides a relatively safe and convenient place for in-water decompression.

Dive planning is the process of planning an underwater diving operation. The purpose of dive planning is to increase the probability that a dive will be completed safely and the goals achieved.

[ 1 ] Some form of planning is done for most underwater dives, but the complexity and detail considered may vary enormously.

[ 2 ] Professional diving operations are usually formally planned and the plan documented as a legal record that due diligence has been done for health and safety purposes.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Recreational dive planning may be less formal, but for complex technical dives , can be as formal, detailed and extensive as most professional dive plans. A professional diving contractor will be constrained by the code of practice, standing orders or regulatory legislation covering a project or specific operations within a project, and is responsible for ensuring that the scope of work to be done is within the scope of the rules relevant to that work.

[ 3 ] A recreational (including technical) diver or dive group is generally less constrained, but nevertheless is almost always restricted by some legislation, and often also the rules of the organisations to which the divers are affiliated.

[ 2 ] The planning of a diving operation may be simple or complex. In some cases the processes may have to be repeated several times before a satisfactory plan is achieved, and even then the plan may have to be modified on site to suit changed circumstances. The final product of the planning process may be formally documented or, in the case of recreational divers, an agreement on how the dive will be conducted. A diving project may consist of a number of related diving operations.

[ 5 ] A documented dive plan may contain elements from the following list: [ 1 ] Overview of diving activities Schedule of diving operations Specific dive plan information Budget Objective [ edit ] Commercial diving contractors will develop specifications for the operation in cooperation with the client, who will normally provide a specific objective. The client will generally specify what work is to be done, and the diving contractor will deal with the logistics of how to do it.

[ 3 ] Other professional divers will usually plan their diving operations around an objective related to their primary occupation.

[ 6 ] Recreational divers will generally choose an objective for entertainment value, or for training purposes.

It will generally be necessary to specify the following: Work to be done, or the recreational equivalent Equipment needed Procedures to be used Personnel required Places Times Analysis of available information on the site [ edit ] Expected surface conditions, such as sea state, air temperature, and wind chill factor Expected underwater conditions, including water temperature, depth, type of bottom, tides and currents, visibility, extent of pollution, and other hazards Assistance and emergency information, including location, status, and contact procedures for the nearest recompression chamber , evacuation and rescue facilities, and nearest hospital.

Location and accessibility of the site Selection of techniques and mode of diving [ edit ] Detailed planning depends on the mode and techniques selected for the dive, and the choice of these depends to a large extent on the physical constraints of the dive, but also to the legal, financial and procedural constraints of the divers. The mode and techniques chosen must also allow the dive to be done at an acceptable level of risk . There is usually more than one mode which is physically feasible, and often a choice between modes which are otherwise acceptable. In some cases detailed planning may show that the initial choice was not appropriate, and the process has to be repeated for an alternative choice.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] Diving without breathing apparatus [ edit ] Freediving does not involve the use of external breathing devices, but relies on a diver's ability to hold his or her breath until resurfacing. Free diving is limited in depth and time, but for some purposes it may be suitable.

[ 6 ] Scuba diving [ edit ] Diving with a self-contained underwater breathing apparatus , which is completely independent of surface supply, provides the diver with the advantages of mobility and horizontal range far beyond what is possible when supplied from the surface by the umbilical hoses of surface-supplied diving equipment . Scuba has limitations of breathing gas supply, communications between diver and surface are problematic, the location of the diver may be difficult to monitor, and it is considered a higher-risk mode of diving in most circumstances. Scuba is specifically forbidden for some professional applications.

Decompression is often avoided, and if necessary, is generally in-water, but may use a variety of gases.

[ 7 ] [ 6 ] Open circuit [ edit ] Open-circuit scuba systems discharge the breathing gas into the environment as it is exhaled, and consist of one or more diving cylinders containing breathing gas at high pressure connected to a primary diving regulator , and may include additional cylinders for decompression gas or emergency breathing gas.

[ 7 ] Rebreathers [ edit ] Closed-circuit or semi-closed circuit rebreather systems allow recycling of exhaled gases. This reduces the volume of gas used, so that a smaller cylinder, or cylinders, than open-circuit scuba may be used for the equivalent dive duration, and giving the ability to spend far more time underwater compared to open circuit for the same gas consumption. Rebreathers also produce far less bubble volume and less noise than open circuit scuba, which makes them attractive to military, scientific and media divers. They also have a larger number of critical failure modes , are more expensive and require more maintenance and require more training to use at a reasonable level of safety.

[ 7 ] Surface supplied diving [ edit ] Surface supplied diving using a diving stage Breathing gases may be supplied from the surface through a diver's umbilical , or airline hose, which provides breathing gas, communications and a safety line, with options for a hot water hose for heating, a video cable and gas reclaim line . The diver's breathing gas supply is significantly more secure than for scuba; communications are simplified and the divers position is either known or can be traced reliably by following the umbilical. Several major risks are thereby mitigated, but the system also has serious disadvantages in some applications, as diver mobility is constrained by the length of the umbilical, and it may snag on obstructions.

Surface-oriented, or bounce diving, is how commercial divers refer to diving operations where the diver starts and finishes the diving operation at atmospheric pressure. The alternative, while retaining surface supply, is saturation diving . For bounce dives, the diver may be deployed directly, often from a diving support vessel or indirectly via a diving bell .

[ 8 ] Decompression procedures include in-water decompression or surface decompression in a deck chamber . Small closed bell systems which include a two-man bell, a launch and recovery frame and a chamber for decompression after transfer under pressure (TUP) are reasonably mobile, and suited to deep bounce dives .

[ 8 ] Saturation diving [ edit ] Diver Transfer Capsule suitable for saturation diving Saturation diving lets divers live and work at depth for days or weeks at a time. After working in the water, divers are transferred in a closed diving bell to rest and live in a dry pressurized underwater habitat on the bottom or a saturation life support system of pressure chambers at the surface. Decompression at the end of the dive may take many days, but since it is done only once for a long period of exposure, rather than after each of many shorter exposures, the overall risk of decompression injury to the diver and the total time spent decompressing are reduced. This type of diving allows greater economy of work and enhanced safety, but the capital and running costs are high and the systems are expensive to transport. Mobility of the diver is restricted because of the umbilical.

[ 9 ] Atmospheric diving suits [ edit ] Diver in atmospheric diving suit on launch and recovery platform Atmospheric diving suits can be used for very deep dives of up to 2,300 feet (700 m) for many hours, and eliminate several physiological dangers associated with deep diving : the occupant need not decompress; there is no need for special gas mixtures; and there is no danger of decompression sickness or nitrogen narcosis . Disadvantages include high cost, limited availability, bulk and limited diver dexterity.

Diving team selection [ edit ] The diving team personnel selection will depend largely on the diving mode selected and organisational requirements.

Professional dive team members will generally be selected on documented evidence of proven competence or qualification for the tasks allocated. The precise terminology may vary between organisations, but professional diving teams will usually include: [ 6 ] [ 5 ] A diving supervisor One or more working divers One or more stand-by divers One or more diver's attendants Other surface support personnel, which may include: Medical support (not necessarily on-site) Chamber operator or life support technician Support vessel crew Equipment technicians, gas panel operators, timekeepers, riggers Technical teams will also generally base appointments on proven competence, certification or personal trust. Technical diving groups vary in complexity, but will generally comprise: Dive team In-water support team Surface support team Recreational groupings may be based on personal experience and trust, but are frequently relatively arbitrary allocations by the service provider, based on certification . Recreational diving groups commonly comprise a buddy pair of divers, but may also be a solo diver or a group of divers who will be led by a divemaster . Selection may be by mutual agreement to dive together, or may simply be the result of booking on the same dive.

Depth and time [ edit ] Depth is often one of the more straightforward parameters, as it is often fixed by the topography of the site.

Time is influenced by limitations of equipment and decompression constraints, as well as the actual time required to perform the intended task, which in turn is influenced by the underwater environment in general, and specific to the site.

Together, the depth and time constitute the planned dive profile , which is needed for decompression planning and gas planning Environmental factors [ edit ] See also: Altitude diving , Cave diving , Deep diving , Ice diving , Wreck diving , and List of diving environments by type The specific diving environment at the dive site will determine several factors which may require specific planning. The depth, water salinity and altitude affect decompression planning. An overhead environment affects navigation and gas planning. Water temperature and contaminants affect the choice of exposure and environmental protection. Site topography affects the choice of entry and exit points, and entry and exit procedures, which may require special equipment. The presence of entrapment or entanglement hazards, or dangerous animals, may require special precautions and additional equipment.

[ 1 ] Hazards of the proposed diving operation [ edit ] See also: List of diving hazards and precautions and Human factors in diving safety Divers face specific physical and health risks when they go underwater with diving equipment, or use high pressure breathing gas.

A hazard is any biological, chemical, physical, mechanical or environmental agent or situation that poses a level of threat to life, health, property, or environment. The presence of a combination of several hazards simultaneously is common in diving, and the effect is generally increased risk to the diver, particularly where the occurrence of an incident due to one hazard triggers other hazards with a resulting cascade of incidents.

Diving hazards may be classified under several groups: The aquatic environment itself Use of breathing equipment underwater Exposure to a pressurised environment and pressure changes Pressure changes during descent Pressure changes during ascent Breathing gases at high ambient pressure The specific diving environment Pre-existing physiological and psychological conditions in the diver Diver behaviour and competence Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Hazards of the dive task and special equipment Risk assessment [ edit ] See also: Hazard identification , Risk assessment , and Risk management The assessed risk of a dive would generally be considered unacceptable if the diver is not expected to be able to cope with any single reasonably foreseeable incident with a significant probability of occurrence during that dive, or the dive team is not expected to be able to manage the probable consequences of such an event.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Professional diving organisations tend to be less tolerant of risk than recreational, particularly technical divers, who are usually not constrained by occupational health and safety legislation.

Risk assessment is mandated in professional diving, where it is the specific responsibility of the diving supervisor, [ 7 ] [ 3 ] [ 1 ] and is expected in recreational diving, where it is generally the responsibility of the individual diver, though the expectations of the level of risk assessment are highly variable, and are associated with the level of training, certification and experience of the dive team, and the circumstances of the dive. A diving instructor is responsible for risk assessment during training, and a professional dive leader is responsible for some aspects of risk assessment when leading clients at an unfamiliar site.

Dive profile [ edit ] See also: Dive profile The planned dive profile is an important input parameter for gas planning and decompression planning, and is generally based on the time required to perform the task of each specific dive, and the depth at which the task will be performed, in combination with environmental considerations and the breathing gas mixtures chosen. Limits are often due to exposure to cold, work load, decompression time, safety constraints and logistics of breathing gas supply.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] Route [ edit ] See also: Cave diving , Wreck diving , Distance line , and Diver navigation For some dives the route to be followed and navigation procedures to follow the planned route may be important, either for achieving the objective, for safety, or for both. There may be known hazards that can be avoided by following a specific route or constraining the possible extent of diver excursion.

[ 10 ] In all penetration dives the route may be critical for safety. The diver must be assured of getting out from the overhead zone before running out of gas. The standard method is to follow a guideline into and out of the overhead environment , and laying the line or laying and recovering the line may be part of the dive plan. In explorations and surveys the route may be unknown or uncertain, and contingency plans must be known to the divers so that the dive plan can be altered to suit the situation as it unfolds.

[ 11 ] [ 2 ] Professional divers may follow a planned route to the worksite which prevents the diver from close approach to known hazards. This may involve limiting umbilical length and manned or unmanned underwater tending points, downlines and jackstays .

[ 10 ] [ 5 ] Choice of equipment [ edit ] See also: Diving equipment , Gas blending , Rebreather , Sidemount diving , Technical diving , Surface supplied diving , and Saturation diving Diving equipment in storage Equipment will be chosen based on several constraints, including: [ 11 ] [ 6 ] [ 5 ] Legal and procedural requirements of the organisation Availability of equipment Diver skills and certification Suitability for the purpose Risk and benefit considerations Equipment and supplies selection would normally include: [ 6 ] Diving equipment Breathing gas, including a backup supply Tools or equipment for the task if appropriate Dive platform and support equipment, including diver/crew shelter Oxygen resuscitator and first aid kit Dive flag Communications equipment A recreational diver may expect many of these items to be arranged by the service provider (the dive boat operator, shop, or school providing the transport to the dive site and organising the dive). Technical diving is less constrained by legislation than professional diving, but risk analysis may indicate similar equipment to be necessary or desirable for a specific dive.

[ 12 ] Decompression planning [ edit ] See also: Planning and monitoring decompression , Decompression procedures , and Decompression equipment Decompression tables for recreational dive planning Decompression is planned based on the intended dive profile, the chosen gas mixtures, and the chosen decompression tables or algorithms .

[ 11 ] [ 6 ] There are two basic approaches to decompression for surface oriented dives, and one for saturation diving.

Real time computation of tissue gas levels and the appropriate decompression schedule may be monitored by personal decompression computers worn by the diver. This system is popular with recreational, technical and scientific scuba divers. Any deviation from the planned profile is automatically taken into account, and the diver can keep track at all times of the current total time required for ascent. The surface team is not aware of the decompression status of a diver unless there is voice communication and the diver reports the information.

[ 11 ] [ 6 ] Decompression schedules are drawn up for the planned dive profile before the dive from tables or a program. Contingency schedules are usually prepared for scuba divers, which allow for all the reasonably probable deviations from the planned schedule, and usually allow for variations in depth and time. These schedules are carried by the diver and used to manage the ascent profile and decompression.

[ 11 ] Surface supplied divers are monitored by the surface team, and if they deviate from plan the supervisor can change the schedule to suit.

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] Saturation diving will decompress the divers only at the end of the diving contract, in the controlled and relatively comfortable environment of the saturation system [ broken anchor ] . The schedule will depend on the pressure and breathing gas mixture, not on the duration of exposure.

[ 9 ] The procedures chosen will to a large extent depend on the mode of diving and equipment available.

[ 7 ] Gas planning [ edit ] Gas planning for diving operations where divers use open circuit equipment with breathing gas mixtures is more complex than operations where atmospheric air is supplied via low pressure compressor from the surface, or the breathing gas is reclaimed, processed and re-used.

[ 10 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Scuba gas planning [ edit ] Main article: Scuba gas planning Gas blending equipment Scuba gas planning is the aspect of dive planning which deals with the calculation or estimation of the amounts and mixtures of gases to be used for a planned dive profile , and can be critical to the safety of the dive. The scuba diver by definition is independent of surface supply and, in general, must carry all gas needed for the dive, though in limited circumstances depots of drop cylinders may be placed along the route of the dive for use on the return. This requires the route to be marked and the divers to return along the marked route, and is particularly suited to penetration dives, such as wreck and cave dives.

[ 11 ] Deep dives with open water ascents can also occasionally make use of surface standby divers who can provide contingency gas to ascending divers whose position is marked by a shotline or decompression buoys.

[ 2 ] The calculations assume that the dive profile, including decompression, is known, but the process may be iterative, involving changes to the dive profile as a consequence of the gas requirement calculation, or changes to the gas mixtures chosen.

[ 11 ] [ 6 ] Scuba gas planning includes the following aspects: [ 11 ] [ 6 ] Choice of breathing gases to limit decompression requirements to limit inert gas narcosis to limit work of breathing Choice of Scuba configuration Estimation of gas quantities required for the planned dive, including bottom gas, travel gas, and decompression gases, as appropriate to the profile.

Estimation of gas quantities for reasonably foreseeable contingencies.

Choice of cylinders to carry the required gases. Each cylinder volume and working pressure must be sufficient to contain the required quantity of gas.

Calculation of the pressures for each of the gases in each of the cylinders to provide the required quantities.

Specifying the critical pressures of relevant gas mixtures for appropriate stages (waypoints) of the planned dive profile.

Surface supplied gas planning [ edit ] See also: Surface supplied diving Open circuit surface supplied diving mostly uses air as the breathing gas, though mixed gases may also be used.

[ 5 ] Surface supplied air is generally supplied by low pressure compressor, and the continuous supply is limited only by the compressor continuing to run effectively, and to provide air of suitable quality. There is also a reserve air supply, either from a second compressor, or from fairly large high pressure cylinders. Each diver also carries a scuba bailout cylinder , which should carry sufficient gas to safely surface from any point in the planned dive.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Running out of air is a relatively low risk with these facilities, and gas planning centres on ensuring that the primary and, if present, backup compressors are correctly sized to provide the necessary pressure and flow rates. These are specified by the breathing equipment manufacturer based on depth and workload, and by the compressor manufacturer for the standard running speed of the machine.

[ 5 ] Reserve surface supply cylinder contents are based on the gas requirement for safe ascent from any part of the dive, allowing for reasonably foreseeable delays, and for a rescue by the standby diver.

[ 10 ] The diver's bailout cylinder should contain adequate gas in case of an emergency at the planned depth. Critical pressure should be calculated based on the planned profile and must allow change-over, ascent and all planned decompression.

[ 5 ] In some jurisdictions the stand-by diver must be supplied from an air source which is independent of that supplying the working divers, as the cause of an emergency may be failure or contamination of the main air supply to the working diver.

[ 5 ] Low pressure compressor delivery [ edit ] Compressors are rated according to the volume of air taken in each minute. This is also the free gas volume that will be supplied to the divers. The volume of air used by the divers will depend on work rate and depth. Short term variations are compensated by the air receiver on the compressor. The delivery volume at maximum ambient pressure for the planned dive must be sufficient for all the divers to be supplied from the compressor.

[ 10 ] The supply pressure must be in excess of minimum functional pressure for the regulator to be enough to get air to the diver. In practice a delivery pressure of about 20 bar is commonly used. The manufacturer of the helmet or full-face mask will specify a pressure range which will deliver sufficient air for a given dive depth, which is usually from 6 to 10 bar more than the ambient pressure due to depth.

[ 10 ] Free flow helmets [ edit ] Free flow helmets generally require a considerably higher compressor delivery than demand helmets, as the flow is continuous, and should never drop below peak inhalation rate of the diver. Flow rates up to 1500 litres per minute surface equivalent are quoted for the Divex AH-5 helmet at 50 metres sea water for heavy work. Delivery pressure at the AH-5 helmet is recommended at 3.5 bar above ambient.

[ 13 ] Saturation gas planning [ edit ] See also: Saturation diving Saturation systems frequently use gas reclaim equipment to minimize the loss of expensive helium , and this makes the gas usage relatively independent of dive duration and depth, however reserves must be available in case of loss or leakage.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Scrubber systems are used to remove carbon dioxide from the breathing gas, and other filters to remove odours and other contaminants.

Booster pump systems are used to return gas to high pressure storage.

[ 9 ] Contingency plans [ edit ] Contingency planning covers what to do if something happens that is not according to the planned operation. The hazard identification and risk assessment will suggest the range of foreseeable contingencies, and the specifics of how much to organise to deal with them will depend on the consequences.

[ 11 ] In general, contingencies that have serious health and safety consequences should have plans in place to deal with them, while those which are merely an inconvenience may be accepted if they occur.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Some contingency classes are listed here: Environmental condition changes Weather and sea state Equipment malfunctions Incorrect information Position of site Accessibility Environmental conditions Unexpected hazards Extent of work, equipment required One contingency that must always be considered is an out-of-gas emergency , as there are several ways it can happen, it is known to have happened by most of these ways on more than one occasion, and the consequences can be fatal. The diver must be able to safely reach a reliable alternative source of breathing gas at all times during the planned dive. Plans for technical contingencies may include arrangements for alternative equipment, spares, alternative boat etc. The level of contingency planning will depend on the project, and the importance of the task. Plans for adverse conditions may include arrangements for alternative dates, or in some cases alternative venues.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Emergency plans [ edit ] In general, there should be plans to deal with reasonably foreseeable emergencies that pose a risk to health and safety wherever there is a duty of care, these may include where relevant: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] First Aid for medical emergencies Search and recovery Casualty evacuation Site evacuation Hazmat emergencies Some of the action generally taken to prepare for possible medical emergencies will include: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Appropriate first aid equipment available on site Adequate oxygen administration equipment available on site A plan for evacuation of a casualty to a hyperbaric chamber A list of contact numbers, call codes and frequencies for local emergency services.

How to reach the nearest suitable emergency medical facility from the site.

Permits and permission [ edit ] It may be necessary to arrange for clearance to dive. Permits or permission for access or to dive at the site may be required, and making the arrangements can be considered part of dive planning.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] This may include, but is not limited to: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Permits to dive in a marine protected area Permits to collect specimens at a specific site or in general.

Permits to use specific collecting methods.

Permits to operate specific equipment.

Permits to dive on an archaeological site .

Permits to perform salvage work .

Permits to perform drilling and blasting work.

Permits or permission to launch or recover a vessel at a specific place.

Permits to operate a vessel in restricted areas.

Permission from harbourmaster to dive within harbour limits.

Permission from port control to dive in shipping lanes .

Permission from landowners to access the water, and to dive in inland waters.

Permission from utilities companies to dive in reservoirs.

Clearance from vessel operators or installation operators that the site is safe to dive.

Clearance that contamination is acceptable for the diving equipment to be used. This may require a water sample to be tested before the dive.

Schedule of operational tasks [ edit ] Scheduled activities generally include: Travel to the site Preparation of diving and support equipment Predive briefing Planned diving operations Recovery, cleaning, inspection, repair, and storage of gear Debriefing Budget [ edit ] Estimating the cost of a diving operation is an important component of the planning process, [ 11 ] and is dependent on almost all the factors described above.

Dive planning software [ edit ] Dive planning for technical diving can be relatively complex, particularly the aspects of decompression and gas planning, which are the components of dive planning most amenable to automation. Software for decompression planning on personal dive computers, smartphones and other personal computers has become easily available and reliable, and has made manual calculations largely obsolescent, though they are still common during training, so that the diver can develop a feel for the correct order of magnitude of the computed values, as a sanity check in case of input errors.

[ 14 ] The original system of technical dive planning involved either looking up the commercial or military tables for a depth and time profile, or contacting a researcher for experimental tables if they wanted to use trimix. Later, pregenerated trimix tables became available within the community. The schedule of depths and run times for the planned profile would be written on a dive slate, along with contingency schedules for extended exposure, usually for deeper depth, longer bottom time and/or both. A bailout schedule could also be carried, for a shorter bottom time and/or shallower depth. CNS and OTU exposure values would be manually calculated for these schedules, and gas requirements calculated for each phase of the profiles, including contingency gas, using the rule of thirds, rock bottom calculations, or other rule of thumb, and used to select appropriate cylinders. Contingency plans for loss of decompression gas would usually also be carried. The dive would be done following the dive plan and monitored using a watch and depth gauge or a bottom timer.

[ 14 ] Later, dive computers that were programmed with algorithms for mixed gas diving and constant oxygen partial pressure for rebreather diving became available. These were built to be used to greater depths, but they were expensive and sometimes unreliable, so some diver and training agencies did not trust them and insisted on using a written plan and schedule, using a computer as a backup in case of an emergency, which was a waste of the flexibility provided by real-time monitoring of decompression status by the computer, similar to the situation when dive computers were first accepted for scientific diving.

[ 14 ] As technical diving computers became more reliable and more affordable, more divers started accepting them as the primary tool for dive and decompression monitoring, using the written schedule as a backup, but still planning the dive beforehand based on a specified maximum depth and bottom time, so that gas planning based on the planned profile would be reliable. When the diver has a backup computer, the flexibility of the real-time monitoring can be fully utilised.

[ 14 ] Real time computer aided contingency management [ edit ] A consequence of using a decompression computer to monitor gas loading during a dive is that it becomes possible to adapt the dive plan during the dive, but it remains necessary to ensure that there is sufficient gas remaining to make the return to the surface with all necessary decompression while providing emergency gas for a buddy.

[ 14 ] Tools for adapting the dive plan for contingencies during a dive are available on some technical diving computers. The primary change in dive planning was that the ascent profile became controlled by the computer for the actual decompression obligation of the dive up to and including the parts of the ascent already done.

[ 14 ] Dive computers have become more reliable and more affordable, so it is fairly common for tech divers to have a backup computer. This reduces the risk of a computer failure during the dive necessitating an ascent controlled by depth gauge, timer and dive tables, and all the extra functionality and flexibility remains available to the diver. One of the options available is to set up the backup computer with different display settings and user options, but when these can be selected at any time during the dive, there is no great advantage provided the diver is sufficiently familiar with the device.

[ 14 ] Gas usage calculations are relatively straightforward for a fixed decompression schedule. It becomes more complicated when the surfacing schedule may vary. Since the primary purpose of gas planning is to ensure that there is sufficient breathing gas for a safe return to the surface for all members of the team, this minimum gas principle (also known as critical pressure of ascent) can be used to check any changes in the plan made during the dive. Minimum gas is linked to a planned " time to surface "  (TTS) and maximum depth from which the ascent may be started. During the dive it is necessary to ensure that the TTS displayed on the dive computer does not exceed the planned maximum TTS associated with the "minimum gas" available.

[ 14 ] The current " no-decompression limit " is a function normally displayed on the main screen until it runs out. Once the diver has a decompression obligation, other functions may become available, such as time to surface, decompression ceiling, depth of the next decompression stop, predicted value for TTS change for staying an extra period at the current depth (such as 5 minutes). By comparing the ceiling depth and the stop depth, the diver can get an indication of the depth tolerance at the stop. This will increase during the stop, and when it reaches the depth of the next stop, the stop is complete.

[ 14 ] Another display that might be available is the current gradient factor or M-value. On the Shearwater computers this is indicated by GF99 value displayed, which shows the diver how close their leading tissue is to gradient factor for the current depth for the user selected GF high and GF low values. If the diver ascends above the indicated decompression stop depth, the computer will display a warning. This depth may still be below the ceiling displayed, and the GF99 will indicate the reduction in conservatism in play.

[ 14 ] There may be a graphic display such as a bar graph indicating tissue loading and the oxygen window for one or more representative tissues, which can give the diver a feel for how the outgassing is progressing. A display for surfacing gradient factor may be available. This shows the GF that would occur if the diver were to surface directly at that time, without any stops. A surfacing GF of less than 100% indicates that the diver can or has surfaced with some conservatism relative to the baseline unmodified algorithm. A surfacing GF of over 100% indicates a relatively high risk. This feature can be useful it there is an urgent need to surface as early as possible and a slightly increased decompression risk is acceptable.

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e NOAA Diving Program (U.S.) (28 Feb 2001). Joiner, James T. (ed.).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (4th ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, National Undersea Research Program.

ISBN 978-0-941332-70-5 .

CD-ROM prepared and distributed by the National Technical Information Service (NTIS)in partnership with NOAA and Best Publishing Company ^ a b c d e Gurr, Kevin (August 2008). "13: Operational safety". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

165– 180.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ a b c d "Diving Regulations 2009" .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41 . Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ Staff (1977).

"The Diving at Work Regulations 1997" .

Statutory Instruments 1997 No. 2776 Health and Safety . Kew, Richmond, Surrey: Her Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO).

Archived from the original on 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 6 November 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Diving Advisory Board.

Code Of Practice Inshore Diving (PDF) . Pretoria: The South African Department of Labour. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 November 2016 . Retrieved 1 January 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t Diving Advisory Board.

Code Of Practice for Scientific Diving (PDF) . Pretoria: The South African Department of Labour. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 November 2016 . Retrieved 1 January 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g US Navy (1 January 2017).

U.S. Navy Diving Manual Revision 7 SS521-AG-PRO-010 0910-LP-115-1921 (PDF) . Washington, DC.: US Naval Sea Systems Command.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 December 2016 . Retrieved 1 January 2017 .

^ a b Imbert, Jean Pierre (February 2006). Lang, Michael A.; Smith, N. Eugene (eds.).

"Commercial Diving: 90m Operational Aspects" (PDF) .

Advanced Scientific Diving Workshop . Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 30 June 2012 .

^ a b c d Staff (February 2014).

"IMCA International Code of Practice for Offshore Diving" (PDF) .

IMCA D 014 Rev. 2 . London: International Marine Contractor's Association . Retrieved 1 January 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c d e f g Staff (2002). Williams, Paul (ed.).

The Diving Supervisor's Manual (IMCA D 022 May 2000, incorporating the May 2002 erratum ed.). London, UK: International Marine Contractors' Association.

ISBN 1-903513-00-6 .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2001 . Retrieved 1 January 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Mount, Tom (August 2008). "11: Dive Planning". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

113– 158.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ Bishop, Leigh (6 May 2020).

"The Logistics of Exploration" .

www.dansa.org . DAN Southern Africa.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ Buchan, P (2010).

"Operation and Maintenance manual for the AH5 helmet (Part No: DD030342)" .

P2083-OM-128 Rev 3 . Divex Ltd.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 December 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Powell, Mark (11 August 2020).

"Evolution of Dive Planning" .

shearwater.com . Retrieved 9 May 2024 .

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐pjm2f
Cached time: 20250812015552
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.840 seconds
Real time usage: 1.019 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3885/1000000
Revision size: 47750/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 524859/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2341/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87138/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.386/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10210919/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  629.387      1 -total
 34.98%  220.141      1 Template:Reflist
 32.73%  205.981      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 31.94%  201.037      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 22.84%  143.743      7 Template:Cite_book
 18.86%  118.694     35 Template:Navbox
  9.96%   62.672      1 Template:Short_description
  7.57%   47.615      9 Template:See_also
  5.52%   34.754      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.05%   31.778      1 Template:Broken_anchor Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:36692461:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015552 and revision id 1302559442. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dive_planning&oldid=1302559442 " Categories : Dive planning Underwater work Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with broken anchors This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 05:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dive planning Add languages Add topic

