Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Foundational structure 2 Origins 3 Marriages and gotras Toggle Marriages and gotras subsection 3.1 Legal situation 4 List of Gotras and each gotra's Rishis 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Gotra 23 languages বাংলা Deutsch डोटेली Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių मराठी Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lineage forming an exogamous clan in Vedic society "Gothra" redirects here. For other uses, see Gothra (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Gatra .

For wasp genus, see Gotra (wasp) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gotra" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: the article needs to be rewritten with proper grammar to be understandable.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( August 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: the article is written from a devotional Hindu PoV and gives advice on Hindu practices as opposed to general information.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e In Hindu culture , the term gotra ( Sanskrit : गोत्र) is considered to be equivalent to lineage . It broadly refers to people who are descendants in an unbroken male line from a common male ancestor or patriline . Generally, the gotra forms an exogamous unit, with marriage within the same gotra being regarded as incest and prohibited by custom.

[ 1 ] The name of the gotra can be used as a surname, but it is different from a surname and is strictly maintained because of its importance in marriages among Hindus, especially among castes.

Pāṇini defines gotra as apatyam pautraprabhrti gotram (IV. 1. 162), which means "the word gotra denotes the descendance (or descendants), apatya , of a couple consisting of a pautra , a son and a bharti , a mother, i.e. a daughter-in-law."  (Based on Monier Williams Dictionary definitions.) Foundational structure [ edit ] According to the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 2.2.4, Kashyapa, Atri, Vasistha, Vishvamitra, Gautama Maharishi, Jamadagni and Bharadvaja are seven sages (also known as saptarishi ) and Jambu Maharishi is another sage (also known as Renuka , who belongs to Kashyapa). The progeny of these eight sages are declared to be gotras. This enumeration of seven primary and one secondary gotra seems to have been known to Pāṇini. The offspring ( apatya ) of these seven are gotras and others than these are called gotrāvayava.

[ 2 ] One who follows the system defined by three sages defines himself as Tri-a-Vishay . Similarly, for five sages, it is Pancha-Vishay , and for seven sages, it is Santa-Vishay .

There exists another theory about gotra: sons and disciples of a sage would have the same gotra; it is believed that they possess similar thoughts and philosophies. People of the same gotra can be found across different castes. Each gotra comprises pravaras .

While Hindu texts prescribe marrying within one's own community, they prohibit individuals from marrying those who belong to their own gotra , or lineage from the same Vedic sage: [ 3 ] One should not choose (the bride) from the same gotra or born in the line of same sage. (One may choose) from (descendants of) more than seven (generations) on the paternal side and more than five (generations) on the maternal side.

— Agni Purana , Chapter 154 Origins [ edit ] As a Rigvedic term, gotra simply means "forward moving descendants".

[ 4 ] (गौः) गमन करनेवाली (पृथिवी) means one always moving (Earth) and (त्र:) stands for Offspring. The specific meaning "family, lineage kin" (as it were "herd within an enclosure") is relatively more recent, first recorded around the mid-1st millennium BCE (e.g., Chandogya Upanishad ).

These "lineages" as they developed among the Brahmins of that time meant patrilineal descent. The Brahmanic system was later adopted by other communities, such as the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas [ 5 ] According to the Vedic theories, the Brahmins are direct descendants of seven sages who are believed to be the sons of Brahma, born out of his mind through yogic prowess. They are (1) Atri , (2) Bharadvaja , (3) Gautama Maharishi , (4) Jamadagni , (5) Kashyapa , (6) Vasishta and (7) Vishvamitra . To this list, Agastya is also sometimes added. These eight sages are called gotrakarins, from whom all 108 gotras (especially of the Brahmins) have evolved. For instance, from Atri sprang the Atreya and Gavisthiras gotras.

[ 6 ] According to Robert Vane Russell , many gotras of Hindu religion are of totemic origin which is named after plants, animals, and natural objects. These are universal among tribes but occur also in Hindu castes. The commonest totem names are those of animals, including several which are held sacred by Hindus, as bagh or Nahar, the tiger; bachhas, the calf; murkuria, the peacock; kachhua, the tortoise; nagas, the cobra; hathi, the elephant; bhains, the buffalo; richaria, the bear; Kuliha, the Jackal, Kukura, the dog; kursaal, the deer; Hiran, the Blackbuck and so on. The utmost variety of names is found, and numerous trees, as well as rice and other crops, salt, sandalwood , cucumber, pepper, and some household implements such as pestle , rolling slab, serve as the names of clans. Thus the name of the rishi Bharadvaja means a lark bird , and Kaushika means descended from Kusha grass , Agastya from Agassi flower, Kashyapa from kachhap a tortoise, Taittiri from titer, the partridge . Similarly, the origin of other rishis is attributed to animals, Rishyasringa to an antelope, Mandavya to a frog, Kanada to an owl. The usual characteristic of totemism is that the members of a clan regard themselves as related to or descended from, the animals or trees from which the clan takes its name, and abstain from killing or eating them.

[ 7 ] A gotra must be distinguished from a kula . A kula is equal to a particular family, or equal to modern-day "clans".  A kula relates to  a caste .

[ citation needed ] Marriages and gotras [ edit ] Marriages within the gotra ( sagotra marriages) are not permitted under the rule of exogamy in the traditional matrimonial system. The compound word sagotra is a union of the words "sa" and "gotra", where "sa" means same or similar. It is common practice in preparation for Hindu marriage to inquire about the kula-gotra (clan lineage) of the bride and groom before approving the marriage. People within the gotra are considered as siblings and marrying such a person can lead to higher chances for the child to get genetically transferred diseases. In almost all Hindu families, marriage within the same gotra is not practiced (since they are believed to be descended from the same lineage). Marriages between different gotras are encouraged; marriage within the same gotra started to happen later.

For example, Jats , Gurjars , and Rajputs have 13,000 Gotras. And Mudirajas of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have 2,600 Gotras. Gotra is always passed on from father to children among most Hindu communities. However, among the Tulu people it is passed on from mother to child.

The tatsama words sahodara (brother) and sahodari (sister) derive their roots from the Sanskrit word sahara (सहर) meaning co-uterine or born of the same womb. In communities where gotra membership passed from father to children, marriages were allowed between a woman and her maternal uncle, [ 8 ] while such marriages were forbidden in matrilineal communities, like Tuluvas , where gotra membership was passed down from the mother.

A much more common characteristic of South Indian Hindu society is permission for marriage between cross-cousins (children of brother and sister, first cousins) as they are of different gotras. Thus, a man is allowed to marry his maternal uncle's daughter or his paternal aunt's daughter but is not allowed to marry his paternal uncle's daughter. She would be considered a parallel cousin , of the same gotra, and therefore to be treated as a sister.

[ 9 ] Nepali Hindu society not only follows the rules of gotra for marriages but also has many regulations which go beyond the basic definition of gotra and have a broader definition of incest.

[ 10 ] Some communities in North India do not allow marriage with certain other clans, based on the belief that both clans are of the same patrilineal descent.

[ 11 ] In other communities, marriage within the gotra of the mother's father, and possibly some others, is prohibited.

A possible workaround for Sagotra marriages is to perform a Data (adoption) of the bride to a family of different gotra (usually data is given to the bride's maternal uncle who belongs to different gotra by the same rule) and let them perform the ' Kanyadanam ' ('kanya' (girl) + 'danam' (to give)). Such workarounds are used in rare cases, and the acceptability is questionable.

Vedic Hinduism recognizes eight types of marriages, thus predominantly following the principles as stated in the Manu Smriti , referring to eight types of marriages, the roles, and responsibilities of husband and wife, and the purpose of marriage.

Eight types of marriages are, (1) Brahma Vivaha, (2) Arsa Vivaha, (3) Daiva Vivaha, (4) Prajapatya Vivaha, (5) Gandharva Vivaha , (6) Asura Vivaha, (7) Rakshasa Vivaha, and (8) Paishacha Vivaha. The first four types of marriages reflect the paradigm behind arranged marriages. The last three are prohibited as per Manu Smriti , out of which the last two are condemned. The Gandharva marriage is analogous to the modern-day love marriage, where the individuals have the liberty to choose their partners. Though Gandharva marriage had its due prominence in the Shastras or precepts, with the advancement of time, Vedic Hinduism giving way to classic Hinduism, the concept of arranged marriage rose to prominence, which still today is predominant ritual for a marriage between two individuals.

There is no harm in Sagotra marriage if the individuals are not related for six generations on both maternal and paternal sides.  This is expressed in chapter 5 of Manu smriti in mantra 60, which states, सपिण्डता तु पुरुषे सप्तमे विनिवर्तते । समानोदकभावस्तु जन्मनाम्नोरवेदने, which means that sapinda ends after seven generations.

[ 12 ] Section 5(v) of Hindu Marriage Act 1955 also prohibits Sapinda relationship but there is no restriction of Sagotra marriage.

[ 13 ] Legal situation [ edit ] While the gotras are almost universally used for excluding marriages that would be traditionally incestuous , they are not legally recognized as such, although those within "degrees of prohibited relationship" or who are  "sapinda" are not permitted to marry.

[ 14 ] Khap panchayats in Haryana have campaigned to legally ban marriages within the same gotra. A convener of the Kadyan Khap, Naresh Kadyan, petitioned the courts to seek an amendment to the Hindu Marriage Act to legally prohibit such marriages. However, the petition was dismissed as withdrawn after being vacated, with the Delhi High Court warning that the Khap would face heavy penalty costs for wasting the time of the court.

[ 15 ] In the 1945 case of Madhavrao vs Raghavendrarao , which involved a Deshastha Brahmin couple, the definition of gotra as descending from eight sages and then branching out to several families was thrown out by the Bombay High Court . The court called the idea of Brahmin families descending from an unbroken line of common ancestors as indicated by the names of their respective gotras "impossible to accept." The court consulted relevant Hindu texts and stressed the need for Hindu society and law to keep up with the times, emphasizing that notions of good social behavior and the general ideology of Hindu society had changed. The court also said that the material in the Hindu texts is so vast and full of contradictions that it is a near-impossible task to reduce it to order and coherence.

[ 16 ] List of Gotras and each gotra's Rishis [ edit ] Bharadwaja : Angirasa , Braahaspatya , Bharadwaja Shatamarshana : Angirasa , Powrukutsa , Trasatasya Atreya : Atreya , Aarchanaasa , Syaavaasva Vatula : Bhargava , Vaitahavya , Saavedasa Renukacharya : Revaṇārādhya , Revaṇasiddha , Veer, Veerabhadra.

Vatsa : Bhargava, Chyaavana, AApnavaana, Owrva, Jaamadaghnya Kowsika : Vaiswaamitra, AAgamarshana, Kowsika Viswamitra : Vaiswaamitra, Devaraata, Owtala or Vaiswaamitra, Ashtaka Kowndinya : Vaasishta, Maitraavaruna, Kowndinya Harita , Ambarisha, Yuvanasva Harita , Angirasa, Ambarisha, Yuvanasva Mowdkalya (three variations): Ankiras, Bharmyasva, Mowdgalya Tarkshya, Bharmyasva, Mowdgalya Ankirsa, Dhavya, Mowdgalya Sandilya (two variations): Kasyapa, Aavatsaara, Daivala Kasyapa, Aavatsaara, Sandilya Naitruvakaasyapa : Kasyapa, Aavatsara, Naitruva Kutsa : Aankirasa, Maandhatra,Kowtsa Kanva (two variations): Aankirasa, Ajameeda, Kaanva Aankirasa, Kowra, Kaanva Paraasara : Vaasishta, Saaktya, Paarasarya Aagastya : Aagastya, Tardhachyuta, Sowmavaha Gargi (two variations): Aankirasa, Bharhaspatya, Bharadwaja, Sainya, Gargya Aangirasa, Sainya, Gaargya Bhadarayana : Aankirasa, Paarshadaswa, Raatitara Kasyapa : Kasyapa, Aavatsaara, Daivala Sunkriti (two variations): Aankirasa, Kowravidha, Saankritya Sadhya, Kowravidha, Saankritya Vasistha : Alamb Thamasphala See also [ edit ] Aliyasantana Hindu genealogy registers at Haridwar Pravaras Bharadvaja List of gotras References [ edit ] ^ Singer, Milton; Cohn, Bernard S., eds. (2007).

Structure and change in Indian society (1. paperback printing ed.). New Brunswick, N.J.: AldineTransaction. p. 408.

ISBN 978-0202361383 .

^ "Mana Sanskriti (Our Culture)" .

vedah.net (69). October 2003.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2017 . Retrieved 16 January 2009 .

^ www.wisdomlib.org (14 November 2021).

"Rules of Marriage (vivāha) [Chapter 154]" .

www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 29 October 2022 .

^ Saraswati, Swami Dayanand (2010).

Rigvedadi-Bhashya-Bhumika . Vijaykumar Govindram Hasanand. p. 199.

ISBN 978-8170771296 .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 28 August 2022 .

^ "Gotra – Indian caste system" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2015 . Retrieved 24 March 2015 .

^ "Gotra" .

gurjari.net .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 March 2015 .

^ Russell, Robert Vane (1916).

The Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces of India . London: Macmillan and Co.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Sadagopan, V. (7 August 1995).

"The 20 Gothrams" .

ramanuja.org .

^ Mehndiratta, MM; Paul, B; Mehndiratta, P (2007).

"Arranged marriage, consanguinity and epilepsy" (PDF) .

Neurology Asia .

12 (Supplement 1): 15– 17.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 August 2009 . Retrieved 27 August 2009 .

^ Sex and Marriage: Marriage Rules (Part 1) Archived 26 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine . palomar.edu.

^ Vashisht, Dinker (20 July 2009).

"Haryana panchayat takes on govt over same-gotra marriage" .

indianexpress.com .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2011 . Retrieved 27 August 2009 .

^ "Manu Smriti" .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2017 . Retrieved 19 April 2020 .

^ "The Hindu Marriage Act 1955" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 September 2013 . Retrieved 19 April 2020 .

^ The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 Archived 22 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

^ HC throws out a plea to forbid same gotra marriages Archived 5 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine , The Hindu , June 2010.

^ Anand, Pinky (28 July 2011).

"The paradox of the 21st century" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2014 . Retrieved 5 May 2014 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ruegg, D. Seyfort (1976).

The Meanings of the Term "Gotra" and the Textual History of the " Ratnagotravibhāga " .

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies , University of London , Vol. 39, No. 2 (1976), pp. 341–363 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gotras .

Brahmin Sages and Branches (Gotras and Subcastes) Marriage Ceremonies Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gotra&oldid=1304109908 " Categories : Caste system in India Family in India Gotras Caste system in Nepal Hidden categories: Source attribution Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2016 Articles needing additional references from April 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from August 2015 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from August 2015 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from August 2015 Articles needing cleanup from August 2021 Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from August 2021 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from August 2021 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 01:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gotra 23 languages Add topic

