Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fire tetrahedron 2 Oxidizer 3 Extinguishment of the fire 4 Role of water in firefighting 5 Multi-scale fire triangles for wildland fires 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Fire triangle 23 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Pangcah Português Română Русский Simple English Svenska தமிழ் Tayal West-Vlams 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Model for understanding the 3 components of fire The fire triangle The fire triangle or combustion triangle is a simple model for understanding the necessary ingredients for most fires .

[ 1 ] The triangle illustrates the three elements a fire needs to ignite: heat , fuel , and an oxidizing agent (usually oxygen ).

[ 2 ] A fire naturally occurs when the elements are present and combined in the right mixture.

[ 3 ] A fire can be prevented or extinguished by removing any one of the elements in the fire triangle. For example, covering a fire with a fire blanket blocks oxygen and can extinguish a fire. In large fires where firefighters are called in, decreasing the amount of oxygen is not usually an option because there is no effective way to make that happen in an extended area.

[ 4 ] Fire tetrahedron [ edit ] Not to be confused with NFPA 704 , also called the fire diamond.

The fire tetrahedron The fire tetrahedron represents the addition of the chemical chain reaction to the three already present in the fire triangle.

Combustion is a chemical reaction that feeds a fire more heat and allows it to continue. Once a fire has started, the resulting exothermic chain reaction sustains the fire and allows it to continue until or unless at least one of the elements of the fire is blocked: foam can be used to deny the fire the oxygen it needs water can be used to lower the temperature of the fuel below the ignition point, or to remove or disperse the fuel.

halon can be used to remove free radicals and create a barrier of inert gas in a direct attack on the chemical reaction responsible for the fire.

carbon dioxide , being denser than air, can displace oxygen away from the fire [ 5 ] When the fire involves burning metals like lithium , magnesium , titanium , [ 6 ] etc. (known as a class-D fire ), it becomes even more important to consider the energy release. Because the metals react faster with water than with oxygen and thereby more energy is released, putting water on such a fire results in the fire getting hotter or even exploding . Carbon dioxide extinguishers are ineffective against certain metals such as titanium.

[ 6 ] Therefore, inert agents (e.g. dry sand) must be used to break the chain reaction of metallic combustion.

In the same way, as soon as one of the four elements of the tetrahedron is (entirely) removed, combustion stops.

Oxidizer [ edit ] The oxidizer is the other reactant of the chemical reaction. In most cases, it is the ambient air, and in particular one of its components, oxygen (O 2 ). A typical fire can be extinguished by depriving it of air, such as when covering the flame of a small candle with an empty glass. To the contrary, if air is blown over a wood fire (as with bellows ), the fire is activated by the introduction of more air.

Some chemicals, such as fluorine gas, perchlorate salts such as ammonium perchlorate , or chlorine trifluoride , act as oxidizers, sometimes more powerful ones than oxygen itself.  A fire based on a reaction with these oxidizers can be very difficult to put out until the oxidizer is exhausted; that leg of the fire triangle cannot be broken by normal means (i.e., depriving it of air will not smother it).

In certain cases such as some explosives, the oxidizer and combustible are the same (e.g., nitroglycerin, an unstable molecule that has oxidizing parts in the same molecule as the oxidizeable parts).

The reaction is initiated by an activating energy — in most cases, it is heat. Several examples include friction, as in the case of matches, heating an electrical wire, a flame (propagation of fire), or a spark (from a lighter or from any starting electrical device). There are also many other ways to bring sufficient activation energy including electricity, radiation, and pressure, all of which will lead to a temperature rise. In most cases, heat production enables self-sustainability of the reaction, and enables a chain reaction to grow. The temperature at which a liquid produces sufficient vapor to get a flammable mix with self-sustainable combustion is called its flash-point.

Extinguishment of the fire [ edit ] To stop a combustion reaction, one of the three elements of the fire triangle must be removed.

Without sufficient heat, a fire cannot begin, and it cannot continue.  Heat can be removed by the application of a substance which reduces the amount of heat available to the fire reaction. This is often water, which absorbs heat for phase change from water to steam.  Introducing sufficient quantities and types of powder or gas in the flame reduces the amount of heat available for the fire reaction in the same manner.  Scraping embers from a burning structure also removes the heat source.  Turning off the electricity in an electrical fire removes the ignition source.

Without fuel, a fire will stop.  Fuel can be removed naturally, as where the fire has consumed all the burnable fuel, or manually, by mechanically or chemically removing the fuel from the fire.  Fuel separation is an important factor in wildland fire suppression, and is the basis for most major tactics, such as controlled burns .  The fire stops because a lower concentration of fuel vapor in the flame leads to a decrease in energy release and a lower temperature. Removing the fuel thereby decreases the heat.

Without sufficient oxygen, a fire cannot begin, and it cannot continue.  With a decreased oxygen concentration, the combustion process slows. Oxygen can be denied to a fire using a carbon dioxide fire extinguisher , a fire blanket or water.

Role of water in firefighting [ edit ] The water can have two different roles. In the case of a solid combustible, the solid fuel produces pyrolyzing products under the influence of heat, commonly radiation. This process is halted by the application of water, since water is more easily evaporated than the fuel is pyrolyzed. Thereby energy is removed from the fuel surface and it is cooled and the pyrolysis is stopped, removing the fuel supply to the flames. In fire fighting, this is referred to as surface cooling.

In the gas phase, i.e. in the flames or in the smoke, the combustible can not be separated from the oxidizer, and the only possible action consists of cooling down. In this case, water droplets are evaporated in the gas phase, thereby lowering the temperature and adding water vapour making the gas mixture non combustible. This requires droplets of a size less than about 0.2 mm. In fire fighting, this is referred to as gas cooling or smoke cooling.

Cases also exist  where the ignition factor is not the activation energy. For example, a smoke explosion is a very violent combustion of unburned gases contained in the smoke created by a sudden fresh air input (oxidizer input). The interval in which an air/gas mix can burn is limited by the explosive limits of the air. This interval can be very small (kerosene) or large (acetylene).

Water cannot be used on certain type of fires: Fires where live electricity is present – as water conducts electricity it presents an electrocution hazard.

Hydrocarbon fires – as it will only spread the fire because of the difference in density/ hydrophobicity . For example, adding water to a fire with an oil source will cause the oil to spread, since oil and water do not mix . However, using a foam/water mix in a specific application method is acceptable.

Metal fires – as these fires produce huge amounts of energy (up to 7.550 calories/kg [ disputed – discuss ] for aluminium ) and water can also create violent chemical reactions with burning metal (possibly even serving as an additional oxidizing agent).

Since these reactions are well understood, it has been possible to create specific water-additives which will allow: A better heat absorption with a higher density than water.

Carrying free radical catchers on the fire.

Carrying foaming agents to enable water to stay on the surface of a liquid fire and prevent gas release.

Carrying specific reactives which will react and change the nature of the burning material.

Water-additives are generally designed to be effective on several categories of fires (class A + class B or even class A + class B + class F [Class K in North America]), meaning a better global performance and usability of a single extinguisher on many different types of fires (or fires that involve several different classes of materials).

Multi-scale fire triangles for wildland fires [ edit ] Multi-scale fire triangles describing the elements of wildland fire at the scale of the flame, a wildfire, and a fire regime. Adapted from Moritz et al. (2005) Wildfire, complexity, and highly optimized tolerance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102, 17912-17917.

In the context of wildland fire, the fire triangle can be scaled up to apply to fire spread over landscapes (scales of days and several kilometres) and recurrence of fire over time (scales of decades and hundreds of kilometres).

[ 7 ] Thus, while heat is important to ignite a flame, topography is important for aiding fire spread especially by preheating upslope fuels, and ignitions sources are important to help explain recurrence on longer time scales. Similarly, while oxygen is relevant to sustain a flame, weather and associated winds feed oxygen into a spreading fire, and the longer-term pattern of weather is summarized as climate. Lastly, fuels is the term to describe what burns in a single flame to the range of materials burnt in a spreading wildfire, but fuels vary over larger space and time scales in what is called vegetation .

At the smallest scale, the combustion fire triangle, individual fuel particles are ignited once at a critical temperature, and fire transfers energy to the nearest surroundings. Combustion events range on the scale of several seconds to a couple of days and their effects are monitored at the quadrant scale. The largest scale, in contrast, describes the fire regime concept. Global climate change drives many of the factors involved in the 'wildfire' and the 'fire regime' triangles.  For example, with respect to the fire regime, a particular vegetation type will support a characteristic fire in terms of recurrence, intensity, seasonality and biological effects; a change in vegetation type will have implications for a changing fire regime.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fire triangle .

Look up fire triangle in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Glossary of firefighting terms Fire classes Notes [ edit ] ^ The Fire Triangle Archived 2012-04-06 at the Wayback Machine , Hants Fire brigade, accessed June 2009 ^ "Wildland Fire Facts: There Must Be All Three" .

National Park Service . Retrieved 30 August 2018 .

^ IFSTA, 2008 p. 88.

^ "What is a fire illuminate shape? triangle" .

FireRescue1 . Archived from the original on 2017-02-14 . Retrieved 2017-02-14 .

^ "The Fire Tetrahedron (A pyramid)" .

Information about the Fire Triangle/Tetrahedron and Combustion . Safelincs Ltd . Retrieved 30 August 2012 .

^ a b http://www.titanium.com/titanium/tech_manual/tech16.cfm Archived 2009-01-26 at the Wayback Machine Titanium MSDS ^ Moritz, Max A.; Morais, Marco E.; Summerell, Lora A.; Carlson, J. M.; Doyle, John (2005-12-13).

"Wildfires, complexity, and highly optimized tolerance" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

102 (50): 17912– 17917.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0508985102 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 1312407 .

PMID 16332964 .

References [ edit ] Essentials of Fire Fighting and Fire Department Operations (fifth ed.).

International Fire Service Training Association . 2008.

v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐578f99f475‐f9hdh
Cached time: 20250812000034
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.361 seconds
Real time usage: 0.468 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1268/1000000
Revision size: 13121/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 65918/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1543/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 40213/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.220/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6338192/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  363.547      1 -total
 35.92%  130.578      1 Template:Reflist
 24.22%   88.046      2 Template:Cite_web
 21.78%   79.163      1 Template:Fire_fighting
 21.43%   77.893      2 Template:Navbox
 15.89%   57.765      1 Template:Short_description
  8.81%   32.038      2 Template:Sister_project
  8.75%   31.823      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.53%   31.015      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.38%   30.450      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:888192:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000034 and revision id 1295093903. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_triangle&oldid=1295093903 " Categories : Firefighting Fire Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 17:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire triangle 23 languages Add topic

