Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 North Atlantic Toggle North Atlantic subsection 1.1 Caribbean Sea 1.2 Florida 1.3 Mediterranean Sea 1.4 North Carolina, Outer Banks 1.5 Scapa Flow, Scotland 2 South Atlantic Toggle South Atlantic subsection 2.1 Brazil 3 East Pacific 4 West Pacific Toggle West Pacific subsection 4.1 Bikini Atoll 4.2 Guam 4.3 Truk Lagoon 5 Indian Ocean Toggle Indian Ocean subsection 5.1 Red Sea 6 Freshwater Shipwrecks Toggle Freshwater Shipwrecks subsection 6.1 Great Lakes 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Notes Toggle the table of contents List of wreck diving sites 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia List of shipwreck sites which are popular amongst scuba divers for wreck diving.

Wreck of the Zenobia.

List of shipwreck sites which are popular amongst scuba divers for wreck diving , arranged by geographical distribution.

North Atlantic [ edit ] Ireland Alondra – English steamer wrecked off Ireland, Baltimore, County Cork United Kingdom HMS A1 – The Royal Navy's first British-designed submarine HMS A3 – A-class submarine of the Royal Navy Abessinia – German ship wrecked at the Farne Islands in 1921. Now a dive site Aeolian Sky – Greek registered freighter sunk off Dorset after a collision SS Ajax – Cargo steamship that was built in Germany in 1923 Albert C. Field – Canadian cargo ship, sunk off the Needles during World War II SS Ben Doran – Steam fishing trawler that operated out of Aberdeen SS Binnendijk – Dutch cargo steamship sunk by a mine off Portland Bill in the English Channel HMS Boadicea – B-class destroyer of the Royal Navy, sunk by enemy action in Lyme Bay SS Breda – Dutch ship sunk off Scotland in 1940 HMS Coronation – 90-gun second-rate ship of the line of the English Royal Navy SMS Dresden – Light cruiser of the German Imperial Navy SS Eastfield – Ship sunk off Cornwall in 1917, now a dive site HMT Elk – British trawler sunk off Plymouth in 1940, now a recreational dive site.

SS Espagne – Belgian cargo ship sunk in English Channel HMS Falmouth – Town-class light cruiser of the Royal Navy HMS Ghurka – Tribal-class destroyer of the Royal Navy sunk off Dungeness by a German mine Glen Strathallan – British ship scuttled in Plymouth sound as a dive site Herzogin Cecilie – German-built four-masted barque wrecked near Salcombe Hilma Hooker – Shipwreck in Bonaire in the Caribbean Netherlands SS Hispania – Swedish steamship wrecked in the Sound of Mull, now a dive site HMS Hood – Royal Sovereign-class battleship of the Royal Navy scuttled in Portland Harbour SS James Eagan Layne – Liberty ship sunk off Cornwall, now a dive site SMS Kronprinz – Battleship of the German Imperial Navy Kyarra – Cargo and passenger luxury liner torpedoed and sunk near Swanage HMS Laforey – Royal Navy destroyer sunk by a mine off Sussex SS Louis Sheid – Belgian ship sunk off Devon on 1939. Now a recreational dive site USS LST-507 – US Tank landing ship sunk off the south coast of England, now a dive site HMS M2 – Royal Navy submarine monitor wrecked in Lyme Bay SS Maine – British ship sunk in 1917 near Dartmouth, Devon. Now a recreational dive site SS Maloja – UK registered passenger steamship sunk by a mine off Dover Marguerite – French ship sunk in Lyme Bay in 1917. Now a dive site SMS Markgraf – Battleship of the German Imperial Navy SS Mendi – Passenger steamship that sank after a collision south of the Isle of Wight RMS Moldavia – British ship sunk in 1918 off Beachy Head, now a dive site HMS Montagu – Pre-dreadnought battleship of the British Royal Navy MV RMS Mulheim – German owned container ship wrecked at Land's End, United Kingdom SS Oceana – Cargo and passenger ship sunk off Beachy Head after a collision MS Oslofjord – Ocean liner sunk after hitting a mine off the River Tyne SS Persier – British ship sunk in Plymouth Sound in 1945. Now a dive site MS Piłsudski – Polish passenger ship sunk off the Yorkshire coast MV Pool Fisher – British merchant vessel that sank off the Isle of Wight HMS Port Napier – British World War II auxiliary minesweeper that caught fire and exploded Preußen – German steel-hulled five-masted ship-rigged windjammer sunk in Crab Bay after a collision SS Radaas – Ship sunk in 1917 near Portland Bill, now a dive site SS Rondo – Ship sunk in Sound of Mull in 1935, now a recreational dive site SS Rosehill – Steam collier torpedoed and sunk near Fowey, Cornwall SS Rotorua – New Zealand Shipping Company steam ocean liner and refrigerated cargo ship Royal Adelaide – Iron sailing ship wrecked on Chesil Beach Royal Charter – Steam clipper wrecked off Anglesey, UK HMS Safari – Royal Navy S-class submarine which served in World War II HMS Scylla – 1970 Type 12I or Leander-class frigate of the Royal Navy, Cornwall , United Kingdom HMS Sidon – Royal Navy submarine sunk in Portland Harbour by explosion of a faulty torpedo Stanegarth – Steam tugboat scuttled as a dive feature at Stoney Cove SS Stanwood – British ship sunk off Falmouth in 1939 SS Stella – Passenger ferry wrecked off the Casquets in 1899 SS Stepas Darius – Liberty ship built in the United States during World War II SS Thesis – Steamship wrecked in 1889 in the Sound of Mull, Scotland. Now a recreational dive site.

SS Torrey Canyon – Oil tanker wrecked off the coast of Cornwall U-40 – German submarine sunk by a mine in the English Channel U-1195 – German World War II submarine SS Varvassi – Greek freighter wrecked at The Needles in a storm after engine failure SS Walter L M Russ – German freighter wrecked in St George's Channel List of shipwrecks of the Isles of Scilly , Cornwall United States USS Aeolus – Attack cargo ship converted into a cable repair ship SS Andrea Doria – Ocean liner sunk after a collision off Massachusetts in 1956 , Nantucket Sound . This dive is becoming less common, as the rapid deterioration of the wreck is making diving more difficult on top of the already treacherous dive to reach the vessel.

SS Arratoon Apcar – 19th-century British steamship that is now a wreck in Florida SMS Geier – Unprotected cruiser of the German Imperial Navy USNS General Hoyt S. Vandenberg – US Navy transport ship sunk as artificial reef at Key West Caribbean Sea [ edit ] Aruba MS Antilla – Hamburg America Line cargo ship scuttled in 1940 off Aruba SS Pedernales – Lake tanker damaged by a torpedo at Aruba,  part of the ships remains as dive site Bonaire Hilma Hooker – Shipwreck in Bonaire in the Caribbean Netherlands British Virgin Islands RMS Rhone – Royal Mail Ship wrecked off Salt Island in the British Virgin Islands in a hurricane Cayman Islands MV Captain Keith Tibbetts – Class of Soviet anti-submarine frigates Curaçao Superior Producer , [ 1 ] Grenada MV Bianca C.

– Passenger ship sunk off Grenada Mexico Felipe Xicoténcatl – Admirable class minesweeper sunk as an artificial reef off Cozumel Mustique SS Antilles – French cruise ship that ran aground and sank off Mustique Florida [ edit ] Eagle , Islamorada , Florida USNS General Hoyt S. Vandenberg , Key West , Florida USS Oriskany , Pensacola , Florida USS Spiegel Grove , Florida Keys , Florida Mediterranean Sea [ edit ] Adriatic SMS Zenta SS Tiffany Cyprus Constandis Lady Thetis Zenobia Italy Haven Malta Cominoland [ citation needed ] Imperial Eagle [ citation needed ] Karwela [ citation needed ] HMS Maori P29 P31 Rozi St. Michael [ citation needed ] Tug No. 10 [ citation needed ] Tug No. 2 [ citation needed ] Um El Faroud X127 [ citation needed ] Xlendi [ citation needed ] North Carolina, Outer Banks [ edit ] See also: Graveyard of the Atlantic U-352 USS Monitor USS Tarpon USS Yancey USS Schurz ( SMS Geier ) USCGC Spar USS Indra SS Papoose USS Aeolus SS Dixie Arrow Scapa Flow, Scotland [ edit ] SMS Markgraf South Atlantic [ edit ] Brazil [ edit ] Pirapama , Vapor Bahia , Corveta Camacuã and other wrecks in Recife ; Corveta Ipiranga in Fernando de Noronha ; Buenos Aires at Rio de Janeiro ; other wrecks along the coast of Brazil East Pacific [ edit ] Wreck Alley , San Diego , California West Pacific [ edit ] HMAS Adelaide , New South Wales , Australia HMAS Brisbane , Queensland , Australia SS Yongala , Queensland, Australia HMAS Canberra , Victoria , Australia USAT Liberty , Tulamben , Bali , Indonesia MS Mikhail Lermontov , New Zealand Rainbow Warrior , New Zealand HMNZS Wellington , New Zealand Toa Maru , Solomon Islands SS President Coolidge , Vanuatu Bikini Atoll [ edit ] USS Saratoga (CV-3) - aircraft carrier USS Arkansas (BB-33) - battleship USS Gilliam (APA-57) - attack transport USS Carlisle (APA-69) - attack transport USS Lamson (DD-367) - destroyer USS Anderson (DD-411) - destroyer USS Apogon (SS-308) - submarine USS Pilotfish (SS-386) - submarine Japanese battleship Nagato - battleship Japanese cruiser Sakawa - light cruiser Guam [ edit ] Diver between the hulls of Cormoran and Tokai Maru in Apra Harbor , Guam American Tanker, WWII American concrete barge in Apra Harbor [ 2 ] Aratama Maru , a WWII Japanese military transport in Talofofo Bay [ 3 ] SMS Cormoran (1914) , WWI German merchant raider in Apra Harbor [ 3 ] Kitsugawa Maru , a WWII Japanese transport in Apra Harbor [ 3 ] Tokai Maru , WWII Japanese passenger-cargo ship in Apra Harbor [ 3 ] Truk Lagoon [ edit ] Main article: Truk Lagoon Indian Ocean [ edit ] Al Munassir , Muscat , Oman HMS Hermes , Sri Lanka Inket Wreck, World War II Japanese shipwreck, Andaman Islands , India Red Sea [ edit ] The Umbria Wreck ( Sudan)
The Umbria wreck is considered one of the most famous wreck diving sites in the world, owing to its massive size, mysterious history, and fascinating cargo. This Italian vessel was constructed in Hamburg, Germany, in 1912. The circumstances of its sinking remain a matter of historical debate. Some accounts claim that the captain deliberately scuttled the ship to prevent it from falling into British hands, while other sources suggest it was under threat from a German submarine, leading to its sinking.

The ship sank—or was scuttled—on June 9, 1940, during the early days of Italy’s entry into World War II, while en route to East Africa. It was covertly carrying a large military cargo estimated at over 300,000 bombs, in addition to various weapons and supplies intended for Italian forces.

Today, the wreck lies in shallow waters off the Sudanese coast, specifically at Wingate Reef near Port Sudan, at depths ranging from 5 to 35 meters, making it accessible to most recreational divers. The site is renowned for its exceptional underwater visibility, which can reach up to 30 meters, providing stunning and unobstructed views of the ship’s structure. Fully exploring the wreck typically requires at least three dives, due to its immense size and the presence of five large cargo holds, many of which still contain original items such as bombs, timber, and crates of wine.

The Toyota Wreck (Blue Belt Wreck) - Sudan
In 1977, the Blue Belt cargo ship collided with Sha’ab Suedi Reef, one of the most prominent dive sites along Sudan’s Red Sea coast, resulting in the vessel's sinking at the site. The accident caused its cargo—composed of Toyota-brand cars and trucks—to plunge to the seafloor, where the wreck remains to this day. The site is widely known among divers as The Toyota Wreck, and it is considered a unique dive location that combines historical intrigue with ecological richness.

On The Underwater and Diving Video Channel on YouTube, several daring divers explored and captured close-up footage of the remnants of the ship and its cargo. While the Japanese steel used in the vehicle bodies has long since corroded, the plastic components have surprisingly endured. Seats, dashboards, and front grills now encrusted with corals serve as lasting underwater monuments to the sunken vehicles.

Continental Shelf Station Two (Conshelf II)-Sudan
Between 1962 and 1965, the renowned French oceanographer Jacques-Yves Cousteau constructed three underwater habitats as part of an ambitious project aimed at proving the feasibility of human habitation in underwater villages at varying depths. Although two of these structures were later dismantled, Continental Shelf Station Two—also known as Conshelf II—remains the only physical remnant of this pioneering experiment. It was established in 1963 near Sha’ab Rumi reef.

Cousteau documented this remarkable endeavor in his award-winning 1964 Oscar-winning documentary “World Without Sun”, which captured the experience of six aquanauts living for thirty days in a star-shaped underwater habitat located at a depth of ten meters. The mission was supported by a surface team that provided essential life support services, including air, water, food, and energy.

Despite the scientific and technical success of the project, Cousteau later chose not to pursue this path further, as he feared it would ultimately serve the interests of the oil industry. Instead, he devoted the rest of his life to the protection of the world’s oceans.

Today, divers can visit the remains of Conshelf II, where the six-meter-wide star-shaped metal structure still lies on the white sandy seabed at a depth of 13 meters. Coral and marine life have colonized the site, transforming it into a thriving artificial reef. Slightly deeper lie the old shark cages, which have likewise become rich habitats—silent witnesses to a groundbreaking scientific experiment that took place over half a century ago (Adil Sidahmed. Ahmed, 2025).

Freshwater Shipwrecks [ edit ] Great Lakes [ edit ] List of shipwrecks in the Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary RMS Empress of Ireland , Saint Lawrence River SS America , Lake Superior SS Carl D. Bradley , Lake Michigan SS Cedarville , Lake Huron SS D.R.Hanna , Lake Huron SS Eber Ward , Lake Michigan SS Ironsides , Lake Michigan SS Isaac M. Scott , Lake Huron SS Pewabic , Lake Huron SS Milwaukee , Lake Michigan SS Regina , Lake Huron SS Vienna , Lake Superior See also [ edit ] Artificial reef – Human-made underwater structure that functions as a reef Lists of shipwrecks – Index to Wikipedia's lists of shipwrecks Sinking ships for wreck diving sites – Scuttling old ships to produce artificial reefs References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Sawyer, Ty (22 September 2005).

"The History of the Superior Producer" .

SportDiver.com . Retrieved 6 January 2017 .

^ "What Concrete Ships Lie at Guam?" .

ww2pacific.com . September 7, 2006 . Retrieved 7 March 2021 .

^ a b c d "Diving in War in the Pacific National Historical Park" .

National Park Service . October 30, 2012 . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kkzmh
Cached time: 20250817195015
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.558 seconds
Real time usage: 0.808 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13444/1000000
Revision size: 15979/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 42045/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8161/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 12857/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.358/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16981776/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  742.098      1 -total
 55.59%  412.521     76 Template:Annotated_link
 11.42%   84.714      1 Template:Reflist
 10.02%   74.336      3 Template:Cite_web
  9.75%   72.363      8 Template:Citation_needed
  7.84%   58.170      1 Template:Short_description
  7.50%   55.662      8 Template:Fix
  4.80%   35.642      2 Template:Pagetype
  3.72%   27.589     16 Template:Category_handler
  3.61%   26.777      8 Template:USS Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25024111:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817195015 and revision id 1303669925. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_wreck_diving_sites&oldid=1303669925 " Categories : Wreck diving sites Lists of shipwrecks Shipwrecks Underwater diving lists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 10:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of wreck diving sites 1 language Add topic

