Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prehistoric art 2 Ancient Toggle Ancient subsection 2.1 Minoan 2.2 Classical Greek and Hellenistic 2.3 Roman 3 Medieval Toggle Medieval subsection 3.1 Early medieval art 3.2 Byzantine 3.3 Romanesque 3.4 Gothic 4 Renaissance Toggle Renaissance subsection 4.1 From Gothic to the Renaissance 4.2 Early Renaissance 4.3 High Renaissance 4.4 Northern art up to the Renaissance 5 Mannerism, Baroque, and Rococo Toggle Mannerism, Baroque, and Rococo subsection 5.1 Mannerism (16th century) 5.2 Baroque (early 17th century to mid-early 18th century) 5.3 Rococo (early to mid-18th century) 6 Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Academism, and Realism 7 Modern art 8 Contemporary art and Postmodern art 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Art of Europe 16 languages العربية Беларуская Bosanski Eesti Français Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Македонски مصرى ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Română Slovenčina ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Leonardo da Vinci 's Mona Lisa is an Italian art masterpiece famous worldwide. Considered an archetypal masterpiece of the Italian Renaissance , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] it has normally been on display at the Louvre in Paris since 1797.

[ 3 ] Kosovo Maiden ; by Uroš Predić ; 1919; oil on canvas; 1.95 x 2.64m; National Museum of Serbia ( Belgrade , Serbia ) The Art of Painting ; by Johannes Vermeer ; 1666–1668; oil on canvas; 1.3 x 1.1 m; Kunsthistorisches Museum ( Vienna , Austria ) History of art Periods and movements Prehistoric Ancient Medieval Pre-Romanesque Romanesque Gothic Renaissance Mannerism Baroque Rococo Neoclassicism Revivalism Romanticism Realism Pre-Raphaelites Modern Impressionism Symbolism Decorative Post-Impressionism Art Nouveau Fauvism Expressionism Cubism Contemporary Postmodern Conceptualism Pop Minimalism Periods in Western art history Regions Art of the Middle East Mesopotamian Egyptian Hittite Kurdish Persian Arabian South Arabian Phoenician Ottoman Art of Central Asia Art of East Asia Chinese Hong Kong Taiwan Japanese Korean Tibetan Art of South Asia Indian Bhutanese Newar Art of Southeast Asia Indonesian Filipino Vietnamese Thai Myanmar Malaysian Cambodian Khmer Lao Singaporean Bruneian Art of Europe Minoan Cycladic Etruscan Dacian Celtic Scythian Greek Hellenistic Iberian Roman Byzantine Anglo-Saxon Ottonian Viking Rus Art of Africa Igbo Yoruba Benin Kuba Luba Art of the Americas Pre-Columbian Maya Muisca Inuit Art of Oceania Australian Cook Islands Hawaiian Papuan Religions Buddhist Christian Catholic Protestant Hindu Islamic Jain Manichaean Sikh Taoist Vodou Vodun Techniques Sculpture Painting Pottery Calligraphy Architecture Photography Graphic arts Digital art Types Abstract Art history Art movement List Figurative Funerary Naïve Narrative Naturalist v t e European art history Medieval Renaissance Mannerism Baroque Neoclassicism Romanticism Realism Modern Contemporary v t e The art of Europe , also known as Western art , encompasses the history of visual art in Europe . European prehistoric art started as mobile Upper Paleolithic rock and cave painting and petroglyph art and was characteristic of the period between the Paleolithic and the Iron Age .

[ 4 ] Written histories of European art often begin with the Aegean civilizations , dating from the 3rd millennium BC. However a consistent pattern of artistic development within Europe becomes clear only with Ancient Greek art , which was adopted and transformed by Rome and carried; with the Roman Empire , across much of Europe, North Africa and Western Asia .

[ 5 ] The influence of the art of the Classical period waxed and waned throughout the next two thousand years, seeming to slip into a distant memory in parts of the Medieval period, to re-emerge in the Renaissance , suffer a period of what some early art historians viewed as "decay" during the Baroque period, [ 6 ] to reappear in a refined form in Neo-Classicism [ 7 ] and to be reborn in Post-Modernism .

[ 8 ] Before the 1800s, the Christian church was a major influence on European art, and commissions from the Church provided the major source of work for artists. In the same period there was also a renewed interest in classical mythology, great wars, heroes and heroines, and themes not connected to religion.

[ 9 ] Most art of the last 200 years has been produced without reference to religion and often with no particular ideology at all, but art has often been influenced by political issues, whether reflecting the concerns of patrons or the artist.

European art is arranged into a number of stylistic periods, which, historically, overlap each other as different styles flourished in different areas. Broadly the periods are: Classical , Byzantine , Medieval , Gothic , Renaissance , Baroque , Rococo , Neoclassical , Modern , Postmodern and New European Painting .

[ 9 ] Prehistoric art [ edit ] Main article: Prehistoric art § Europe European prehistoric art is an important part of the European cultural heritage.

[ 10 ] Prehistoric art history is usually divided into four main periods: Stone Age , Neolithic , Bronze Age , and Iron Age . Most of the remaining artifacts of this period are small sculptures and cave paintings.

Venus of Willendorf ; c. 26,000 BC (the Gravettian period); limestone with ocre coloring; Naturhistorisches Museum ( Vienna , Austria) Much surviving prehistoric art is small portable sculptures, with a small group of female Venus figurines such as the Venus of Willendorf (24,000–22,000 BC) found across central Europe; [ 11 ] the 30 cm tall Löwenmensch figurine of about 30,000 BCE has hardly any pieces that can be related to it.  The Swimming Reindeer of about 11,000 BCE is one of the finest of a number of Magdalenian carvings in bone or antler of animals in the art of the Upper Paleolithic , though they are outnumbered by engraved pieces, which are sometimes classified as sculpture.

[ 12 ] With the beginning of the Mesolithic in Europe figurative sculpture greatly reduced, [ 13 ] and remained a less common element in art than relief decoration of practical objects until the Roman period, despite some works such as the Gundestrup cauldron from the European Iron Age and the Bronze Age Trundholm sun chariot .

[ 14 ] The oldest European cave art dates back 40,800, and can be found in the El Castillo Cave in Spain.

[ 15 ] Other cave painting sites include Lascaux , Cave of Altamira , Grotte de Cussac , Pech Merle , Cave of Niaux , Chauvet Cave , Font-de-Gaume , Creswell Crags, Nottinghamshire, England, (Cave etchings and bas-reliefs discovered in 2003), Coliboaia cave from Romania (considered the oldest cave painting in central Europe ) [ 16 ] and Magura, [ 4 ] Belogradchik, Bulgaria.

[ 17 ] Rock painting was also performed on cliff faces, but fewer of those have survived because of erosion.  One well-known example is the rock paintings of Astuvansalmi in the Saimaa area of Finland. When Marcelino Sanz de Sautuola first encountered the Magdalenian paintings of the Altamira cave, Cantabria, Spain in 1879, the academics of the time considered them hoaxes.  Recent reappraisals and numerous additional discoveries have since demonstrated their authenticity, while at the same time stimulating interest in the artistry of Upper Palaeolithic peoples.  Cave paintings, undertaken with only the most rudimentary tools, can also furnish valuable insight into the culture and beliefs of that era.

The Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin represents a very different style, with the human figure the main focus, often seen in large groups, with battles, dancing and hunting all represented, as well as other activities and details such as clothing.  The figures are generally rather sketchily depicted in thin paint, with the relationships between the groups of humans and animals more carefully depicted than individual figures. Other less numerous groups of rock art, many engraved rather than painted, show similar characteristics. The Iberian examples are believed to date from a long period perhaps covering the Upper Paleolithic, Mesolithic and early Neolithic.

Prehistoric Celtic art comes from much of Iron Age Europe and survives mainly in the form of high-status metalwork skillfully decorated with complex, elegant and mostly abstract designs, often using curving and spiral forms. There are human heads and some fully represented animals, but full-length human figures at any size are so rare that their absence may represent a religious taboo.  As the Romans conquered Celtic territories, it almost entirely vanishes, but the style continued in limited use in the British Isles , and with the coming of Christianity revived there in the Insular style of the Early Middle Ages.

Cave paintings from Lascaux caves ( Montignac, Dordogne , France) Bison Licking Insect Bite ; 15,000–13,000 BC; antler ; National Museum of Prehistory ( Les Eyzies-de-Tayac-Sireuil , France) The Thinker of Cernavoda ; by Hamangia culture from Romania; c. 5000 BC; terracotta; height: 11.5 cm (4 1 ⁄ 2 in.); National Museum of Romanian History ( Bucharest ) Female figure; by Vinča culture from Serbia ; 4500-3500 BC; fired clay with paint; overall: 16.1 cm; Cleveland Museum of Art ( Ohio , US) Ancient [ edit ] Minoan [ edit ] Main article: Minoan art The Minoan civilization of Crete is regarded as the oldest civilization in Europe.

[ 18 ] Minoan art is marked by imaginative images and exceptional workmanship.

Sinclair Hood described an "essential quality of the finest Minoan art, the ability to create an atmosphere of movement and life although following a set of highly formal conventions".

[ 19 ] It forms part of the wider grouping of Aegean art , and in later periods came for a time to have a dominant influence over Cycladic art .  Wood and textiles have decomposed, so most surviving examples of Minoan art are pottery , intricately carved Minoan seals , .palace frescos which include landscapes), small sculptures in various materials, jewellery, and metalwork.

The relationship of Minoan art to that of other contemporary cultures and later Ancient Greek art has been much discussed. It clearly dominated Mycenaean art and Cycladic art of the same periods, [ 20 ] even after Crete was occupied by the Mycenaeans, but only some aspects of the tradition survived the Greek Dark Ages after the collapse of Mycenaean Greece .

[ 21 ] Minoan art has a variety of subject-matter, much of it appearing across different media, although only some styles of pottery include figurative scenes.

Bull-leaping appears in painting and several types of sculpture, and is thought to have had a religious significance; bull's heads are also a popular subject in terracotta and other sculptural materials.  There are no figures that appear to be portraits of individuals, or are clearly royal, and the identities of religious figures is often tentative, [ 22 ] with scholars uncertain whether they are deities, clergy or devotees.

[ 23 ] Equally, whether painted rooms were "shrines" or secular is far from clear; one room in Akrotiri has been argued to be a bedroom, with remains of a bed, or a shrine.

[ 24 ] Animals, including an unusual variety of marine fauna, are often depicted; the " Marine Style " is a type of painted palace pottery from MM III and LM IA that paints sea creatures including octopus spreading all over the vessel, and probably originated from similar frescoed scenes; [ 25 ] sometimes these appear in other media.  Scenes of hunting and warfare, and horses and riders, are mostly found in later periods, in works perhaps made by Cretans for a Mycenaean market, or Mycenaean overlords of Crete.

While Minoan figures, whether human or animal, have a great sense of life and movement, they are often not very accurate, and the species is sometimes impossible to identify; by comparison with Ancient Egyptian art they are often more vivid, but less naturalistic.

[ 26 ] In comparison with the art of other ancient cultures there is a high proportion of female figures, though the idea that Minoans had only goddesses and no gods is now discounted.  Most human figures are in profile or in a version of the Egyptian convention with the head and legs in profile, and the torso seen frontally; but the Minoan figures exaggerate features such as slim male waists and large female breasts.

[ 27 ] Kamares ware beaked jug; 1850-1675 BC; ceramic; height: 27 cm; from Phaistos ( Crete , Greece); Heraklion Archaeological Museum (Greece) The Malia Pendant ; 1800-1700 BC; gold; height: 4.6 cm, width: 4.9 cm; Heraklion Archaeological Museum The fresco named the Bull-Leaping Fresco ; 1675-1460 BC; lime plaster; height: 0.8 m, width: 1 m; from the palace at Knossos (Crete); Heraklion Archaeological Museum "Snake Goddess" figurine ; 1460-1410 BC (from the Minoan Neo-palatial Period); faience ; height: 29.5 cm; from the Temple Repository at Knossos; Heraklion Archaeological Museum Classical Greek and Hellenistic [ edit ] Main article: Ancient Greek art Ancient Greece had great painters, great sculptors, and great architects. The Parthenon is an example of their architecture that has lasted to modern days. Greek marble sculpture is often described as the highest form of Classical art.  Painting on the pottery of Ancient Greece and ceramics gives a particularly informative glimpse into the way society in Ancient Greece functioned.

Black-figure vase painting and Red-figure vase painting gives many surviving examples of what Greek painting was. Some famous Greek painters on wooden panels who are mentioned in texts are Apelles , Zeuxis and Parrhasius , however no examples of Ancient Greek panel painting survive, only written descriptions by their contemporaries or by later Romans.  Zeuxis lived in 5–6 BC and was said to be the first to use sfumato . According to Pliny the Elder , the realism of his paintings was such that birds tried to eat the painted grapes.  Apelles is described as the greatest painter of Antiquity for perfect technique in drawing, brilliant color and modeling.

The Euphiletos Painter Panathenaic prize amphora ; 530 BC; painted terracotta; height: 62.2 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) The Artemision Bronze ; 460-450 BC; bronze; height: 2.1 m; National Archaeological Museum ( Athens ) The Parthenon on the Athenian Acropolis , the most iconic Doric Greek temple built of marble and limestone between circa 460-406 BC, dedicated to the goddess Athena [ 28 ] Mirror with a support in the form of a draped woman; mid-5th century BC; bronze; height: 40.41 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Calyx- krater ; 400-375 BC; ceramic; height: 27.9 cm, diameter: 28.6 cm; from Thebes (Greece); Louvre The Grave relief of Thraseas and Euandria ; 375-350 BC; Pentelic marble ; height: 160 cm, width: 91 cm; Pergamon Museum ( Berlin ) Volute krater; 320-310 BC; ceramic; height: 1.1 m; Walters Art Museum ( Baltimore , US) Statuette of a draped woman; 2nd century BC; terracotta; height: 29.2 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Venus de Milo ; 130–100 BC; marble; height: 203 cm (80 in); Louvre Laocoön and His Sons ; early first century BC; marble; height: 2.4 m; Vatican Museums ( Vatican City ) Mosaic which represents the Epiphany of Dionysus ; 2nd century AD; from the Villa of Dionysus ( Dion, Greece ); Archeological Museum of Dion Illustrations of examples of ancient Greek ornaments and patterns, drawn in 1874 Roman [ edit ] Main article: Roman art Roman art was influenced by Greece and can in part be taken as a descendant of ancient Greek painting and sculpture, but was also strongly influenced by the more local Etruscan art of Italy.

Roman sculpture , is primarily portraiture derived from the upper classes of society as well as depictions of the gods. However, Roman painting does have important unique characteristics.  Among surviving Roman paintings are wall paintings, many from villas in Campania , in Southern Italy, especially at Pompeii and Herculaneum . Such painting can be grouped into four main "styles" or periods [ 29 ] and may contain the first examples of trompe-l'œil , pseudo-perspective, and pure landscape.

[ 30 ] Almost all of the surviving painted portraits from the Ancient world are a large number of coffin-portraits of bust form found in the Late Antique cemetery of Al-Fayum .  They give an idea of the quality that the finest ancient work must have had.  A very small number of miniatures from Late Antique illustrated books also survive, and a rather larger number of copies of them from the early medieval period.

Early Christian art grew out of Roman popular, and later Imperial, art and adapted its iconography from these sources.

Bronze statuette of a philosopher on a lamp stand; late 1st century BC; bronze; overall: 27.3 cm; weight: 2.9 kg; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) Augustus of Prima Porta ; circa 20 BC; white marble ; height: 2.06 m; Vatican Museums ( Vatican City ) Restoration of a fresco from an Ancient villa bedroom; 50-40 BC; dimensions of the room: 265.4 x 334 x 583.9 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) Altar with festoons ; circa 50 AD; marble; height: 99.5 cm, width: 61.5 cm, depth: 47 cm; Louvre Calyx - krater with reliefs of maidens and dancing maenads; 1st century AD; Pentelic marble ; height: 80.7 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Panoramic view of the Pantheon (Rome), built between 113 and 125 Head of a goddess wearing a diadem; 1st–2nd century; marble; height: 23 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Couch and footstool; 1st–2nd century AD; wood, bone and glass; couch: 105.4 × 76.2 × 214.6 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Sarcophagus with Apollo , Minerva and the Muses ; circa 200 AD; from Via Appia ; Antikensammlung Berlin (Berlin) Sarcophagus with festoons ; 200–225; marble; 134.6 x 223.5 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Triumph of Neptune standing on a chariot pulled by two sea horses; mid-3rd century; Sousse Archaeological Museum (Tunisia) The Theseus Mosaic ; 300-400 AD; marble and limestone pebbles; 4.1 x 4.2 m; Kunsthistorisches Museum ( Vienna , Austria) Medieval [ edit ] Main article: Medieval art Most surviving art from the medieval period was religious in focus, often funded by the Church , powerful ecclesiastical individuals such as bishops , communal groups such as abbeys , or wealthy secular patrons . Many had specific liturgical functions—processional crosses and altarpieces , for example.

One of the central questions about medieval art concerns its lack of realism. A great deal of knowledge of perspective in art and understanding of the human figure was lost with the fall of Rome . But realism was not the primary concern of medieval artists. They were simply trying to send a religious message, a task which demands clear iconic images instead of precisely rendered ones.

Time Period : 6th century to 15th century Early medieval art [ edit ] Migration period art is a general term for the art of the "barbarian" peoples who moved into formerly Roman territories.

Celtic art in the 7th and 8th centuries saw a fusion with Germanic traditions through contact with the Anglo-Saxons creating what is called the Hiberno-Saxon style or Insular art , which was to be highly influential on the rest of the Middle Ages.

Merovingian art describes the art of the Franks before about 800, when Carolingian art combined insular influences with a self-conscious classical revival, developing into Ottonian art .

Anglo-Saxon art is the art of England after the Insular period.

Illuminated manuscripts contain nearly all the surviving painting of the period, but architecture, metalwork and small carved work in wood or ivory were also important media.

Buckle of Sutton Hoo ; 580–620; gold and niello; length: 13.1 cm; British Museum (London) The helmet of Sutton Hoo ; early 7th century AD; coppery alloy, iron, gold and garnet ; height: 31.8 cm; British Museum Shoulder-clasps from Sutton Hoo ; early 7th century; gold, glass & garnet ; length: 12.7 cm; British Museum The Incipit to Matthew from the Book of Lindisfarne ; late 7th century; ink and pigments on vellum; 34 x 25 cm; British Library (London) Byzantine [ edit ] Main article: Byzantine art Byzantine art overlaps with or merges with what we call Early Christian art until the iconoclasm period of 730-843 when the vast majority of artwork with figures was destroyed; so little remains that today any discovery sheds new understanding. After 843 until 1453 there is a clear Byzantine art tradition. It is often the finest art of the Middle Ages in terms of quality of material and workmanship, with production centered on Constantinople. Byzantine art's crowning achievement were the monumental frescos and mosaics inside domed churches, most of which have not survived due to natural disasters and the appropriation of churches to mosques.

Slab with a relief representing the Nativity of Jesus ; 4th-early 5th century; marble; Byzantine and Christian Museum ( Athens ) Apse of the Santa Maria Maggiore church in Rome , decorated in the 5th century with this glamorous mosaic Mosaics on a ceiling and some walls of the Basilica of San Vitale in Ravenna (Italy), circa 547 AD The Little Metropolis in Athens , built on unknown dates, between the 9th century to the 13th century Cameo; 10th-11th centuries; jasper , almandine , emerald and chrysoprase ; from Constantinople ; Moscow Kremlin Museums (Russia) Gospel lectionary; circa 1100; tempera, gold, and ink on parchment, and leather binding; overall: 36.8 x 29.6 x 12.4 cm, folio: 35 x 26.2 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) Icon of the New Testament Trinity; circa 1450; tempera and gold on wood panel (poplar); Cleveland Museum of Art ( Cleveland , Ohio , US) Page of an Armenian illuminated manuscript ; 1637–1638; tempera colors, gold paint, and gold leaf on parchment; height: 25.2 cm; Getty Center (Los Angeles) Romanesque [ edit ] Main article: Romanesque art Romanesque art refers to the period from about 1000 to the rise of Gothic art in the 12th century.  This was a period of increasing prosperity, and the first to see a coherent style used across Europe, from Scandinavia to Sicily.  Romanesque art is vigorous and direct, was originally brightly coloured, and is often very sophisticated.

Stained glass and enamel on metalwork became important media, and larger sculptures in the round developed, although high relief was the principal technique.  Its architecture is dominated by thick walls, and round-headed windows and arches, with much carved decoration.

Maria Laach Abbey (near Andernach , Germany), one of the most iconic Romanesque churches Stone bas-relief of Jesus , from the Vézelay Abbey ( Burgundy , France) Miniature of Saint John the Evangelist ; before 1147; illumination on parchment; 35.5 cm; Avesnes-sur-Helpe (France) The stoning of Saint Stephen; 1160s; fresco; height: 1.3 m; Saint John Abbey ( Val Müstair , Canton of Grisons , Switzerland) Gothic [ edit ] Main article: Gothic art Gothic art is a variable term depending on the craft, place and time. The term originated with Gothic architecture in 1140, but Gothic painting did not appear until around 1200 (this date has many qualifications), when it diverged from Romanesque style. Gothic sculpture was born in France in 1144 with the renovation of the Abbey Church of S. Denis and spread throughout Europe, by the 13th century it had become the international style, replacing Romanesque. International Gothic describes Gothic art from about 1360 to 1430, after which Gothic art merges into Renaissance art at different times in different places. During this period forms such as painting, in fresco and on panel, become newly important, and the end of the period includes new media such as prints.

Part of the Royal Portal; 1145–1155; limestone; Chartres Cathedral ( Chartres , France) North transept windows; circa 1230–1235; stained glass; diameter (rose window): 10.2 m; Chartres Cathedral Scenes from the Legend of Saint Vincent of Saragossa; 1245–1247; pot-metal glass, vitreous paint, and lead; overall: 373.4 x 110.5 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) French diptych with the coronation of the Virgin and the Last Judgment; 1260–1270; elephant ivory with metal mounts; overall: 12.7 x 13 x 1.9 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Enthroned Virgin and child; 1260–1280; elephant ivory with traces of paint and gilding; overall: 18.4 x 7.6 x 7.3 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Bifolium with the decretals of gratian ; circa 1290; tempera and gold on parchment, brown ink, and modern leather binding; overall: 48.3 x 29.2 x 1.3 cm, opened: 47.2 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art German diptych with religious scenes; 1300–1325; silver gilt with translucent and opaque enamels; overall (opened): 6.1 x 8.6 x 0.8 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Page of Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry depictic the funeral of Raymond Diocrès; 1411-1416 and 1485–1486; tempera on vellum ; height: 29 cm, width: 21 cm; Condé Museum ( Chantilly, France ) The Lady and the Unicorn , the title given to a series of six tapestries woven in Flanders , this one being called À Mon Seul Désir ; late 15th century; wool and silk; 377 x 473 cm; Musée de Cluny (Paris) Austrian statue of Enthroned Virgin; 1490–1500; limestone with gesso , painted and gilded; 80.3 x 59.1 x 23.5 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Entrance in Jerusalem ; circa 1500; painting; Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon ( Lyon , France) Flamboyant Gothic cross-windows of the Hôtel de Sens (Paris) Renaissance [ edit ] Leonardo da Vinci 's Vitruvian Man ( Uomo Vitruviano ) (c. 1490), a seminal work from the Renaissance. The drawing is inspired and subsequently named after the 1st century BC Roman architect -author Vitruvius and his notions on the "ideal" human body proportions , found in his De architectura .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] The drawing highlights the movement's fascination with Graeco-Roman civilisations and appropriation of classical art , as well as his pursuit for the correlation between body structure and nature.

[ 32 ] Main article: Renaissance art The Renaissance is characterized by a focus on the arts of Ancient Greece and Rome , which led to many changes in both the technical aspects of painting and sculpture, as well as to their subject matter. It began in Italy , a country rich in Roman heritage as well as material prosperity to fund artists. During the Renaissance, painters began to enhance the realism of their work by using new techniques in perspective , thus representing three dimensions more authentically. Artists also began to use new techniques in the manipulation of light and darkness, such as the tone contrast evident in many of Titian 's portraits and the development of sfumato and chiaroscuro by Leonardo da Vinci .

Sculptors , too, began to rediscover many ancient techniques such as contrapposto . Following with the humanist spirit of the age, art became more secular in subject matter, depicting ancient mythology in addition to Christian themes. This genre of art is often referred to as Renaissance Classicism . In the North, the most important Renaissance innovation was the widespread use of oil paints , which allowed for greater colour and intensity.

From Gothic to the Renaissance [ edit ] During the late 13th century and early 14th century, much of the painting in Italy was Byzantine in character, notably that of Duccio of Siena and Cimabue of Florence, while Pietro Cavallini in Rome was more Gothic in style. During the 13th century , Italian sculptors began to draw inspiration not only from medieval prototypes, but also from ancient works.

[ 33 ] In 1290, Giotto began painting in a manner that was less traditional and more based upon observation of nature. His famous cycle at the Scrovegni Chapel , Padua , is seen as the beginnings of a Renaissance style .

Other painters of the 14th century were carried the Gothic style to great elaboration and detail. Notable among these painters are Simone Martini and Gentile da Fabriano .

In the Netherlands , the technique of painting in oils rather than tempera , led itself to a form of elaboration that was not dependent upon the application of gold leaf and embossing, but upon the minute depiction of the natural world. The art of painting textures with great realism evolved at this time. Dutch painters such as Jan van Eyck and Hugo van der Goes were to have great influence on Late Gothic and Early Renaissance painting.

Early Renaissance [ edit ] The ideas of the Renaissance first emerged in the city-state of Florence , Italy . The sculptor Donatello returned to classical techniques such as contrapposto and classical subjects like the unsupported nude—his second sculpture of David was the first free-standing bronze nude created in Europe since the Roman Empire. The sculptor and architect Brunelleschi studied the architectural ideas of ancient Roman buildings for inspiration.

Masaccio perfected elements like composition, individual expression, and human form to paint frescoes, especially those in the Brancacci Chapel , of surprising elegance, drama, and emotion.

A remarkable number of these major artists worked on different portions of the Florence Cathedral . Brunelleschi's dome for the cathedral was one of the first truly revolutionary architectural innovations since the Gothic flying buttress. Donatello created many of its sculptures. Giotto and Lorenzo Ghiberti also contributed to the cathedral.

Pulpit in the Pisa Baptistery by Nicola Pisano ; 1260; marble; height: 4.6 m.

[ 34 ] Crucifix ; by Cimabue ; circa 1285; tempera on panel; 4.29 x 3.83 m; San Domenico ( Arezzo , Italy) [ 35 ] Crucifix; Giotto ; circa 1300; tempera on panel; 5.78 x 4.06 m; Santa Maria Novella ( Florence , Italy) [ 36 ] The Maestà Altarpiece ; by Duccio ; 1308–1311; tempera on panel; 2.46 x 4.67 m; Museo dell'Opera del Duomo ( Siena , Italy) High Renaissance [ edit ] High Renaissance artists include such figures as Leonardo da Vinci , Michelangelo Buonarroti , and Raffaello Sanzio .

The 15th-century artistic developments in Italy (for example, the interest in perspectival systems, in depicting anatomy, and in classical cultures) matured during the 16th century, accounting for the designations "Early Renaissance" for the 15th century and "High Renaissance" for the 16th century. Although no singular style characterizes the High Renaissance, the art of those most closely associated with this period—Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Michelangelo, and Titian—exhibits an astounding mastery, both technical and aesthetic. High Renaissance artists created works of such authority that generations of later artists relied on these artworks for instruction.
These exemplary artistic creations further elevated the prestige of artists. Artists could claim divine inspiration, thereby raising visual art to a status formerly given only to poetry. Thus, painters, sculptors, and architects came into their own, successfully claiming for their work a high position among the fine arts. In a sense, 16th- century masters created a new profession with its own rights of expression and its own venerable character.

The Last Supper (1494–1499), Leonardo da Vinci , Church of Santa Maria delle Grazie , Milan The Tempietto (towards 1502–1510) in a narrow courtyard of the San Pietro in Montorio from Rome The Birth of Venus (1484–1486), Sandro Botticelli , Uffizi Gallery , Florence David ; by Michelangelo ; 1501–1504; marble; 517 cm × 199 cm; Galleria dell'Accademia (Florence) The School of Athens ; by Raphael ; 1509–1510; fresco; 5.8 x 8.2 m; Apostolic Palace ( Vatican City ) Northern art up to the Renaissance [ edit ] Early Netherlandish painting developed (but did not strictly invent) the technique of oil painting to allow greater control in painting minute detail with realism— Jan van Eyck (1366–1441) was a figure in the movement from illuminated manuscripts to panel paintings .

Hieronymus Bosch (1450?–1516), a Dutch painter, is another important figure in the Northern Renaissance . In his paintings, he used religious themes, but combined them with grotesque fantasies, colorful imagery, and peasant folk legends. His paintings often reflect the confusion and anguish associated with the end of the Middle Ages.

Albrecht Dürer introduced Italian Renaissance style to Germany at the end of the 15th century, and dominated German Renaissance art.

Time Period : Italian Renaissance: Late 14th century to Early 16th century Northern Renaissance: 16th century Apelles painting Campaspe , an artwork which shows people surrounded by fine art; by Willem van Haecht ; c. 1630; oil on panel; height: 104.9 cm, width: 148.7 cm; Mauritshuis ( The Hague , the Netherlands ) The Ghent Altarpiece ; by Jan and Hubert van Eyck ; 1432; oil on oak wood; 3.4 m × 4.6 m (opened like in this image); St Bavo's Cathedral ( Ghent , Belgium ) The Arnolfini Portrait ; by Jan van Eyck ; 1434; oil on panel; 82.2 x 60 cm; National Gallery (London) The Descent from the Cross ; by Rogier van der Weyden ; circa 1442; oil on oak panel; 220 × 262 cm; Museo del Prado ( Madrid , Spain) The Garden of Earthly Delights ; by Hieronymus Bosch ; c. 1504; oil on panel; 2.2 × 1.95 m – the central panel; Museo del Prado The Rhinoceros ; by Albrecht Dürer ; 1515; woodcut; 23.5 cm × 29.8 cm; National Gallery of Art ( Washington, D.C.

) The Ambassadors ; by Hans Holbein the Younger ; 1533; oil on panel; 2.07 × 2.09; National Gallery (London) The Parade Armour of Henry II of France ; by Étienne Delaune ; circa 1555; chased steel; height: 187.96 cm, weight: 24.2 kg; Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) The Tower of Babel ; by Pieter Bruegel the Elder ; 1563; oil on panel: 1.14 × 1.55 cm; Kunsthistorisches Museum ( Vienna , Austria) Mannerism, Baroque, and Rococo [ edit ] Main articles: Mannerism , Baroque , and Rococo Differences between Baroque and Rococo art Baroque art was characterised by strongly religious and political themes; common characteristics included rich colours with a strong light and dark contrast. Paintings were elaborate, emotional and dramatic in nature. In the image Caravaggio 's Christ at the Column ( Cristo alla colonna ) Rococo art was characterised by lighter, often jocular themes; common characteristics included pale, creamy colours, florid decorations and a penchant for bucolic landscapes. Paintings were more ornate than their Baroque counterpart, and usually graceful, playful and light-hearted in nature.

In European art, Renaissance Classicism spawned two different movements— Mannerism and the Baroque . Mannerism, a reaction against the idealist perfection of Classicism, employed distortion of light and spatial frameworks in order to emphasize the emotional content of a painting and the emotions of the painter. The work of El Greco is a particularly clear example of Mannerism in painting during the late 16th, early 17th centuries.

Northern Mannerism took longer to develop, and was largely a movement of the last half of the 16th century. Baroque art took the representationalism of the Renaissance to new heights, emphasizing detail, movement, lighting, and drama in their search for beauty. Perhaps the best known Baroque painters are Caravaggio , Rembrandt , Peter Paul Rubens , and Diego Velázquez .

A rather different art developed out of northern realist traditions in 17th-century Dutch Golden Age painting , which had very little religious art, and little history painting , instead playing a crucial part in developing secular genres such as still life , genre paintings of everyday scenes, and landscape painting .  While the Baroque nature of Rembrandt's art is clear, the label is less use for Vermeer and many other Dutch artists.

Flemish Baroque painting shared a part in this trend, while also continuing to produce the traditional categories.

Baroque art is often seen as part of the Counter-Reformation —the artistic element of the revival of spiritual life in the Roman Catholic Church . Additionally, the emphasis that Baroque art placed on grandeur is seen as Absolutist in nature. Religious and political themes were widely explored within the Baroque artistic context, and both paintings and sculptures were characterised by a strong element of drama, emotion and theatricality. Famous Baroque artists include Caravaggio or Rubens .

[ 37 ] Artemisia Gentileschi was another noteworthy artist, who was inspired by Caravaggio's style. Baroque art was particularly ornate and elaborate in nature, often using rich, warm colours with dark undertones. Pomp and grandeur were important elements of the Baroque artistic movement in general, as can be seen when Louis XIV said, "I am grandeur incarnate"; many Baroque artists served kings who tried to realize this goal. Baroque art in many ways was similar to Renaissance art; as a matter of fact, the term was initially used in a derogative manner to describe post-Renaissance art and architecture which was over-elaborate.

[ 37 ] Baroque art can be seen as a more elaborate and dramatic re-adaptation of late Renaissance art.

By the 18th century, however, Baroque art was falling out of fashion as many deemed it too melodramatic and also gloomy, and it developed into the Rococo , which emerged in France. Rococo art was even more elaborate than the Baroque, but it was less serious and more playful.

[ 38 ] Whilst the Baroque used rich, strong colours, Rococo used pale, creamier shades. The artistic movement no longer placed an emphasis on politics and religion, focusing instead on lighter themes such as romance, celebration, and appreciation of nature. Rococo art also contrasted the Baroque as it often refused symmetry in favor of asymmetrical designs. Furthermore, it sought inspiration from the artistic forms and ornamentation of Far Eastern Asia , resulting in the rise in favour of porcelain figurines and chinoiserie in general.

[ 39 ] The 18th-century style flourished for a short while; nevertheless, the Rococo style soon fell out of favor, being seen by many as a gaudy and superficial movement emphasizing aesthetics over meaning.

Neoclassicism in many ways developed as a counter movement of the Rococo, the impetus being a sense of disgust directed towards the latter's florid qualities.

Mannerism (16th century) [ edit ] Main article: Mannerism Entombment ; by Jacopo da Pontormo ; 1525–1528; oil on panel; 3.12 x 1.9 m; Santa Felicita ( Florence , Italy) Madonna with the Long Neck ; by Parmigianino ; 1534–1540; oil on panel; 2.19 x 1.32 m; Uffizi Gallery (Florence) Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time ; by Bronzino ; mid-1540s; oil on panel; 1.46 x 1.16 m; National Gallery (London) Summer ; by Giuseppe Arcimboldo ; 1563; oil on panel; 67 x 50.8 cm; Kunsthistorisches Museum ( Vienna , Austria) Baroque (early 17th century to mid-early 18th century) [ edit ] Main article: Baroque The Four Continents ; by Peter Paul Rubens ; circa 1615; oil on canvas; 209 x 284 cm; Kunsthistorisches Museum ( Vienna , Austria) Dutch wardrobe; 1625–1650; oak with ebony and rosewood veneers; overall: 244.5 x 224.3 x 85.2 cm; Cleveland Museum of Art ( Cleveland , Ohio , US) The Night Watch ; by Rembrandt ; 1642; oil on canvas; 363 × 437 cm; Rijksmuseum ( Amsterdam , the Netherlands ) The Ecstasy of Saint Teresa ; by Gian Lorenzo Bernini ; 1647–1652; marble; height: 3.5 m; Santa Maria della Vittoria (Rome) Las Meninas ; by Diego Velázquez ; 1656–1657; oil on canvas; 318 cm × 276 cm; Museo del Prado ( Madrid , Spain) The entrance of the Palace of Versailles ( Versailles , France), the most iconic Baroque building The Bust of Louis XIV ; by Gian Lorenzo Bernini; 1665; marble; 105 × 99 × 46 cm; Palace of Versailles The Art of Painting ; by Johannes Vermeer ; 1666–1668; oil on canvas; 1.3 x 1.1 m; Kunsthistorisches Museum Carpet with fame and fortitude; 1668–1685; knotted and cut wool pile, woven with about 90 knots per square inch; 909.3 x 459.7 cm; Metropolitan Museum of Art Dome of the Church of the Gesù (Rome), made in 1674 by Giovanni Battista Gaulli The Portrait of Louis XIV ; by Hyacinthe Rigaud ; 1701; oil on canvas; 277 × 194 cm; Louvre The Karlskirche in Vienna (Austria), built between 1716 and 1737 Rococo (early to mid-18th century) [ edit ] Main article: Rococo The Chinese House , a chinoiserie garden pavilion in Sanssouci Park , from Potsdam (Germany) The amazing interior of the Wilhering Abbey ( Wilhering , Austria ). This interior has a trompe-l'œil on its ceiling, surrounded of highly decorated stuccos Boiserie from the Hôtel de Varengeville; circa 1736–1752; various materials, including carved, painted, and gilded oak; height: 5.58 m, width: 7.07 m, length: 12.36 m; in the Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City) Title print; by Juste Meissonnier ; 1738–1749; etching on paper; 51.6 x 34.9 cm; Rijksmuseum Pair of candelabrums; 18th century; soft-paste porcelain; heights (the left one): 26.8 cm, (the right one): 26.4 cm; by the Chelsea porcelain factory ; Metropolitan Museum of Art Mr and Mrs Andrews ; by Thomas Gainsborough ; circa 1750; oil on canvas; 69.8 x 119.4 cm; National Gallery (London) Madame de Pompadour ; by François Boucher ; 1756; oil on canvas; 2.01 x 1.57 m; Alte Pinakothek ( Munich , Germany) The Swing ; by Jean-Honoré Fragonard ; 1767–1768; oil on canvas; height: 81 cm, width: 64 cm; Wallace Collection (London) Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Academism, and Realism [ edit ] Main articles: Neoclassicism , Romantic art , Academic art , and Realism (arts) Neoclassical art, inspired by different classical themes, was characterised by an emphasis on simplicity, order and idealism. In the image Antonio Canova 's Psyche Revived by Cupid's Kiss (1787-1793) Throughout the 18th century, a counter movement opposing the Rococo sprang up in different parts of Europe, commonly known as Neoclassicism . It despised the perceived superficiality and frivolity of Rococo art, and desired for a return to the simplicity, order and 'purism' of classical antiquity, especially ancient Greece and Rome. The movement was in part also influenced by the Renaissance, which itself was strongly influenced by classical art. Neoclassicism was the artistic component of the intellectual movement known as the Enlightenment ; the Enlightenment was idealistic, and put its emphasis on objectivity, reason and empirical truth. Neoclassicism had become widespread in Europe throughout the 18th century, especially in the United Kingdom , which saw great works of Neoclassical architecture spring up during this period; Neoclassicism's fascination with classical antiquity can be seen in the popularity of the Grand Tour during this decade, where wealthy aristocrats travelled to the ancient ruins of Italy and Greece. Nevertheless, a defining moment for Neoclassicism came during the French Revolution in the late 18th century; in France, Rococo art was replaced with the preferred Neoclassical art, which was seen as more serious than the former movement. In many ways, Neoclassicism can be seen as a political movement as well as an artistic and cultural one.

[ 40 ] Neoclassical art places an emphasis on order, symmetry and classical simplicity; common themes in Neoclassical art include courage and war, as were commonly explored in ancient Greek and Roman art.

Ingres , Canova , and Jacques-Louis David are among the best-known neoclassicists.

[ 41 ] Eugène Delacroix , Liberty Leading the People 1830, Romantic art .

Just as Mannerism rejected Classicism, so did Romanticism reject the ideas of the Enlightenment and the aesthetic of the Neoclassicists. Romanticism rejected the highly objective and ordered nature of Neoclassicism, and opted for a more individual and emotional approach to the arts.

[ 42 ] Romanticism placed an emphasis on nature, especially when aiming to portray the power and beauty of the natural world, and emotions, and sought a highly personal approach to art. Romantic art was about individual feelings, not common themes, such as in Neoclassicism; in such a way, Romantic art often used colours in order to express feelings and emotion.

[ 42 ] Similarly to Neoclassicism, Romantic art took much of its inspiration from ancient Greek and Roman art and mythology, yet, unlike Neoclassical, this inspiration was primarily used as a way to create symbolism and imagery. Romantic art also takes much of its aesthetic qualities from medievalism and Gothicism , as well as mythology and folklore . Among the greatest Romantic artists were Eugène Delacroix , Francisco Goya , J. M. W. Turner , John Constable , Caspar David Friedrich , Thomas Cole , and William Blake .

[ 41 ] Most artists attempted to take a centrist approach which adopted different features of Neoclassicist and Romanticist styles, in order to synthesize them. The different attempts took place within the French Academy, and collectively are called Academic art .

Adolphe William Bouguereau is considered a chief example of this stream of art.

In the early 19th century the face of Europe, however, became radically altered by industrialization . Poverty, squalor, and desperation were to be the fate of the new working class created by the "revolution". In response to these changes going on in society, the movement of Realism emerged. Realism sought to accurately portray the conditions and hardships of the poor in the hopes of changing society. In contrast with Romanticism, which was essentially optimistic about mankind, Realism offered a stark vision of poverty and despair. Similarly, while Romanticism glorified nature, Realism portrayed life in the depths of an urban wasteland. Like Romanticism, Realism was a literary as well as an artistic movement. The great Realist painters include Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin , Gustave Courbet , Jean-François Millet , Camille Corot , Honoré Daumier , Édouard Manet , Edgar Degas (both considered as Impressionists ), and Thomas Eakins , among others.

The response of architecture to industrialisation, in stark contrast to the other arts, was to veer towards historicism. Although the railway stations built during this period are often considered the truest reflections of its spirit – they are sometimes called "the cathedrals of the age" – the main movements in architecture during the Industrial Age were revivals of styles from the distant past, such as the Gothic Revival . Related movements were the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood , who attempted to return art to its state of "purity" prior to Raphael , and the Arts and Crafts Movement , which reacted against the impersonality of mass-produced goods and advocated a return to medieval craftsmanship.

Time Period : Neoclassicism : mid-early 18th century to early 19th century Romanticism : late 18th century to mid-19th century Realism : 19th century Modern art [ edit ] Main articles: Impressionism , Post Impressionism , Fauvism , Cubism , Modern art , Modernism , and Late modernism Impressionism was known for its usage of light and movement in its paintings, as in Claude Monet 's 1902 Houses of Parliament, sunset Art & Language are known for their major input on conceptual art.

Out of the naturalist ethic of Realism grew a major artistic movement, Impressionism . The Impressionists pioneered the use of light in painting as they attempted to capture light as seen from the human eye.

Edgar Degas , Édouard Manet , Claude Monet , Camille Pissarro , and Pierre-Auguste Renoir , were all involved in the Impressionist movement. As a direct outgrowth of Impressionism came the development of Post-Impressionism .

Paul Cézanne , Vincent van Gogh , Paul Gauguin , Georges Seurat are the best known Post-Impressionists.

Following the Impressionists and the Post-Impressionists came Fauvism , often considered the first "modern" genre of art. Just as the Impressionists revolutionized light, so did the fauvists rethink color , painting their canvases in bright, wild hues. After the Fauvists, modern art began to develop in all its forms, ranging from Expressionism , concerned with evoking emotion through objective works of art, to Cubism , the art of transposing a four-dimensional reality onto a flat canvas, to Abstract art . These new art forms pushed the limits of traditional notions of "art" and corresponded to the similar rapid changes that were taking place in human society, technology, and thought.

Surrealism is often classified as a form of Modern Art. However, the Surrealists themselves have objected to the study of surrealism as an era in art history, claiming that it oversimplifies the complexity of the movement (which they say is not an artistic movement), misrepresents the relationship of surrealism to aesthetics , and falsely characterizes ongoing surrealism as a finished, historically encapsulated era. Other forms of Modern art (some of which border on Contemporary art ) include: Abstract expressionism Art Deco Art Nouveau Bauhaus Color Field painting Conceptual Art Constructivism Cubism Dada Der Blaue Reiter De Stijl Die Brücke Body art Expressionism Fauvism Fluxus Futurism Happening Surrealism Lettrisme Lyrical Abstraction Land art Minimalism Naive art Op art Performance art Photorealism Pop art Suprematism Video art Vorticism Time Period : Impressionism: late 19th Century Others: First half of the 20th century Contemporary art and Postmodern art [ edit ] Charles Thomson .

Sir Nicholas Serota Makes an Acquisitions Decision , 2000, Stuckism .

Main articles: Contemporary art and Postmodern art Modern art foreshadowed several characteristics of what would later be defined as postmodern art; as a matter of fact, several modern art movements can often be classified as both modern and postmodern, such as pop art . Postmodern art, for instance, places a strong emphasis on irony, parody and humour in general; modern art started to develop a more ironic approach to art which would later advance in a postmodern context. Postmodern art sees the blurring between the high and fine arts with low-end and commercial art; modern art started to experiment with this blurring.

[ 42 ] Recent developments in art have been characterised by a significant expansion of what can now deemed to be art, in terms of materials, media, activity and concept.

Conceptual art in particular has had a wide influence. This started literally as the replacement of concept for a made object, one of the intentions of which was to refute the commodification of art. However, it now usually refers to an artwork where there is an object, but the main claim for the work is made for the thought process that has informed it. The aspect of commercialism has returned to the work.

There has also been an increase in art referring to previous movements and artists, and gaining validity from that reference.

Postmodernism in art, which has grown since the 1960s, differs from Modernism in as much as Modern art movements were primarily focused on their own activities and values, while Postmodernism uses the whole range of previous movements as a reference point. This has by definition generated a relativistic outlook, accompanied by irony and a certain disbelief in values, as each can be seen to be replaced by another. Another result of this has been the growth of commercialism and celebrity. Postmodern art has questioned common rules and guidelines of what is regarded as ' fine art ', merging low art with the fine arts until none is fully distinguishable.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Before the advent of postmodernism, the fine arts were characterised by a form of aesthetic quality, elegance, craftsmanship, finesse and intellectual stimulation which was intended to appeal to the upper or educated classes; this distinguished high art from low art, which, in turn, was seen as tacky, kitsch , easily made and lacking in much or any intellectual stimulation, art which was intended to appeal to the masses. Postmodern art blurred these distinctions, bringing a strong element of kitsch, commercialism and campness into contemporary fine art; [ 42 ] what is nowadays seen as fine art may have been seen as low art before postmodernism revolutionised the concept of what high or fine art truly is.

[ 42 ] In addition, the postmodern nature of contemporary art leaves a lot of space for individualism within the art scene; for instance, postmodern art often takes inspiration from past artistic movements, such as Gothic or Baroque art, and both juxtaposes and recycles styles from these past periods in a different context.

[ 42 ] Some surrealists in particular Joan Miró , who called for the "murder of painting" (In numerous interviews dating from the 1930s onwards, Miró expressed contempt for conventional painting methods and his desire to "kill", "murder", or "rape" them in favor of more contemporary means of expression) [ 45 ] have denounced or attempted to "supersede" painting, and there have also been other anti-painting trends among artistic movements, such as that of Dada and conceptual art . The trend away from painting in the late 20th century has been countered by various movements, for example the continuation of Minimal Art , Lyrical Abstraction , Pop Art , Op Art , New Realism , Photorealism , Neo Geo , Neo-expressionism , New European Painting , Stuckism , Excessivism and various other important and influential painterly directions.

See also [ edit ] History of art History of painting Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects (16th century book) Modernism Painting in the Americas before European colonization List of time periods References [ edit ] ^ "The Theft That Made Mona Lisa a Masterpiece" .

All Things Considered . 30 July 2011. NPR . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ Sassoon, Donald (21 September 2001).

"Why I think Mona Lisa became an icon" .

Times Higher Education .

^ Carrier, David (2006).

Museum Skepticism: A History of the Display of Art in Public Galleries . Duke University Press. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-8223-3694-5 .

^ a b Oosterbeek, Luíz.

"European Prehistoric Art" .

Europeart . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ Boardman, John ed., The Oxford History of Classical Art , pp. 349-369, Oxford University Press , 1993, ISBN 0198143869 ^ Banister Fletcher excluded nearly all Baroque buildings from his mammoth tome A History of Architecture on the Comparative Method . The publishers eventually rectified this.

^ Murray, P. and Murray, L. (1963) The Art of the Renaissance . London: Thames & Hudson (World of Art), p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-500-20008-7 .  "...in 1855 we find, for the first time, the word 'Renaissance' used — by the French historian Michelet — as an adjective to describe a whole period of history and not confined to the rebirth of Latin letters or a classically inspired style in the arts." ^ Hause, S. & Maltby, W. (2001).

A History of European Society. Essentials of Western Civilization (Vol. 2, pp. 245–246). Belmont, CA: Thomson Learning, Inc.

^ a b "Art of Europe" .

Saint Louis Art Museum . Slam . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ Oosterbeek, Luíz.

"European Prehistoric Art" .

Europeart . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ Sandars, 8-16, 29-31 ^ Hahn, Joachim, "Prehistoric Europe, §II: Palaeolithic 3. Portable art" in Oxford Art Online , accessed 24 August 2012; Sandars, 37-40 ^ Sandars, 75-80 ^ Sandars, 253-257, 183-185 ^ Kwong, Matt.

"Oldest cave-man art in Europe dates back 40,800 years" . CBC News . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ "Romanian Cave May Boast Central Europe's Oldest Cave Art | Science/AAAS | News" . News.sciencemag.org. 21 June 2010 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ Gunther, Michael.

"Art of Prehistoric Europe" . Retrieved 4 December 2012 .

^ Chaniotis, Angelos.

"Ancient Crete" .

Oxford Bibliographies . Oxford University Press . Retrieved 2 January 2013 .

^ Hood, 56 ^ Hood, 17-18, 23-23 ^ Hood, 240-241 ^ Gates (2004), 33-34, 41 ^ eg Hood, 53, 55, 58, 110 ^ Chapin, 49-51 ^ Hood, 37-38 ^ Hood, 56, 233-235 ^ Hood, 235-236 ^ Mattinson, Lindsay (2019).

Understanding Architecture A Guide To Architectural Styles . Amber Books. p. 21.

ISBN 978-1-78274-748-2 .

^ "Roman Painting" . Art-and-archaeology.com . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "Roman Painting" .

Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History . The Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 19 October 2013 .

^ "The Vitruvian Man" .

leonardodavinci.stanford.edu . Retrieved 25 March 2018 .

^ a b "BBC - Science & Nature - Leonardo - Vitruvian man" .

www.bbc.co.uk . Retrieved 25 March 2018 .

^ Fortenberry, Diane (2017).

THE ART MUSEUM . Phaidon. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-7148-7502-6 .

^ Fortenberry, Diane (2017).

THE ART MUSEUM . Phaidon. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-7148-7502-6 .

^ Fortenberry, Diane (2017).

THE ART MUSEUM . Phaidon. p. 157.

ISBN 978-0-7148-7502-6 .

^ Fortenberry, Diane (2017).

THE ART MUSEUM . Phaidon. p. 157.

ISBN 978-0-7148-7502-6 .

^ a b "Baroque Art" . Arthistory-famousartists-paintings.com. 24 July 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "Ancien Regime Rococo" . Bc.edu. Archived from the original on 11 April 2018 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ "chinoiserie facts, information, pictures - Encyclopedia.com articles about chinoiserie" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 25 March 2018 .

^ "Art in Neoclassicism" . Artsz.org. 26 February 2008. Archived from the original on 21 March 2008 . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ a b James J. Sheehan, "Art and Its Publics, c. 1800," United and Diversity in European Culture c. 1800, ed.

Tim Blanning and Hagen Schulze (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006), 5-18.

^ a b c d e f "General Introduction to Postmodernism" . Cla.purdue.edu . Retrieved 25 August 2013 .

^ Ideas About Art , Desmond, Kathleen K.

[1] Archived 29 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine John Wiley & Sons, 2011, p.148 ^ International postmodernism: theory and literary practice , Bertens, Hans [2] Archived 29 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Routledge, 1997, p.236 ^ M. Rowell, Joan Mirό: Selected Writings and Interviews (London: Thames & Hudson , 1987) pp. 114–116.

Bibliography [ edit ] Chapin, Anne P., "Power, Privilege and Landscape in Minoan Art", in Charis: Essays in Honor of Sara A. Immerwahr , Hesperia (Princeton, N.J.) 33, 2004, ASCSA, ISBN 0876615337 , 9780876615331, google books Gates, Charles, "Pictorial Imagery in Minoan Wall Painting", in Charis: Essays in Honor of Sara A. Immerwahr , Hesperia (Princeton, N.J.) 33, 2004, ASCSA, ISBN 0876615337 , 9780876615331, google books Hood, Sinclair , The Arts in Prehistoric Greece , 1978, Penguin (Penguin/Yale History of Art), ISBN 0140561420 Sandars, Nancy K., Prehistoric Art in Europe , Penguin (Pelican, now Yale, History of Art), 1968 (nb 1st edn.; early datings now superseded) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Art of Europe .

Web Gallery of Art Postmodernism European artists community Panopticon Virtual Art Gallery v t e Art of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Culture of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union v t e Europe articles History Chronology Bibliography of European history Prehistory Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages Early modernity World War I World War II Pax Europaea Crisis situations and unrest since 2000 COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine By topic Military Sovereignty predecessor states Geography Areas and populations Countries by area European microstates Largest metropolitan areas Cities Climate Climate change Extreme points Geology Islands Lakes Mountains Regions Rivers Sovereign states and dependent territories by population Villages Politics Eurosphere International organisations Integration Law Post-Soviet Europe Transatlantic relations Intergovernmental Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Council of Europe (CoE) Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) European Political Community (EPC) GUAM Organization Open Balkan North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) statistics Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation European Union Economy relations free trade agreements Education European Economic Area (EEA) European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly European Union Customs Union (EUCU) Eurozone Foreign relations Members enlargement Politics Schengen Area Visa policy Statistics Economy History Financial (and social) rankings Free trade areas Energy Telecommunications Transport Rail Road Intergovernmental Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) Eurasian Customs Union (EACU) Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC) European Free Trade Association (EFTA) Sovereign states by Average wage Budget revenues per capita GDP (nominal) per capita GDP (PPP) per capita GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita HDI Internet users (%) Minimum wage Press Freedom Index Unemployment rate (%) Health expense per capita Military spending (%) Urban population (%) Electricity use per capita Society Ages of consent Etiquette Social (and financial) rankings Languages endangered Tattooing Universities Bologna Process Erasmus Culture Art painting sculpture Architecture Capital of Culture Cinema film festivals Classical music Cuisine Dance Folklore Literature Philosophy Religion Christianity Islam Judaism Sport Symbols ( Armorial , Flags ) Demographics Ageing Childhood population (%) Ethnic groups genetic history Immigration Life expectancy by region Retirement Outline Index Category Portal Maps v t e History of Europe Prehistory Paleolithic Europe Neolithic Europe Bronze Age Europe Iron Age Europe Classical antiquity Classical Greece Roman Republic Hellenistic period Roman Empire Early Christianity Christianity in late antiquity Crisis of the Third Century Fall of the Western Roman Empire Late antiquity Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Francia Anglo-Saxon England Byzantine Empire Papal States Bulgarian Empire First Second Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Viking Age Kievan Rus' Crown of Aragon ( Aragon , Catalonia , Valencia , Majorca ) Holy Roman Empire High Middle Ages Republic of Florence Feudalism Crusades Mongol invasion Serbian Empire Late Middle Ages Black Death Hundred Years' War Kalmar Union Modern period Renaissance Early modern Christianity in the modern era Reformation Age of Discovery Baroque Grand Duchy of Tuscany Thirty Years' War Absolute monarchy Ottoman Empire Portuguese Empire Spanish Empire Early modern France Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Cossack Hetmanate Swedish Empire Dutch Republic British Empire Habsburg monarchy Russian Empire Age of Enlightenment Great Divergence Industrial Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic Wars Nationalism Revolutions of 1848 World War I Russian Revolution Interwar period World War II Cold War European integration Euro area crisis COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine See also Art of Europe Bibliography of European history Genetic history of Europe History of Christianity History of the Mediterranean region History of the European Union History of Western civilization Maritime history of Europe Military history of Europe Crusading movement v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wt7qj
Cached time: 20250818000259
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.297 seconds
Real time usage: 1.726 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25665/1000000
Revision size: 72976/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 332802/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 30947/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 57/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 321101/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.487/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8396739/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1269.780      1 -total
 22.71%  288.382      2 Template:Europe_topic
 18.64%  236.700      1 Template:Reflist
 14.64%  185.844     96 Template:Iso2country
 11.69%  148.374      1 Template:Art_of_Europe
 11.26%  143.026      1 Template:Culture_of_Europe
  7.70%   97.762      1 Template:History_of_art_sidebar
  7.51%   95.316      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.20%   91.404      1 Template:Europefooter
  6.91%   87.801      1 Template:Region_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:334829:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818000259 and revision id 1306177858. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Art_of_Europe&oldid=1306177858 " Categories : Art of Europe History of art Western culture Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 10:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Art of Europe 16 languages Add topic

