Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early 1.2 Modern Era 1.3 World War I 1.4 World War II 1.5 Vietnam War 1.6 21st century 2 Examples of the term Toggle Examples of the term subsection 2.1 Terrorism 3 By country Toggle By country subsection 3.1 China 3.2 France 3.3 Germany 3.4 Iran 3.5 Israel 3.6 Russia 3.7 Soviet Union 3.8 United Kingdom 3.9 United States 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Psychological warfare 55 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Information operations to assist military objectives "Psyop" redirects here. For other uses, see Psyop (disambiguation) .

"Psywar" redirects here. For the song by the Norwegian metal band Mayhem, see Psywar (Mayhem song) .

An example of a World War II era leaflet meant to be dropped from an American B-17 over a German city (see the file description page for a translation) Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e Psychological warfare ( PSYWAR ), or the basic aspects of modern psychological operations ( PsyOp ), has been known by many other names or terms, including Military Information Support Operations ( MISO ), Psy Ops, political warfare , "Hearts and Minds", and propaganda .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term is used "to denote any action which is practiced mainly by psychological methods with the aim of evoking a planned psychological reaction in other people".

[ 3 ] Various techniques are used, and are aimed at influencing a target audience's value system, belief system, emotions , motives , reasoning , or behavior . It is used to induce confessions or reinforce attitudes and behaviors favorable to the originator's objectives, and are sometimes combined with black operations or false flag tactics. It is also used to destroy the morale of enemies through tactics that aim to depress troops' psychological states.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Target audiences can be governments , organizations , groups , and individuals , and is not just limited to soldiers. Civilians of foreign territories can also be targeted by technology and media so as to cause an effect on the government of their country.

[ 6 ] Stories are said to be a key factor in a successful operation.

[ 7 ] Mass communication such as radio allows for direct communication with an enemy populace, and therefore has been used in many efforts. Social media channels and the internet allow for campaigns of disinformation and misinformation performed by agents anywhere in the world.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] Early [ edit ] Mosaic of Alexander the Great on his campaign against the Persian Empire Currying favor with supporters was the other side of psychological warfare, and an early practitioner of this was Alexander the Great , who successfully conquered large parts of Europe and the Middle East and held on to his territorial gains by co-opting local elites into the Greek administration and culture. Alexander left some of his men behind in each conquered city to introduce Greek culture and oppress dissident views. His soldiers were paid dowries to marry locals [ 9 ] in an effort to encourage assimilation .

Genghis Khan , leader of the Mongol Empire in the 13th century AD employed less-subtle techniques. Defeating the will of the enemy before having to attack and reaching a consented settlement was preferable to facing his wrath. The Mongol generals demanded submission to the Khan and threatened the initially captured villages with complete destruction if they refused to surrender. If they had to fight to take the settlement, the Mongol generals fulfilled their threats and massacred the survivors. Tales of the encroaching horde spread to the next villages and created an aura of insecurity that undermined the possibility of future resistance.

[ 10 ] Genghis Khan also employed tactics that made his numbers seem greater than they actually were. During night operations he ordered each soldier to light three torches at dusk to give the illusion of an overwhelming army and deceive and intimidate enemy scouts. He also sometimes had objects tied to the tails of his horses, so that riding on open and dry fields raised a cloud of dust that gave the enemy the impression of great numbers. His soldiers used arrows specially notched to whistle as they flew through the air, creating a terrifying noise.

[ 11 ] In the 6th century BCE Greek Bias of Priene successfully resisted the Lydian king Alyattes by fattening up a pair of mules and driving them out of the besieged city.

[ 12 ] When Alyattes' envoy was then sent to Priene, Bias had piles of sand covered with wheat to give the impression of plentiful resources.

During the Granada War , Spanish captain Hernán Pérez del Pulgar routinely employed psychological tactics as part of his guerrilla actions against the Emirate of Granada . In 1490, infiltrating the city by night with a small retinue of soldiers, he nailed a letter of challenge on the main mosque and set fire to the alcaicería before withdrawing.

[ 13 ] In 1574, having been informed about the pirate attacks previous to the Battle of Manila , Spanish captain Juan de Salcedo had his relief force return to the city by night while playing marching music and carrying torches in loose formations, so they would appear to be a much larger army to any nearby enemy. They reached the city unopposed.

[ 14 ] Modern Era [ edit ] Because psyops shape public opinion and public memory, the rise of the printing press and mass communication greatly increased the use of psyops for military advantage. During the Indian Wars of the 17th through 19th centuries, politicians, newspaper reports and fictional novels about Native Americans all conveyed the belief that tribes in the Northeast had "died out," and leaders of New England communities even gave speeches about the "last Indians" in New England, even as Native Americans continued to reside in these communities.

[ 7 ] World War I [ edit ] Lord Bryce led the commission of 1915 to document German atrocities committed against Belgian civilians .

The start of modern psychological operations in war is generally dated to World War I . By that point, Western societies were increasingly educated and urbanized, and mass media was available in the form of large circulation newspapers and posters. It was also possible to transmit propaganda to the enemy via the use of airborne leaflets or through explosive delivery systems like modified artillery or mortar rounds.

[ 15 ] At the start of the war, the belligerents, especially the British and Germans, began distributing propaganda, both domestically and on the Western front . The British had several advantages that allowed them to succeed in the battle for world opinion ; they had one of the world's most reputable news systems, with much experience in international and cross-cultural communication, and they controlled much of the undersea communications cable system then in operation. These capabilities were easily transitioned to the task of warfare.

The British also had a diplomatic service that maintained good relations with many nations around the world, in contrast to the reputation of the German services.

[ 16 ] While German attempts to foment revolution in parts of the British Empire , such as Ireland and India , were ineffective, extensive experience in the Middle East allowed the British to successfully induce the Arabs to revolt against the Ottoman Empire .

In August 1914, David Lloyd George appointed a Member of Parliament (MP), Charles Masterman , to head a Propaganda Agency at Wellington House. A distinguished body of literary talent was enlisted for the task, with its members including Arthur Conan Doyle , Ford Madox Ford , G. K. Chesterton , Thomas Hardy , Rudyard Kipling and H. G. Wells . Over 1,160 pamphlets were published during the war and distributed to neutral countries, and eventually, to Germany. One of the first significant publications, the Report on Alleged German Outrages of 1915, had a great effect on general opinion across the world. The pamphlet documented atrocities , both actual and alleged, committed by the German army against Belgian civilians. A Dutch illustrator, Louis Raemaekers , provided the highly emotional drawings which appeared in the pamphlet.

[ 17 ] In 1917, the bureau was subsumed into the new Department of Information and branched out into telegraph communications, radio , newspapers, magazines and the cinema. In 1918, Viscount Northcliffe was appointed Director of Propaganda in Enemy Countries. The department was split between propaganda against Germany organized by H.G Wells, and propaganda against the Austro-Hungarian Empire supervised by Wickham Steed and Robert William Seton-Watson ; the attempts of the latter focused on the lack of ethnic cohesion in the Empire and stoked the grievances of minorities such as the Croats and Slovenes . It had a significant effect on the final collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Army at the Battle of Vittorio Veneto .

[ 15 ] Aerial leaflets were dropped over German trenches containing postcards from prisoners of war detailing their humane conditions, surrender notices and general propaganda against the Kaiser and the German generals . By the end of the war, MI7b had distributed almost 26 million leaflets. The Germans began shooting the leaflet-dropping pilots, prompting the British to develop unmanned leaflet balloons that drifted across no-man's land . At least one in seven of these leaflets were not handed in by the soldiers to their superiors, despite severe penalties for that offence. Even General Hindenburg admitted that "Unsuspectingly, many thousands consumed the poison", and POWs admitted to being disillusioned by the propaganda leaflets that depicted the use of German troops as mere cannon fodder . In 1915, the British began airdropping a regular leaflet newspaper Le Courrier de l'Air for civilians in German-occupied France and Belgium.

[ 18 ] At the start of the war, the French government took control of the media to suppress negative coverage. Only in 1916, with the establishment of the Maison de la Presse, did they begin to use similar tactics for the purpose of psychological warfare. One of its sections was the "Service de la Propagande aérienne" (Aerial Propaganda Service), headed by Professor Tonnelat and Jean-Jacques Waltz , an Alsatian artist code-named " Hansi ". The French tended to distribute leaflets of images only, although the full publication of US President Woodrow Wilson 's Fourteen Points , which had been heavily edited in the German newspapers, was distributed via airborne leaflets by the French.

[ 15 ] The Central Powers were slow to use these techniques; however, at the start of the war the Germans succeeded in inducing the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire to declare 'holy war', or Jihad , against the Western infidels .

[ citation needed ] They also attempted to foment rebellion against the British Empire in places as far afield as Ireland , Afghanistan , and India . The Germans' greatest success was in giving the Russian revolutionary, Lenin , free transit on a sealed train from Switzerland to Finland after the overthrow of the Tsar . This soon paid off when the Bolshevik Revolution took Russia out of the war.

[ 19 ] World War II [ edit ] Germany's Fall Grün plan of invasion of Czechoslovakia had a large part dealing with psychological warfare aimed both at the Czechoslovak civilians and government as well as, crucially, at Czechoslovakia's allies.

[ 20 ] It became successful to the point that Germany gained the acquiescence of the British and French governments to the German occupation of Czechoslovakia without having to fight an all-out war, sustaining only minimum losses in covert war before the Munich Agreement .

[ citation needed ] Map depicting the targets of all the subordinate plans of Operation Bodyguard .

During World War II, the British made extensive use of deception – developing many new techniques and theories. The main protagonists at this time were 'A' Force, set up in 1940 under Dudley Clarke , and the London Controlling Section, chartered in 1942 under the control of John Bevan.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Clarke pioneered many of the strategies of military deception. His ideas for combining fictional orders of battle, visual deception and double agents helped define Allied deception strategy during the war, for which he has been referred to as "the greatest British deceiver of WW2".

[ 23 ] During the lead-up to the Allied invasion of Normandy , many new tactics in psychological warfare were devised. The plan for Operation Bodyguard set out a general strategy to mislead German high command as to the date and location of the invasion, which was obviously going to happen. Planning began in 1943 under the auspices of the London Controlling Section (LCS). A draft strategy, referred to as Plan Jael, was presented to Allied high command at the Tehran Conference .

Operation Fortitude was intended to convince the Germans of a greater Allied military strength than was the case, through fictional field armies , faked operations to prepare the ground for invasion and "leaked" misinformation about the Allied order of battle and war plans.

Elaborate naval deceptions (Operations Glimmer , Taxable and Big Drum ) were undertaken in the English Channel.

[ 24 ] Small ships and aircraft simulated invasion fleets lying off Pas de Calais, Cap d'Antifer and the western flank of the real invasion force.

[ 25 ] At the same time Operation Titanic involved the RAF dropping fake paratroopers to the east and west of the Normandy landings.

A dummy Sherman tank , used to deceive the Germans.

The deceptions were implemented with the use of double agents, radio traffic and visual deception. The British " Double Cross " anti-espionage operation had proven very successful from the outset of the war, [ 26 ] and the LCS was able to use double agents to send back misleading information about Allied invasion plans.

[ 27 ] The use of visual deception, including mock tanks and other military hardware had been developed during the North Africa campaign . Mock hardware was created for Bodyguard ; in particular, dummy landing craft were stockpiled to give the impression that the invasion would take place near Calais .

The Operation was a strategic success and the Normandy landings caught German defences unaware. Continuing deception, portraying the landings as a diversion from a forthcoming main invasion in the Calais region, led Hitler into delaying transferring forces from Calais to the real battleground for nearly seven weeks.

[ 28 ] Vietnam War [ edit ] "Viet Cong, beware!" – South Vietnam leaflets urging the defection of Viet Cong .

The United States ran an extensive program of psychological warfare during the Vietnam War . The Phoenix Program had the dual aim of assassinating National Liberation Front of South Vietnam (NLF or Viet Cong ) personnel and terrorizing any potential sympathizers or passive supporters. During the Phoenix Program, over 19,000 NLF supporters were killed.

[ 29 ] In Operation Wandering Soul , the United States also used tapes of distorted human sounds and played them during the night making the Vietnamese soldiers think that the dead were back for revenge.

The Vietcong and their forces also used a program of psychological warfare during this war. Trịnh Thị Ngọ, also known as Thu Hương and Hanoi Hannah , was a Vietnamese radio personality. She made English-language broadcasts for North Vietnam directed at United States troops. During the Vietnam War, Ngọ became famous among US soldiers for her propaganda broadcasts on Radio Hanoi. Her scripts were written by the North Vietnamese Army and were intended to frighten and shame the soldiers into leaving their posts. She made three broadcasts a day, reading a list of newly killed or imprisoned Americans, and playing popular US anti-war songs in an effort to incite feelings of nostalgia and homesickness, attempting to persuade US GIs that the US involvement in the Vietnam War was unjust and immoral.

[ 30 ] A typical broadcast began as follows: How are you, GI Joe? It seems to me that most of you are poorly informed about the going of the war, to say nothing about a correct explanation of your presence over here. Nothing is more confused than to be ordered into a war to die or to be maimed for life without the faintest idea of what's going on.

[ 31 ] 21st century [ edit ] An American PSYOP leaflet disseminated during the Iraq War . It shows a caricature of Al-Qaeda in Iraq leader Abu Musab al-Zarqawi caught in a rat trap . The caption reads "This is your future, Zarqawi".

The CIA made extensive use of Contra soldiers to destabilize the Sandinista government in Nicaragua .

[ 32 ] The CIA used psychological warfare techniques against the Panamanians by delivering unlicensed TV broadcasts. The United States government has used propaganda broadcasts against the Cuban government through TV Marti , based in Miami, Florida . However, the Cuban government has been successful at jamming the signal of TV Marti.

In the Iraq War , the United States used the shock and awe campaign to psychologically maim and break the will of the Iraqi Army to fight.

In cyberspace, social media has enabled the use of disinformation on a wide scale. Analysts have found evidence of doctored or misleading photographs spread by social media in the Syrian Civil War and 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine , possibly with state involvement.

[ 33 ] Military and governments have engaged in psychological operations (PSYOP) and informational warfare (IW) on social networking platforms to regulate foreign propaganda, which includes countries like the US , Russia , and China .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] In 2022, Meta and the Stanford Internet Observatory found that over five years people associated with the U.S. military, who tried to conceal their identities, created fake accounts on social media systems including Balatarin , Facebook , Instagram , Odnoklassniki , Telegram , Twitter , VKontakte and YouTube in an influence operation in Central Asia and the Middle East. Their posts, primarily in Arabic, Farsi and Russian, criticized Iran, China and Russia and gave pro-Western narratives. Data suggested the activity was a series of covert campaigns rather than a single operation.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] In operations in the South and East China Seas, both the United States and China have been engaged in " cognitive warfare ", which involves displays of force, staged photographs and sharing disinformation.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] The start of the public use of " cognitive warfare " as a clear movement occurred in 2013 with China's political rhetoric.

[ 41 ] Examples of the term [ edit ] Most modern uses of the term psychological warfare refer to the following military methods: Demoralization : Distributing pamphlets that encourage desertion or supply instructions on how to surrender.

Shock and awe military strategy.

Projecting repetitive and disturbing noises and music for long periods at high volume towards groups under siege like during Operation Nifty Package .

Propaganda radio stations, such as Lord Haw-Haw in World War II on the "Germany calling" station.

False flag events.

The Gleiwitz incident (1939) - Nazi operation staging a fake Polish attack on a German radio station to justify the invasion of Poland.

Terrorism [ 42 ] The threat of Chemical weapons .

[ 43 ] Information warfare .

Daniel Lerner divides psychological warfare operations into three categories: [ 44 ] [ page needed ] White propaganda (omissions and emphasis): Truthful and not strongly biased, where the source of information is acknowledged.

Grey propaganda (omissions, emphasis and racial/ethnic/religious bias): Largely truthful, containing no information that can be proven wrong; the source is not identified.

Black propaganda (commissions of falsification): Inherently deceitful, information given in the product is attributed to a source that was not responsible for its creation.

Lerner says grey and black operations ultimately have a heavy cost, in that the target population sooner or later recognizes them as propaganda and discredits the source. He writes, "This is one of the few dogmas advanced by Sykewarriors that is likely to endure as an axiom of propaganda: Credibility is a condition of persuasion. Before you can make a man do as you say, you must make him believe what you say." [ 44 ] : 28 Consistent with this idea, the Allied strategy in World War II was predominantly one of truth (with certain exceptions).

[ citation needed ] In Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes , Jacques Ellul discusses psychological warfare as a common peace policy practice between nations as a form of indirect aggression. This type of propaganda drains the public opinion of an opposing regime by stripping away its power on public opinion. This form of aggression is hard to defend against because no international court of justice is capable of protecting against psychological aggression since it cannot be legally adjudicated.

"Here the propagandists is [sic] dealing with a foreign adversary whose morale he seeks to destroy by psychological means so that the opponent begins to doubt the validity of his beliefs and actions." [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Terrorism [ edit ] According to Boaz Ganor , terrorism weakens the sense of security and disturbs daily life, damaging the target country's capability to function. Terrorism is a strategy that aims to influence public opinion into pressuring leaders to give in to the terrorists' demands, and the population becomes a tool to advance the political agenda.

[ 42 ] By country [ edit ] China [ edit ] Further information: Three warfares and United front (China) According to U.S. military analysts, attacking the enemy's mind is an important element of the People's Republic of China 's military strategy.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] This type of warfare is rooted in the Chinese Stratagems outlined by Sun Tzu in The Art of War and Thirty-Six Stratagems . In its dealings with its rivals, China is expected to utilize Marxism to mobilize communist loyalists, as well as flex its economic and military muscle to persuade other nations to act in the Chinese government's interests. The Chinese government also tries to control the media to keep a tight hold on propaganda efforts for its people.

[ 49 ] The Chinese government also utilizes cognitive warfare against Taiwan .

[ 50 ] France [ edit ] The Centre interarmées des actions sur l'environnement is an organization made up of 300 soldiers whose mission is to assure to the four service arm of the French Armed Forces psychological warfare capacities. Deployed in particular to Mali and Afghanistan, its missions "consist in better explaining and accepting the action of French forces in operation with local actors and thus gaining their trust: direct aid to the populations, management of reconstruction sites, actions of communication of influence with the population, elites and local elected officials". The center has capacities for analysis, influence, expertise and instruction.

[ 51 ] Germany [ edit ] In the German Bundeswehr , the Zentrum Operative Kommunikation is responsible for PSYOP efforts. The center is subordinate to the Cyber and Information Domain Service branch alongside multiple IT and Electronic Warfare battalions and consists of around 1000 soldiers. One project of the German PSYOP forces is the radio station Stimme der Freiheit (Sada-e Azadi, Voice of Freedom), [ 52 ] heard by thousands of Afghans . Another is the publication of various newspapers and magazines in Kosovo and Afghanistan , where German soldiers serve with NATO .

Iran [ edit ] The Iranian government had an operation program to use the 2022 FIFA World Cup as a psyop against concurrent people's protests.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Israel [ edit ] The Israeli government and its military make use of psychological warfare. In 2021, Israeli newspaper Haaretz revealed that " Abu Ali Express ", a popular news page on Telegram and Twitter purportedly dedicated to "Arab affairs", was actually run by a Jewish Israeli paid consultant to the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). The IDF's psyops account had been the source of a number of noteworthy reports that were afterwards cited by the Israeli and international media.

[ 58 ] Russia [ edit ] See also: Active measures and New generation warfare Soviet Union [ edit ] Main article: Russian military deception See also: Active measures United Kingdom [ edit ] The British were one of the first major military powers to use psychological warfare in the First and Second World Wars. In the current British Armed Forces , PsyOps are handled by the tri-service 15 Psychological Operations Group . (See also MI5 and Secret Intelligence Service ). The Psychological Operations Group comprises over 150 personnel, approximately 75 from the regular Armed Services and 75 from the Reserves. The Group supports deployed commanders in the provision of psychological operations in operational and tactical environments.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] The Group was established immediately after the 1991 Gulf War , [ 61 ] has since grown significantly in size to meet operational requirements, [ 62 ] and since 2015 has been one of the sub-units of the 77th Brigade , formerly called the Security Assistance Group.

[ 63 ] In June 2015, NSA files published by Glenn Greenwald revealed details of the JTRIG group at British intelligence agency GCHQ covertly manipulating online communities.

[ 64 ] This is in line with JTRIG's goal: to "destroy, deny, degrade [and] disrupt" enemies by "discrediting" them, planting misinformation and shutting down their communications.

[ 65 ] In March 2019, it emerged that the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL) of the UK's Ministry of Defence (MoD) is tendering to arms companies and universities for £70M worth of assistance under a project to develop new methods of psychological warfare. The project is known as the human and social sciences research capability (HSSRC).

[ 66 ] United States [ edit ] See also: Psychological operations (United States) U.S. Army soldier hands out a newspaper to a local in Mosul , Iraq .

U.S. Army loudspeaker team in action in Korea The term psychological warfare is believed to have migrated from Germany to the United States in 1941.

[ 67 ] During World War II, the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff defined psychological warfare broadly, stating "Psychological warfare employs any weapon to influence the mind of the enemy. The weapons are psychological only in the effect they produce and not because of the weapons themselves." [ 68 ] The U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) currently defines psychological warfare as: "The planned use of propaganda and other psychological actions having the primary purpose of influencing the opinions, emotions, attitudes, and behavior of hostile foreign groups in such a way as to support the achievement of national objectives." [ 69 ] This definition indicates that a critical element of the U.S. psychological operations capabilities includes propaganda and by extension counterpropaganda . Joint Publication 3–53 establishes specific policy to use public affairs mediums to counter propaganda from foreign origins.

[ 70 ] The purpose of United States psychological operations is to induce or reinforce attitudes and behaviors favorable to US objectives.  The Special Activities Center (SAC) is a division of the Central Intelligence Agency's Directorate of Operations , responsible for Covert Action and "Special Activities". These special activities include covert political influence (which includes psychological operations) and paramilitary operations.

[ 71 ] SAC's political influence group is the only US unit allowed to conduct these operations covertly and is considered the primary unit in this area.

[ 71 ] A U.S. Army field manual released in January 2013 states that "Inform and Influence Activities" are critical for describing, directing, and leading military operations. Several Army Division leadership staff are assigned to “planning, integration and synchronization of designated information-related capabilities." [ 72 ] Journalist and fiction writer P.W. Singer , author of Wired for War, teaches military leaders about how to incorporate "useful fiction" stories and narrative structure into military psyops.

[ 73 ] In September 2022, the DoD launched an audit of covert information warfare after social media companies identified a suspected U.S. military operation.

[ 74 ] See also [ edit ] Active measures Asymmetric warfare Brainwashing Information warfare Lawfare Media manipulation Minor sabotage Special Operations Psychological Warfare Division Zersetzung References [ edit ] ^ "Forces.gc.ca" . Journal.forces.gc.ca . Retrieved 18 May 2011 .

^ Cowan, David; Cook, Chaveso (March 2018).

"What's in a Name? Psychological Operations versus Military Information Support Operations and an Analysis of Organizational Change" (PDF) .

Military Review .

^ Szunyogh, Béla (1955).

Psychological warfare; an introduction to ideological propaganda and the techniques of psychological warfare . United States: William-Frederick Press. p. 13 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ Chekinov, S. C.; Bogdanov, S. A.

"The Nature and Content of a New-Generation War" (PDF) .

Military Theory Monthly = Voennaya Mysl . United States: Military Thought: 16.

ISSN 0869-5636 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2015 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ Doob, Leonard W. "The Strategies Of Psychological Warfare." Public Opinion Quarterly 13.4 (1949): 635–644. SocINDEX with Full Text. Web. 20 February 2015.

^ Wall, Tyler (September 2010).

U.S Psychological Warfare and Civilian Targeting . United States: Vanderbilt University. p. 289 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ a b Newitz, Annalee (2024).

Stories are Weapons: Psychological Warfare the American Mind . W.W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-88151-6 .

^ Kirdemir, Baris (2019).

Hostile Influence and Emerging Cognitive Threats in Cyberspace (Report). Centre for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies.

JSTOR resrep21052 .

^ Lance B. Curke Ph.D., The Wisdom of Alexander the Great: Enduring Leadership Lessons From the Man Who Created an Empire (2004) p. 66 ^ David Nicolle, The Mongol Warlords: Genghis Khan, Kublai Khan, Hulegu, Tamerlane (2004) p. 21 ^ George H. Quester (2003).

Offense and Defense in the International System . Transaction Publishers. p. 43.

ISBN 9781412829939 . Retrieved 19 March 2016 .

^ Diogenes Laertius.

Lives and Opinions of the Eminent Philosophers . Archived from the original on 26 June 2017 . Retrieved 16 February 2017 .

^ Bruno Barragán Fernández, Cincuenta personajes de Ciudad Real para la historia , 2016 ^ Isabelo de los Reyes y Florentino, Artículos varios sobre etnografía: Historia y costumbres de Filipinas , p. 52 ^ a b c "Allied PsyOp of WWI" . Retrieved 17 December 2012 .

^ Linebarger, Paul Myron Anthony (2006).

Psychological Warfare . University of Chicago Press . Retrieved 7 February 2013 .

^ "The Battle for the Mind: German and British Propaganda in the First World War" .

Quadri.wordpress.com . 25 April 2008.

^ Taylor, Philip M. (1999).

British Propaganda in the Twentieth Century: Selling Democracy . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 9780748610396 . Retrieved 7 February 2013 .

^ "German WWI PsyOp" . Retrieved 17 December 2012 .

^ Hruška, Emil (2013), Boj o pohraničí: Sudetoněmecký Freikorps v roce 1938 (1st ed.), Prague: Nakladatelství epocha, Pražská vydavatelská společnost, p. 9 ^ Latimer (2004), pg. 148–149 ^ Cruickshank (2004) ^ Rankin, Nicholas (1 October 2008).

Churchill's Wizards: The British Genius for Deception, 1914–1945 .

Faber and Faber . p. 178.

ISBN 978-0-571-22195-0 .

^ Barbier, Mary (30 October 2007).

D-Day Deception: Operation Fortitude and the Normandy Invasion . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 70.

ISBN 978-0275994792 .

^ Barbier, Mary (30 October 2007).

D-Day Deception: Operation Fortitude and the Normandy Invasion . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0275994792 .

^ Masterman, John C (1972) [1945].

The Double-Cross System in the War of 1939 to 1945 . Australian National University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7081-0459-0 .

^ Ambrose, Stephen E.

(1981). "Eisenhower, the Intelligence Community, and the D-Day Invasion".

The Wisconsin Magazine of History . Vol. 64, no. 4. Wisconsin Historical Society. p. 269.

ISSN 0043-6534 .

^ Latimer, John (2001).

Deception in War . New York: Overlook Press. p. 238.

ISBN 978-1-58567-381-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Janq Designs.

"Special operation – Phoenix" .

Specialoperations.com . Archived from the original on 12 May 2011 . Retrieved 18 May 2011 .

The Chieu Hoi program of the South Vietnamese government promoted NLF defections.

When members of the Viet Cong were assassinated, CIA and Special Forces operatives placed playing cards in the mouth of the deceased as a calling card, with the aim of striking fear into the enemy.

^ Jeff Stein (3 October 2016).

"Vietnam-era propagandist 'Hanoi Hannah' dies at 87" .

newsweek.com .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2019 . Retrieved 4 October 2016 .

^ Hanoi Hannah, 16 June 1967 ^ "Is the U.S. Organizing Salvador-Style Death Squads in Iraq?" .

Democracy Now!

. 10 January 2005 . Retrieved 16 December 2008 .

^ "Countering Disinformation: Russia's Infowar in Ukraine" .

University of Washington . 25 October 2017 . Retrieved 25 October 2017 .

^ "What We Know—and Don't Know—About Facebook, Trump, and Russia" .

Wired . 26 September 2017 . Retrieved 25 October 2017 .

^ "Revealed: US spy operation that manipulates social media" .

The Guardian . 17 March 2011 . Retrieved 17 March 2011 .

^ "Meta Report: US Military Behind Online Influence Campaign Targeting Central Asia, Middle East" . Voice of America. 24 November 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

^ "Unheard Voice: Evaluating five years of pro-Western covert influence operations" (PDF) .

Stanford Internet Observatory . 24 August 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

^ "US navy sends China the message: 'we're watching you' " .

South China Morning Post . 11 April 2021 . Retrieved 12 April 2021 .

^ Chung, Lawrence (5 January 2021).

"Beijing using 'cognitive warfare' to sway Taiwan public opinion by feeding it misinformation, warns report" .

South China Morning Post .

^ Farahany, Nita (25 March 2023).

"TikTok is part of China's cognitive warfare campaign" .

The Guardian .

Article has detailed analysis of development, risks, and countering of brain-centred techniques.

^ "Cognitive Warfare: The Forgotten War with Tanguy Struye de Swielande" .

Youtube . 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

^ a b Boaz, Gaynor (April 2004). "Terrorism as a strategy of psychological warfare".

Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma .

9 ( 1– 2): 33– 4.

doi : 10.1300/J146v09n01_03 .

S2CID 144488159 .

(subscription required) ^ Romano Jr., James A.; King, James M. (2002). "Chemical warfare and chemical terrorism: psychological and performance outcomes".

Military Psychology .

14 (2): 85– 92.

doi : 10.1207/S15327876MP1402_2 .

S2CID 143979791 .

(subscription required) ^ a b Lerner, Daniel (1971) [1949].

Psychological warfare against Nazi Germany: the Sykewar Campaign, D-Day to VE-Day . Boston, Mass: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0-262-12045-6 .

Originally printed by George W. Stewart of New York. Alternative ISBN 0-262-62019-7 ^ Ellul, Jacques (1973).

Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes , p. xiii.Trans. Konrad Kellen & Jean Lerner. Vintage Books, New York.

ISBN 978-0-394-71874-3 .

^ Stout, Chris E. (2002).

The Psychology of Terrorism: Clinical aspects and responses – Google Books . Greenwood Publishing.

ISBN 9780275978662 . Retrieved 2014-08-10 .

^ Chung, Youngjune (2021-07-05). "Allusion, reasoning and luring in Chinese psychological warfare".

International Affairs .

97 (4): 1007– 1023.

doi : 10.1093/ia/iiab070 .

ISSN 0020-5850 .

^ Hung, Tzu-Chieh; Hung, Tzu-Wei (2022-07-19).

"How China's Cognitive Warfare Works: A Frontline Perspective of Taiwan's Anti-Disinformation Wars" .

Journal of Global Security Studies .

7 (4).

doi : 10.1093/jogss/ogac016 .

ISSN 2057-3170 .

^ a b "Chinese Military – Psychological Warfare" .

ufl.edu . Archived from the original on 15 April 2011.

^ Chin, Jonathan (2023-08-12).

"PRC cognitive warfare targets Lai's trip" .

Taipei Times . Retrieved 2023-08-11 .

^ "Le Centre interarmées des actions sur l'environnement" .

www.defense.gouv.fr . Archived from the original on 2019-12-02.

^ "Sada-e-azadi.net" .

Sada-e-azadi.net . Archived from the original on 12 May 2011 . Retrieved 18 May 2011 .

^ "«عملیات جام‌جهانی»؛ از کی‌روش برای «مقابله با اعتراض احتمالی بازیکنان» استفاده شده است" . 27 November 2022.

^ "اسناد افشاشده خبرگزاری فارس: بهره‌برداری حکومت از جام‌جهانی برای مقابله با خیزش انقلابی" . 10 August 2023.

^ "اسناد افشاشده؛ برنامه‌ریزی حکومت برای دور نگه داشتن تیم فوتبال از ایران اینترنشنال" . 10 August 2023.

^ فردا, رادیو (28 November 2022).

"محتوای دو سند هک‌شده از خبرگزاری فارس: تهدید بازیکنان تیم ملی و استفاده از کی‌روش" .

رادیو فردا .

^ فردا, رادیو.

"انتقال «۱۷ زندانی» به انفرادی برای حکم اعدام؛ کیهان خواستار حبس علی کریمی شد" .

رادیو فردا .

^ Kubovich, Yaniv (2021-08-18).

"Israeli Army Employs Popular Blogger for Psyops on Social Media" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 2022-08-24 .

^ "15 (UK) Psychological Operations Group" .

Ministry of Defence . Archived from the original on 20 June 2006 . Retrieved 23 August 2008 .

^ "Psychological Ops Group" . Royal Navy. Archived from the original on 2 July 2010 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ Jolly, Stephen (October 2000). Minshall, David (ed.). "Wearing the Stag's Head Badge: British Combat Propaganda since 1945".

Falling Leaf (170): 86– 89.

ISSN 0956-2400 .

^ "15 (United Kingdom) Psychological Operations Group: Annual Report" (PDF) . 15 (UK) PSYOPS Group . Retrieved 29 May 2011 .

^ Ewan MacAskill (31 January 2015).

"British army creates team of Facebook warriors" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 31 January 2015 .

^ Greenwald, Glenn and Andrew Fishman.

Controversial GCHQ Unit Engaged in Domestic Law Enforcement, Online Propaganda, Psychology Research .

The Intercept . 22 June 2015.

^ "Snowden Docs: British Spies Used Sex and 'Dirty Tricks' " .

NBC News . 7 February 2014 . Retrieved 7 February 2014 .

^ Gayle, Damien (13 March 2019).

"UK military turns to universities to research psychological warfare" .

Theguardian.com . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .

^ Wall, Tyler (18 August 2010). "U.S. Psychological Warfare and Civilian Targeting".

Peace Review .

22 (3). Informa UK Limited: 288– 294.

doi : 10.1080/10402659.2010.502070 .

ISSN 1040-2659 .

S2CID 144498009 .

^ From "Overall Strategic Plan for the United States' Psychological Warfare, " 1 March 1943, JCS Records, Strategic Issues, Reel 11.  Quoted in Robert H. Keyserlingk (July 1990).

Austria in World War II . McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 131.

ISBN 978-0-7735-0800-2 .

^ Phil Taylor (1987).

"Glossary of Relevant Terms & Acronyms Propaganda and Psychological Warfare Studies University of Leeds UK" . University of Leeds UK. Archived from the original on 2011-10-11 . Retrieved 2008-04-19 .

^ Garrison, WC (1999).

"Information Operations and Counter-Propaganda: Making a Weapon of Public Affairs" (PDF) .

Strategy Research Project, U.S. Army War College . p. 12.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

^ a b Executive Secrets: Covert Action and the Presidency, William J. Daugherty, University of Kentucky Press, 2004.

^ "Pentagon gearing up to fight the PR war" Washington Post , 6 February 2013 ^ Newitz, Annalee (2024).

Stories are Weapons: Psychological Warfare the American Mind . W.W. Norton. p. 194.

ISBN 978-0-393-88151-6 .

^ Nakashima, Ellen (19 September 2022).

"Pentagon opens sweeping review of clandestine psychological operationns" .

Washington Post . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Abner, Alan K.

Psywarriors : psychological warfare during the Korean War (1951) online Holzmann, Ashley F. "Artists of War: A History of United States Propaganda, Psychological Warfare, Psychological Operations and a Proposal for Its Ever-Changing Future." US Army Command and General Staff College, 2020) online Linebarger, Paul M. A.

Psychological Warfare: International Propaganda and Communications .

ISBN 0-405-04755-X (1948). Revised second edition, Duell, Sloan and Pearce (1954).

Pease, Stephen E.

Psywar : psychological warfare in Korea, 1950-1953 (1992) online Roberts III, Mervyn Edwin.

The Psychological War for Vietnam, 1960–1968 (2018) Roetter, Charles.

The art of psychological warfare, 1914-1945 (1974) online Simpson, Christopher.

Science of Coercion: Communication Research & Psychological Warfare, 1945–1960 (1994) online Song, Tae Eun. "Information/Psychological Warfare in the Russia-Ukraine War: Overview and Implications." IFANS FOCUS 2022.9 (May 2022): 1-4.

online Voloshin, Nikolay, and Leyla Garaybeli. "Putin's Psychological Warfare in Ukraine and Syria" Insights of Pakistan, Iran and the Caucasus Studies 2.3 (2023): 50-54.

online External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Psychological warfare .

Look up psychological warfare in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Paul Myron Anthony Linebarger .

Psychological Warfare at Project Gutenberg IWS Psychological Operations (PsyOps) / Influence Operations Archived 8 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine "Pentagon psychological warfare operation" , USA Today , 15 December 2005.

"U.S. Adapts Cold-War Idea to Fight Terrorists" , New York Times , 18 March 2008.

IWS — The Information Warfare Site Archived 8 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine U.S. — PSYOP producing mid-eastern kids comic book The Institute of Heraldry — Psychological Operations The Nature of Psychological Warfare (CIA 1958) Original v t e Media manipulation Context Bias Crowd psychology Deception Dumbing down False balance Half-truths Media Obfuscation Persuasion Manipulation (psychology) Activism Advocacy group Alternative media Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstrations Deplatforming Grassroots Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Internet Media Occupations Petitions Protests Youth Advertising Advertorial / Native advertising Billboards False Infomercials Mobiles Modeling Radio Sex Slogans Testimonials TV Criticism of advertising Annoyance factor Censorship and mass media regulation Books Broadcast law Burying of scholars Catch and kill Corporate Cover-ups Euphemism Films Historical negationism Internet Political Religious Self Hoaxing Alternative facts April Fools' Deepfake audio Fake news websites Fakelore Fictitious entries Firehose of falsehood Forgery Gaslighting List Literary Lying press Photograph manipulation Racial Urban legend Virus Video manipulation Marketing Branding Loyalty Product Product placement Publicity Research Word of mouth News media Agenda-setting Broadcasting Circus Cycle Emotive conjugation False balance Infotainment Managing Narcotizing dysfunction Newspeak Pseudo-event Scrum Sensationalism Tabloid journalism Political campaigning Advertising Astroturfing Attack ad Canvassing Character assassination Dog whistle Election promises Lawn signs Party platforms (or manifestos) Name recognition Negative Push polling Smear campaign Wedge issue Propaganda Bandwagon Big lie Crowd manipulation Disinformation Fearmongering Framing Indoctrination Loaded language National mythology Rally 'round the flag effect Techniques Psychological warfare Airborne leaflets False flag Fifth column Information (IT) Lawfare Political Public diplomacy Sedition Subversion Public relations Cult of personality Doublespeak Non-apology apology Reputation management Slogans Sound bites Spin Transfer Understatement Weasel words Corporate propaganda Sales Cold calling Door-to-door Pricing Product demonstrations Promotion Spaving Promotional merchandise Telemarketing Related Influence-for-hire Media bias United States Media concentration Media democracy Media ecology Media ethics Media franchise Media influence Media proprietor v t e Military deception Techniques Denial and deception Disinformation False flag Information warfare Maskirovka Military camouflage Psychological warfare Ruse de guerre Equipment Military dummy Decoy Q-ship Operations World War II : Bertram Bodyguard Texts The Art of War v t e Propaganda techniques Accusation in a mirror Ad hominem Appeal to fear Appeal to emotion Atrocity propaganda Bandwagon effect Big lie Black propaganda Blood libel Buzzword Cartographic propaganda Computational propaganda Censorship Cherry picking Cult of personality Demonizing the enemy Disinformation Dog whistle Doublespeak Emotive conjugation Exaggeration False accusation False balance False dilemma Fake news Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Flag-waving Framing Gish gallop Glittering generality Half-truth Historical negationism Ideograph Indoctrination Lawfare Loaded language Newspeak Managing the news Minimisation Monumental propaganda Moralistic fallacy New generation warfare Obscurantism Overcomplication Oversimplification Plain folks Psychological warfare Propaganda of the deed Public relations Rally 'round the flag effect Scapegoating Senbu Shooting and crying Slogan Spin Weasel word Whataboutism White propaganda v t e Disinformation and misinformation Core content Disinformation Misinformation Malinformation Propaganda Disinformation attack Disinformation research Publications about disinformation Mechanisms Psychological Cognitive bias List Denialism Manipulation Misinformation effect Political polarization Psychology of climate change denial Computational Algorithmic radicalization Content moderation Community notes Internet manipulation Social bot Social networking service List User-generated content Economic Fake news websites Surveillance capitalism Programmatic advertising Media and Politics Audience fragmentation Echo chamber (media) Fake news Media bias Media culture Media manipulation Tactics Astroturfing Big Lie Circular reporting Clickbait Conspiracy theory List Culture war Deception Deepfake Disinformation playbook Dog whistle (politics) Doublespeak Doxxing Fake news Fake news website List of fake news websites List of satirical fake news websites False accusation False attribution False balance Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Forgery as covert operation Gaslighting Greenwashing Historical negationism Information warfare Logic and reasoning Cherry picking False dilemma Gish gallop Half-truth Fallacy Formal fallacy Informal fallacy List of fallacies Quote mining Red herring Whataboutism Memetic warfare Pink-slime journalism Psychological warfare Propaganda Black propaganda Counterpropaganda State-sponsored Internet propaganda Perception management Rumors Spin (propaganda) Smear campaign Scientific fabrication Strategy of tension Yellow journalism Related terms Alternative facts Factoid Hoax Infodemic Malinformation Post-truth politics Potemkin village Pseudoscience Tabloid journalism Truthiness Targets and campaigns International Politics Disinformation in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Misinformation in the Gaza war New World Order conspiracy theory Russian disinformation Genocide denial Politics by country List of disinformation attacks by country List of political disinformation website campaigns Antisemitism Holocaust denial International Jewish conspiracy Environmental science Climate change denial Fossil fuel industry ExxonMobil climate change denial Fossil fuels lobby Leaded gasoline Ethyl Corporation Robert A. Kehoe Clair Cameron Patterson Pesticide industry Rachel Carson Silent Spring Red mercury Medicine and Public health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccine activism Lancet MMR autism fraud Vaccines and autism Vaccine misinformation COVID-19 misinformation COVID-19 misinformation by governments COVID-19 vaccine misinformation and hesitancy Birth control misinformation Ebola misinformation GMO conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism Mental illness denial Misinformation related to abortion Tobacco industry playbook Transgender health care misinformation Opposition to water fluoridation Journalism and journalists Safety of journalists Maria Ressa Daily Maverick Rappler The Quint Countering disinformation Academic research Critical thinking Digital literacy Health literacy Information literacy Media literacy Science communication Scientific consensus Scientific literacy List of climate change video games Scientific skepticism Skepticism Truth sandwich Verificado 2018 Watchdog journalism Fact-checking and research Fact-checking Websites List of fact-checking websites Non-profits and charities Africa Check FactCheck.org Full Fact PolitiFact USAFacts Private companies Logically (company) NewsGuard StopFake Other Bellingcat International Fact-Checking Network Media Bias/Fact Check Snopes Quackwatch Projeto Comprova Research Canada Citizen Lab EU East StratCom Task Force Finland Faktabaari New Zealand The Disinformation Project UK Counter disinformation unit Ukraine Center for Countering Disinformation USA Active Measures Working Group Counter Misinformation Team Disinformation Governance Board Countering Foreign Propaganda and Disinformation Act United States Information Agency WikiProjects WikiCred Climate change COVID-19 Medicine Skepticism Vaccine safety Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐dgrm8
Cached time: 20250814215600
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.233 seconds
Real time usage: 1.474 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6166/1000000
Revision size: 55139/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 259649/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4899/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 286963/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.743/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21081624/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1159.192      1 -total
 42.80%  496.156      1 Template:Reflist
 18.86%  218.671     24 Template:Cite_web
  8.58%   99.497      3 Template:Lang
  7.91%   91.675      1 Template:War
  7.71%   89.371      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.34%   85.063     16 Template:Cite_book
  5.35%   62.018      1 Template:Short_description
  5.32%   61.689      4 Template:Fix
  4.67%   54.149      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:144615:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215600 and revision id 1305823995. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychological_warfare&oldid=1305823995 " Categories : Psychological warfare Aggression Crowd psychology Information operations and warfare Mind control Propaganda techniques Psychological warfare techniques Warfare by type Warfare of the late modern period Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 08:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychological warfare 55 languages Add topic

