Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Process Toggle Process subsection 1.1 Conditions 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Citations 3.2 General and cited references 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Saprotrophic nutrition 13 languages العربية Български Bosanski Català Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Saprophytic ) Type of heterotrophic nutrition based on decayed organic matter Mycelial cord of fungi made up of a collection of hyphae ; an essential part in the process of saprotrophic nutrition, it is used for the intake of organic matter through its cell wall .

The network of hyphae (the mycelium ) is fundamental to fungal nutrition.

Look up saprotroph in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Saprotrophic nutrition / s æ p r ə ˈ t r ɒ f ɪ k , - p r oʊ -/ [ 1 ] or lysotrophic nutrition [ 2 ] [ 3 ] is a process of chemoheterotrophic extracellular digestion involved in the processing of decayed (dead or waste) organic matter . It occurs in saprotrophs , and is most often associated with fungi (e.g.

Mucor ) and with soil bacteria . Saprotrophic microscopic fungi are sometimes called saprobes .

[ 4 ] Saprotrophic plants or bacterial flora are called saprophytes ( sapro- 'rotten material' + -phyte 'plant'), although it is now believed [ citation needed ] that all plants previously thought to be saprotrophic are in fact parasites of microscopic fungi or of other plants . In fungi, the saprotrophic process is most often facilitated through the active transport of such materials through endocytosis within the internal mycelium and its constituent hyphae .

[ 5 ] Various word roots relating to decayed matter ( detritus , sapro- , lyso- ), to eating and nutrition ( -vore , -phage , -troph ), and to plants or life forms ( -phyte , -obe ) produce various terms, such as detritivore , detritophage, saprotroph, saprophyte , saprophage, and saprobe; their meanings overlap, although technical distinctions (based on physiologic mechanisms) narrow the senses . For example, biologists can make usage distinctions based on macroscopic swallowing of detritus (as in earthworms ) versus microscopic lysis of detritus (as with mushrooms ).

Process [ edit ] As matter decomposes within a medium in which a saprotroph is residing, the saprotroph breaks such matter down into its composites.

Proteins are broken down into their amino acid composites through the breaking of peptide bonds by proteases .

[ 6 ] Lipids are broken down into fatty acids and glycerol by lipases .

[ 6 ] Starch is broken down into pieces of simple disaccharides by amylases .

[ 6 ] Cellulose , a major portion of plant cells, and therefore a major constituent of decaying matter is broken down into glucose These products are re-absorbed into the hypha through the cell wall by endocytosis and passed on throughout the mycelium complex. This facilitates the passage of such materials throughout the organism and allows for growth and, if necessary, repair.

[ 5 ] Conditions [ edit ] In order for a saprotrophic organism to facilitate optimal growth and repair, favourable conditions and nutrients must be present.

[ 7 ] Optimal conditions refers to several conditions which optimise the growth of saprotrophic organisms, such as; Presence of water: 80–90% of the mass of the fungi is water, and the fungi require excess water for absorption due to the evaporation of internally retained water.

[ 7 ] Presence of oxygen : Very few saprotrophic organisms can endure anaerobic conditions as evidenced by their growth above media such as water or soil.

[ 7 ] Neutral-acidic pH : The condition of neutral or mildly acidic conditions under pH 7 are required.

[ 7 ] Low-medium temperature: The majority of saprotrophic organisms require temperatures between 1 and 35 °C (34 and 95 °F), with optimum growth occurring at 25 °C (77 °F).

[ 7 ] The majority of nutrients taken in by such organisms must be able to provide carbon, proteins, vitamins and, in some cases, ions . Due to the carbon composition of the majority of organisms, dead and organic matter provide rich sources of disaccharides and polysaccharides such as maltose and starch , and of the monosaccharide glucose .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Fungi portal Chemoautotrophic nutrition Decomposers Detritivore Holozoic nutrition Mycorrhizal fungi and soil carbon storage Parasitic nutrition Photoautotrophic nutrition Saprotrophic bacteria Wood-decay fungus References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Saprotroph – definition of saprotroph in English from the Oxford dictionary" .

OxfordDictionaries.com . Archived from the original on November 8, 2012 . Retrieved 2016-01-20 .

^ "lyso-" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "The Ecology of Story: Revealing Hidden Characters of the Forest" . April 25, 2020.

^ "saprobe" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) - "The word saprophyte and its derivatives, implying that a fungus is a plant, can be replaced by saprobe (σαπρός + βίος), which is without such implication." ^ a b c Clegg & Mackean (2006 , p. 296) states the purpose of saprotrophs and their internal nutrition, as well as discussing the main two types of fungi that are most often referred to. It also describes, visually, the process of saprotrophic nutrition through a diagram of hyphae, referring to the Rhizobium on damp, stale whole-meal bread or on rotting fruit.

^ a b c Clegg & Mackean (2006 , p. 296), fig 14.16—Diagram detailing the re-absorption of substrates within the hypha.

^ a b c d e Clegg & Mackean (2006 , p. 296), fig 14.17—A diagram explaining the optimal conditions needed for successful growth and repair.

General and cited references [ edit ] Clegg, C. J.; Mackean, D. G. (2006).

Advanced Biology: Principles and Applications (2nd ed.). Hodder Publishing.

Further reading [ edit ] Zmitrovich, I. V.; Wasser, S. P.; Ţura, D. (2014).

"Wood-inhabiting Fungi" (PDF) . In Misra, J. K.; Tewari, J. P.; Deshmukh, S. K.; Vágvölgyi, C. (eds.).

Fungi from Different Substrates . New York: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis group. pp.

17– 74.

v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saprotrophic_nutrition&oldid=1291167595 " Categories : Dead wood Mycology Nutrition by type Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 14:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Saprotrophic nutrition 13 languages Add topic

