Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples of relevant processes 2 Human biometeorology 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Biometeorology 12 languages العربية Deutsch Français 한국어 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Српски / srpski தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The science of climate's effect on living things Biometeorology is the interdisciplinary field of science that studies the interactions between living things (plants, microbes, vertebrates, invertebrates) and atmospheric phenomena (wind, temperature, humidity, sunlight, greenhouse gas concentrations) on time scales of the order of seasons or shorter (in contrast with bioclimatology ).

The field of Biometeorology can be very broad, including roles of weather on: 1) human health; 2) outbreaks of insects and pathogens, 3) the health and production of dairy, cattle, pigs and chickens, 4) frost prevention, 5) irrigation management, 6) modeling of crop growth, yield and crop management, 7) study of phenological growth stages, 8) integrated assessments with remote sensing and 9) future change in these systems with global warming and land use change Examples of relevant processes [ edit ] Weather events influence biological processes on short time scales. For instance, as the Sun rises above the horizon in the morning, light levels become sufficient for the process of photosynthesis to take place in plant leaves . Later on, during the day, air temperature and humidity may induce the partial or total closure of the stomata , a typical response of many plants to limit the loss of water through transpiration . More generally, the daily evolution of meteorological variables controls the circadian rhythm of plants and animals alike.

Living organisms, for their part, can collectively affect weather patterns. The rate of evapotranspiration of forests, or of any large vegetated area for that matter, contributes to the release of water vapor in the atmosphere. This local, relatively fast and continuous process may contribute significantly to the persistence of precipitations in a given area. As another example, the wilting of plants results in definite changes in leaf angle distribution and therefore modifies the rates of reflection , transmission and absorption of solar light in these plants. That, in turn, changes the albedo of the ecosystem as well as the relative importance of the sensible and latent heat fluxes from the surface to the atmosphere.  The height and roughness of vegetation affects wind drag and turbulence.  This can alter the log wind profile above it.

Phenology is another topic studied by biometeorologists.  Phenology is a subject that examines features of life history of plants, like when leaf out and flowering occur.  These events are often triggered by temperature and heat accumulation indices.

Human biometeorology [ edit ] The methods and measurements traditionally used in biometeorology are not different when applied to study the interactions between human bodies and the atmosphere, but some aspects or applications may have been explored more extensively. For instance, wind chill has been investigated to determine the time period an individual can sustain exposure to given temperature and wind conditions. Another important example concerns the study of airborne allergens (such as pollens and aerosols ) and their impact on individuals: weather conditions can favor or hinder the release as well as the transport and deposition of these allergens, sometimes severely affecting the well-being of sensitive populations.

See also [ edit ] International Journal of Biometeorology International Society of Biometeorology Gaia hypothesis Weather's health effects : Health effects of smog Thunderstorm asthma Weather pains References [ edit ] R. E. Munn (1970) Biometeorological Methods , Academic Press, New York, 336 pp., Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 71-97488.

External links [ edit ] Global Bioweather Dutch bioweather site Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biometeorology&oldid=1283539206 " Categories : Biometeorology Branches of meteorology Ecology Environmental science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 04:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biometeorology 12 languages Add topic

