Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Jean-Robert Argand 30 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genevan mathematician Jean-Robert Argand Born July 18, 1768 Geneva , Republic of Geneva Died August 13, 1822 ( 1822-08-14 ) (aged 54) Paris Nationality Republic of Geneva, and then Switzerland (since 1815) Known for Argand diagram and Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Algebra Scientific career Fields Mathematics Quantites Imaginaires Argand 1806 Jean-Robert Argand ( UK : / ˈ ɑːr ɡ æ n d / , US : / ˌ ɑːr ˈ ɡ ɑː n ( d )/ , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] French: [ʒɑ̃ ʁɔbɛʁ aʁɡɑ̃] ; July 18, 1768 – August 13, 1822) was a Genevan amateur mathematician . In 1806, while managing a bookstore in Paris , he published the idea of geometrical interpretation of complex numbers known as the Argand diagram and is known for the first rigorous proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra .

Life [ edit ] Jean-Robert Argand was born in Geneva , then Republic of Geneva , to Jacques Argand and Eve Carnac.  His background and education are mostly unknown.  Since his knowledge of mathematics was self-taught and he did not belong to any mathematical organizations, he likely pursued mathematics as a hobby rather than a profession.

Argand moved to Paris in 1806 with his family and, when managing a bookshop there, privately published his Essai sur une manière de représenter les quantités imaginaires dans les constructions géométriques (Essay on a method of representing imaginary quantities ). In 1813, it was republished in the French journal Annales de Mathématiques . The Essay discussed a method of graphing complex numbers via analytical geometry. It proposed the interpretation of the value i as a rotation of 90 degrees in the Argand plane. In this essay he was also the first to propose the idea of modulus to indicate the magnitude of vectors and complex numbers , as well as the notation for vectors a b → → {\displaystyle {\overrightarrow {ab}}} . The topic of complex numbers was also being studied by other mathematicians, notably Carl Friedrich Gauss and Caspar Wessel .  Wessel's 1799 paper on a similar graphing technique did not attract attention.

Argand is also renowned for delivering a proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra in his 1814 work Réflexions sur la nouvelle théorie d'analyse (Reflections on the new theory of analysis ). It was the first complete and rigorous proof of the theorem, and was also the first proof to generalize the fundamental theorem of algebra to include polynomials with complex coefficients .

The first textbook containing a proof of the theorem was Cauchy 's Cours d'analyse de l'École Royale Polytechnique (1821). It contained Argand's proof, although Argand is not credited for it. And the proof was later referenced in Chrystal's influential textbook Algebra .

Argand died of an unknown cause on August 13, 1822, in Paris. In 1978 his proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra was called by The Mathematical Intelligencer “both ingenious and profound.” See also [ edit ] Caspar Wessel i , the imaginary square root of −1 Complex number Complex plane (also known as Argand plane) References [ edit ] ^ Wells, John C.

(2008).

Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman.

ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 .

^ Jones, Daniel (2011).

Roach, Peter ; Setter, Jane ; Esling, John (eds.).

Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6 .

Roy, J. (n.d.) James Robert Argand Biography | World of Mathematics.

Bookrags.com.

Retrieved March 18, 2008.  From http://www.bookrags.com/biography/jean-robert-argand-wom/ .

McGrath, K., Travers B., et al. (n.d.)  James Robert Argand Biography | Word of Scientific Discovery.

Bookrags.com.

Retrieved March 18, 2008.  From http://www.bookrags.com/biography/jean-robert-argand-wsd/ .

Further reading [ edit ] Jones, Phillip S. (1970). "Argand, Jean Robert".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp.

237– 240.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Jean-Robert Argand" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Robert Argand, Essai sur une manière de représenter des quantités imaginaires dans les constructions géométriques , 2e édition, Gauthier Villars, Paris (1874) BNF Jean-Robert Argand, Biography on s9.com Archived 2015-09-16 at the Wayback Machine Imaginary quantities; their geometrical interpretation , English translation of Jean-Robert Argand's original French work Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Israel Catalonia Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jean-Robert_Argand&oldid=1306373208 " Categories : 1768 births 1822 deaths 18th-century mathematicians from the Republic of Geneva Amateur mathematicians 19th-century Swiss mathematicians Complex numbers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata Pages with French IPA Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 11:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jean-Robert Argand 30 languages Add topic

