Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 Geology 4 Biology 5 Recreation 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Larch Mountain (Multnomah County, Oregon) 4 languages Cebuano Ladin مصرى اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 45°31′57″N 122°5′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.53250°N 122.08806°W ﻿ / 45.53250; -122.08806 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mountain in Oregon, United States of America This article is about the extinct volcano in Multnomah County. For the mountain in the Northern Oregon Coast Range, see Larch Mountain (Washington County, Oregon) .

Larch Mountain Larch Mountain, as seen from Washougal, Washington .

Highest point Elevation 4,061 ft (1,238 m) NAVD 88 [ 1 ] Prominence 975 ft (297 m) [ 2 ] Coordinates 45°31′57″N 122°5′17″W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.53250°N 122.08806°W ﻿ / 45.53250; -122.08806 [ 1 ] Geography Location Multnomah County , Oregon , U.S.

Topo map USGS Multnomah Falls Geology Rock age 1.8–1.4 Ma Mountain type Shield volcano [ 3 ] Volcanic field Boring Lava Field Last eruption 1.4 Ma Climbing Easiest route paved road (June–October) hiking trails (November–May) View of Mt Hood from Larch Mountain Larch Mountain is an extinct volcano [ 4 ] near Portland , Oregon . The name is misleading, as no western larch (a large coniferous tree) can be found there.

[ 5 ] It received that name when early lumbermen sold the noble fir wood as larch. The peak can be reached between May and November on paved Larch Mountain Road, 16 mi (26 km) east of Corbett, Oregon , although the road is closed during the winter and spring months.

[ 6 ] The road leading to Larch Mountain from the Historic Columbia River Highway is 14 miles long, which closed at milepost 10 from Nov. through late May or early June due to snow.

[ 7 ] Geography [ edit ] Larch Mountain is located in Multnomah County , Oregon approximately 40 mi (64 km) east of Portland , above the Columbia River Gorge . Although it has an elevation of 4,061 ft (1,238 m), [ 1 ] its prominence above the surrounding terrain is only 975 ft (297 m).

[ 2 ] The summit of the mountain is accessible by Larch Mountain Road between May and November, which branches off from the Historic Columbia River Highway 2 mi (3.2 km) east of Corbett . Due to the risk of driving on the mountain's upper slopes in winter weather, the road closes during the winter months at milepost 10.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] History [ edit ] In 1879, Amos James Moore was the first known person to advocate for the logging and settling of Larch Mountain. Attractive due to its proximity to Portland and the Columbia River , it contained what were considered some of the highest-quality cedar , hemlock , and fir trees in the United States. In 1886, the Bridal Veil Lumbering Company started logging and constructed a lumber mill, followed a year later by the Latourrel Falls Wagon Road and Lumber Company . The operation rapidly expanded with the construction of a wooden plank road extending from Larch Mountain to the railroad line near the river, allowing for the large-scale logging of the mountain. The Bridal Veil Lumbering company became known for the high quality of its timber.

[ 10 ] In 1902, a fire swept through one of the mills, completely destroying it as well as the town. Both were soon rebuilt in new locations. This event is often heralded as the start of the decline of the large-scale Victorian logging practices, which were replaced by more modern techniques. Only a few remnants of the former system exist today. Logging continued in the new forms on the mountain for several more decades. In 1928, the United States Forest Service began reforesting the slopes of Larch Mountain, so that more lumber could be produced. A fire in 1936 marked the end of the timber business on the mountain. Causing around $100,000 of damage, it severely damaged the lumber mill, which was not rebuilt due to the depletion of the timber supply on the mountain.

[ 10 ] Geology [ edit ] Larch Mountain is the remnant of an ancient shield volcano , with broad slopes covering tens of square kilometers. It is currently the tallest peak in the Boring Lava Field , a volcanic field active during the Plio-Pleistocene time frame. Active between 1.8 and 1.4 million years ago, the volcano is composed mainly of basalts , although the summit at Sherrard Point is composed mainly of iron-rich andesite . Larch Mountain's basalt is tough to distinguish from the surrounding Columbia River Basalt , although the Columbia River Basalt is slightly lighter in color and less brittle .

[ 11 ] Sherrard Point is the eroded remains of the original volcanic plug .

[ 12 ] Sherrard Point was exposed during the last glacial period , when the majority of the mountain's peak was destroyed by glaciers . The glaciers carved a large cirque into the mountain, forming a large lake. Over time, the lake was filled with sediment, and today the area is now a large meadow.

[ 13 ] Biology [ edit ] Larch Mountain contains some of the largest old-growth forest stands left in the Columbia River Gorge area, characterized by the presence of many nurse logs . Dominant tree species include pacific silver fir , grand fir , Douglas fir , and western hemlock .

[ 13 ] Recreation [ edit ] The Larch Mountain area contains multiple popular hiking trails . The Larch Mountain Trail #441 begins near the Columbia River at the Multnomah Falls Lodge and roughly follows Multnomah Creek , passing several waterfalls including the well-known Multnomah Falls , Weisendanger Falls , and Ecola Falls . The trail ends at the Larch Mountain parking lot, [ 14 ] at a picnic area.

[ 6 ] The Sherrard Point Trail #443 leads from this area to Sherrard Point at the pinnacle.

[ 14 ] Sherrard Point offers an outstanding view of the nearby Cascade Range volcanoes Mount Hood , Mount Adams , Mount Jefferson , Mount Rainier , and Mount St. Helens . Elevation plaques are provided, showing the elevation of said volcanoes.

A loop around Larch Mountain itself is formed by the Larch Mountain Trail, the Multnomah Creek Way Trail #444, and the Oneonta Trail #424.

[ 15 ] Gallery [ edit ] View from the summit with Mount Hood in the distance.

A creek in Larch Mountain forest.

Old-growth forest Larch Mountain Trail plaque View of Mt St Helens from the summit of Larch Mountain See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Larch Mountain, Oregon .

Larch Mountain (Clark County, Washington) Larch Mountain (Washington County, Oregon) References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Larch Reset" .

NGS Data Sheet .

National Geodetic Survey , National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , United States Department of Commerce . Retrieved November 18, 2008 .

^ a b "Larch Mountain, Oregon" .

peakbagger.com .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2006 . Retrieved April 1, 2008 .

^ "The Boring Volcanic Field – Hills of the Portland Basin" . USGS Cascades Volcano Observatory.

Archived from the original on December 22, 2015 . Retrieved December 29, 2015 .

^ Cascades Volcano Observatory (June 11, 2014).

"The Boring Volcanic Field — Hills of the Portland Basin" . USGS.

Archived from the original on February 21, 2015 . Retrieved February 21, 2015 .

All existing Boring Volcanic centers are extinct, but the Boring Volcanic Field presumably is not. Since activity started 2.6 million years ago, it is rare that 50,000 years passed without an eruption. The probability of an eruption in the Portland/Vancouver metro area however, is very low.

^ Reed, Ione (December 25, 1971).

"What, Indeed, Is in a Name?" .

Eugene Register-Guard . p. 8.

Archived from the original on October 26, 2021 . Retrieved April 30, 2015 .

^ a b "Larch Mountain Picnic Area" .

United States Forest Service .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved August 11, 2015 .

^ "Larch Mountain Trail (#441)" . January 15, 2022.

Archived from the original on January 15, 2022 . Retrieved January 15, 2022 .

^ House, Kelly (November 20, 2015).

"Upper Larch Mountain Road to close for winter next week" .

The Oregonian . Portland, Oregon.

Archived from the original on November 25, 2015 . Retrieved December 28, 2015 .

^ "Larch Mountain Trailhead" .

United States Forest Service .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2016 . Retrieved December 28, 2015 .

^ a b Prohaska, Sharr (1992).

History of the Development of Bridal Veil, Oregon and the Bridal Veil Lumbering Company: Report for Multnomah County (PDF) (Report) (June ed.).

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 23, 2015 . Retrieved December 23, 2015 .

^ Bishop, Ellen Morris; Allen, John Eliot (2004).

Hiking Oregon's Geology (Second ed.). The Mountaineers Books. pp.

108– 110.

ISBN 9780898868470 .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2023 . Retrieved December 12, 2020 .

^ Hart, Steve (February 26, 2015).

"Sherrard Point" . OregonHikers.org.

Archived from the original on August 23, 2015 . Retrieved August 11, 2015 .

^ a b Lorain, Douglas (March 5, 2008).

Afoot and Afield: Portland/Vancouver: A Comprehensive Hiking Guide . Berkeley, California: Wilderness Press. pp.

217– 219.

ISBN 978-0-89997-468-2 .

^ a b Hart, Steve (February 18, 2010).

"Larch Mountain Hike" . OregonHikers.org.

Archived from the original on December 22, 2015 . Retrieved December 20, 2015 .

^ "Multnomah Creek Way Trail #444" .

United States Forest Service .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2015 . Retrieved December 21, 2015 .

v t e Volcanoes of Oregon High Cascades Applegate Peak Aspen Butte Bald Crater Ball Butte Barlow Butte Bear Butte Belknap Crater Black Butte Black Crater Broken Top Buckskin Butte Cache Mountain Chinquapin Mountain Clear Lake Butte Cleetwood Crater Lake Crater Mountain Crater Peak Cryder Butte Cupit Mary Mountain Danger Bay Davis Lake Volcanic Field Davis Mountain Desert Cone Diamond Peak Dry Butte Dutton Cliff Egan Cone Forgotten Cone Fort Butte Frog Lake Buttes Fuji Mountain Garfield Peak Greylock Mountain Grouse Hill Hamner Butte Hayrick Butte Hillman Peak Hogg Rock Hoodoo Butte Howlock Mountain Irish Mountain Katsuk Butte Kwolh Butte Lemiti Butte Le Conte Crater Llao Bay Llao Rock Little Aspen Butte Little Belknap Little Brother Little Cache Mountain Little Chinquapin Mountain Little Nash Crater Lolah Butte Lost Lake Cinder Cones Lookout Butte Lookout Mountain Lumrum Butte Maiden Peak Maklaks Crater Maklaks Mountain Melvin Butte Merriam Cone Merriam Point Mount Bachelor Mount Bailey Mount Carmine Mount Harriman Mount Hood Mount Jefferson Mount Mazama Mount McLoughlin Mount Multnomah (unconfirmed) Mount Ray Mount Scott (Klamath) Mount Thielsen Mount Washington Mount Wilson Nash Crater North Pinhead Butte North Wilson Odell Butte Oregon's Matterhorns Olallie Butte Peavine Mountain Pelican Butte Phantom Ship Pinhead Buttes Pine Marten Mountain Pothole Butte Redcloud Red Box Red Cone Red Crater Ringo Butte Robinson Butte Rock Butte Rock Mesa Royce Mountain Rustler Peak Sand Mountain Sand Mountain Volcanic Field Scout Hill Sentinel Rock Sharp Peak Sheridan Mountain Siah Butte Sisi Butte South Belknap South Pinhead Butte Summit Butte Talapus Butte Teardrop Pool The Husband The Pinnacle The Twins The Wife Three Fingered Jack Three Sisters ( North Sister , Middle Sister , South Sister ) Three Trappers Timber Crater Tom Dick and Harry Mountain Tot Mountain Triangle Hill Triangle Peak Tumalo Mountain Tumalo Volcanic Center Twin Craters Union Peak Waldo Mountain West Pinhead Butte Whiteface Peak Williamson Mountain Wizard Island Zigzag Mountain Western Cascades & Oregon Coast Range Angels Rest Armet Creek Baldy Battle Ax Bone Mountain Boring Lava Field Cascade Head Chamberlain Hill Clatsop Butte Cook's Butte Crescent Mountain Devil's Rest East Buttes French's Dome Elk Point Elk Rock Island Grass Mountain Grizzly Peak Harter Mountain Highland Butte High Prairie Hunsinger Peak Indian Mountain Iron Mountain Kelly Butte Larch Mountain Laurel Mountain Lenhart Butte Little Butte Volcanics Little Pilot Rock Lookout Point Lost Lake Butte Marys Peak Mount Ashland Mount Defiance Mount Hebo Mount Pisgah Mount Scott (Clackamas) Mount Sylvania Mount Tabor Mount Talbert Nesmith Point Olson Mountain Oregon's Matterhorns Palmer Peak Pepper Mountain Pilot Rock Powell Butte Rocky Butte Rogers Peak Ross Mountain Roxy Ann Peak Saddle Mountain Scout Camp Siletz River Volcanics Snow Peak Southern Oregon Coast Range Spencer Butte Sunshine Rock Swede Hill Three Pyramids Tualatin Mountains TV Hill Upper and Lower Table Rock Walker Peak Willamette National Cemetery Eastern Cascades Bald Mountain Bald Mountain Caldera Barnes Butte Bly Mountain China Hat Cline Buttes Crooked River Caldera Deschutes Formation Hager Mountain Horse Ridge Gearhart Mountain Gray Butte Grizzly Mountain Lava Butte (Newberry/Tumalo) Monkeyface Newberry Volcano Ochoco Mountains Oregon Badlands Wilderness Paulina Peak Pilot Butte Pine Mountain Powell Buttes Round Butte Smith Rock Smith Rock State Park Tea Table Mountain Wildcat Mountain Wildcat Mountain Caldera Yainax Butte Yainax Ridge Yamsay Mountain Basin and Range & Eastern Oregon Big Hole Black Hills Chalk Basin Clarks Butte Clarno Unit Devils Garden Volcanic Field Dooley Mountain Diamond Craters Doherty Slide Drake Peak Fort Rock Fort Rock-Christmas Lake Valley Basin Four Craters Lava Field Glass Buttes Hager Mountain Harney Basin Harney Basin Volcanic Field Hole-in-the-Ground Jackies Butte John Day Fossil Beds National Monument Jordan Craters Lambert Rocks Lava Butte (Basin and Range) Mahogany Mountain Malheur Butte Modoc Plateau Mutton Mountains Pillars of Rome Poker Jim Ridge Powder River Volcanics Powder River Volcanics Saddle Butte Squaw Ridge Lava Field Steens Mountain Strawberry Mountain Strawberry Volcanics Tower Mountain Warner Peak Columbia Plateau Boat Rock Columbia River Basalt Group Grande Ronde Basalt Hat Rock Imnaha Basalt Hat Rock State Park Hermiston Butte Pendleton Vents Saddle Mountains Basalt Steens Basalt Wanapum Basalt Pacific Coast & Juan de Fuca Ridge Axial Seamount Brown Bear Seamount Cobb-Eickelberg Seamounts Devils Elbow Devils Elbow State Park Heceta Head Yaquina Head Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Larch_Mountain_(Multnomah_County,_Oregon)&oldid=1305037180 " Categories : Cascade Range Cascade Volcanoes Volcanoes of Oregon Mountains of Oregon Columbia River Gorge Subduction volcanoes Extinct volcanoes of the United States Volcanoes of Multnomah County, Oregon Landforms of Multnomah County, Oregon Shield volcanoes of the United States Pleistocene shield volcanoes Quaternary Oregon Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2025 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 17:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Larch Mountain (Multnomah County, Oregon) 4 languages Add topic

