Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Teams 3 OLMo 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Allen Institute for AI 4 languages Català Español فارسی Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence ) U.S. research institute for computer science Allen Institute for AI Formation 2014 ; 11 years ago ( 2014 ) Founder Paul Allen Type Non-profit research institute Tax ID no.

82-4083177 Location Seattle, Washington , U.S.

CEO Ali Farhadi Key people Peter Clark, Yejin Choi , Noah Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Dan Weld, Chris Bretherton, Ani Kembhavi, Jes Lefcourt Website allenai .org The Allen Institute for AI (abbreviated AI2 ) is a 501(c)(3) non-profit scientific research institute founded by late Microsoft co-founder and philanthropist Paul Allen in 2014. The institute seeks to conduct high-impact AI research and engineering in service of the common good.

[ 1 ] AI2 is based in Seattle , and also has an active office in Tel Aviv , Israel .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Oren Etzioni was appointed by Paul Allen in September 2013 to direct the research at the institute.

[ 3 ] After leading the organization for nine years, Etzioni stepped down from his role as CEO on September 30, 2022.

[ 4 ] He was replaced in an interim capacity by the leading researcher of the company's Aristo project, Peter Clark.

[ 5 ] On June 20, 2023, AI2 announced Ali Farhadi as its next CEO starting July 31, 2023.

[ 5 ] Teams [ edit ] Aristo : Aristo is a flagship project of AI2. Its original project goal was to design an artificially intelligent system that could successfully read, learn, and reason from texts and ultimately demonstrate its knowledge by successfully passing an 8th-grade science exam – the team achieved this objective in 2018. It was inspired by a similar project called Project Halo carried out by Seattle-based investment company Vulcan.

[ 6 ] The current focus of the team is to build the next generation of systems that can systematically reason, explain, and continually improve over time.

[ 7 ] PRIOR : The PRIOR team seeks to advance the field of computer vision by creating AI systems that can see, explore, learn, and reason about the world.

[ 8 ] The team released the open embodied AI platform AI2-THOR in 2016, supporting the training of AI agents in simulated environments.

[ 9 ] In February 2018, the team released the game Iconary as a demonstration of an AI that can understand and produce situated scenes from a limited set of icons.

Semantic Scholar : Semantic Scholar tool is an artificial-intelligence backed search engine for academic publications publicly released in November 2015.

[ 10 ] It uses advances in natural language processing to provide features such as summaries for scholarly papers, contextual information about inline citations, and the ability to create libraries of papers and receive paper recommendations.

[ 11 ] AllenNLP : The AllenNLP team works on research to improve NLP systems' performance and accountability, and advance scientific methodologies for evaluating and understanding NLP systems. The team produces its own research as well as open-source tools to accelerate NLP research.

[ 12 ] MOSAIC : The Mosaic project is focused on defining and building common sense knowledge and reasoning for AI systems.

[ 13 ] AI for the Environment : These teams seek to apply artificial intelligence solutions to the prevention of poaching and illegal fishing in locations around the world, as well as environmental problems like climate modeling and wildfire management. The teams in this group include EarthRanger, Skylight, Climate Modeling, and Wildlands.

OLMo [ edit ] On May 11, 2023, AI2 announced they were developing OLMo, an open language model aiming to match the performance of other state-of-the-art language models. In February 2024, it was open-sourced, including code, model weights with intermediate snapshots and logs, and contents of their Dolma training dataset, making it the most open state-of-the-art model available.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Allen Institute for Brain Science Allen Institute for Cell Science Artificial intelligence Glossary of artificial intelligence References [ edit ] ^ "About — Allen Institute for AI" .

allenai.org . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ "AI2 Israel — Allen Institute for AI" .

allenai.org . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ Cook, John (2013-09-04).

"Going beyond Siri and Watson: Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen taps Oren Etzioni to lead new Artificial Intelligence Institute" .

GeekWire . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ Schlosser, Kurt (2022-06-15).

"Oren Etzioni stepping down as CEO of Allen Institute for AI after nine years at research hub" .

GeekWire . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ a b Bishop, Todd (2023-06-20).

"Apple machine learning leader Ali Farhadi named CEO of Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence" .

GeekWire .

Archived from the original on 2023-06-20.

^ "Aristo — Allen Institute for AI" .

allenai.org . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ "Aristo — Allen Institute for AI" .

allenai.org . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ "PRIOR" .

prior.allenai.org . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ "AI2-THOR" . Allen Institute for AI . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ Rodriguez, Jesus (2021-07-08).

"🔹🔸Edge#104: AllenNLP Makes Cutting-Edge NLP Models Look Easy" .

TheSequence . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ "Semantic Scholar | Product" .

www.semanticscholar.org . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ "AllenNLP — Allen Institute for AI" .

allenai.org . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ Dormehl, Luke (2018-04-13).

"Forget Cloning, A.I. is the Real Way to Let Your Family Pooch Live Forever" .

Digital Trends . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

^ AI2 (2023-05-18).

"Announcing AI2 OLMo, an open language model made by scientists, for scientists" .

Medium . Retrieved 2023-05-26 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Wiggers, Kyle (2024-02-01).

"AI2 open sources text-generating AI models -- and the data used to train them" .

TechCrunch . Retrieved 2024-02-03 .

External links [ edit ] Official website "Allen Institute for AI" . Internal Revenue Service filings.

ProPublica Nonprofit Explorer .

v t e Existential risk from artificial intelligence Concepts AGI AI alignment AI boom AI capability control AI safety AI takeover Consequentialism Effective accelerationism Ethics of artificial intelligence Existential risk from artificial intelligence Friendly artificial intelligence Instrumental convergence Vulnerable world hypothesis Intelligence explosion Longtermism Machine ethics Suffering risks Superintelligence Technological singularity Organizations Alignment Research Center Center for AI Safety Center for Applied Rationality Center for Human-Compatible Artificial Intelligence Centre for the Study of Existential Risk EleutherAI Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Google DeepMind Humanity+ Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence Machine Intelligence Research Institute OpenAI Safe Superintelligence People Scott Alexander Sam Altman Yoshua Bengio Nick Bostrom Paul Christiano Eric Drexler Sam Harris Stephen Hawking Dan Hendrycks Geoffrey Hinton Bill Joy Shane Legg Elon Musk Steve Omohundro Huw Price Martin Rees Stuart J. Russell Ilya Sutskever Jaan Tallinn Max Tegmark Frank Wilczek Roman Yampolskiy Eliezer Yudkowsky Other Artificial Intelligence Act Do You Trust This Computer?

Human Compatible Open letter on artificial intelligence (2015) Our Final Invention Roko's basilisk Statement on AI risk of extinction Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies The Precipice Category v t e Vulcan Inc.

Paul Allen Jody Allen Subsidiaries Seattle Cinerama The Hospital Club Vulcan Productions Vulcan Capital Vulcan Real Estate Museums Museum of Pop Culture Flying Heritage & Combat Armor Museum Living Computer Museum Vulcan Aerospace Mojave Aerospace Ventures The Spaceship Company Stratolaunch Systems Scaled Composites Roc SpaceX Falcon 9 Air Orbital Sciences Pegasus II Mojave Aerospace Ventures Tier One SpaceShipOne WhiteKnightOne Ansari X-Prize flights 11P 13P 14P 15P 16P 17P Tier 1b SpaceShipTwo RocketMotorTwo WhiteKnightTwo Stratolaunch Systems Scaled Composites Stratolaunch Vulcan Sports and Entertainment Seattle Seahawks Seattle Sounders FC Portland Trail Blazers Moda Center Research and philanthropy Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence Allen Institute for Brain Science Allen Institute for Cell Science Allen Brain Atlas Great Elephant Census RV Petrel Other Vulcan FlipStart WikiCommons Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Allen_Institute_for_AI&oldid=1304517282 " Categories : Artificial intelligence laboratories Artificial intelligence associations 2014 establishments in Washington (state) Research institutes established in 2014 Organizations based in Seattle Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 13:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Allen Institute for AI 4 languages Add topic

