Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Four cardinal virtues Toggle Four cardinal virtues subsection 1.1 Gallery, depiction of the cardinal virtues in 9th-century Europe 2 Antiquity Toggle Antiquity subsection 2.1 Hellenistic philosophy 2.2 Roman philosophy 2.3 In the Bible 2.3.1 In the Old Testament 2.3.2 In the New Testament 3 In Christian tradition Toggle In Christian tradition subsection 3.1 In relation to the theological virtues 3.2 In relation to the seven deadly sins 4 Contemporary thought 5 Allegory 6 The virtues in art 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Cardinal virtues 34 languages Afrikaans العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Lombard Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Virtues of mind and character An image personifying the four virtues ( Ballet Comique de la Reine , 1582) Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e The cardinal virtues are four virtues of mind and character in classical philosophy . They are prudence , justice , fortitude , and temperance . They form a virtue theory of ethics. The term cardinal comes from the Latin cardo (hinge); [ 1 ] these four virtues are called "cardinal" because all other virtues fall under them and hinge upon them.

[ 2 ] These virtues derive initially from Plato in Republic Book IV, 426-435.

[ a ] Aristotle expounded them systematically in the Nicomachean Ethics . They were also recognized by the Stoics and Cicero expanded on them. In the Christian tradition, they are also listed in the Deuterocanonical books in Wisdom of Solomon 8:7 and 4 Maccabees 1:18–19 , and the Doctors Ambrose , Augustine , and Aquinas [ 3 ] expounded their supernatural counterparts, the three theological virtues of faith, hope, and charity.

Four cardinal virtues [ edit ] Prudence ( φρόνησις , phrónēsis ; Latin : prudentia ; also wisdom , sophia , sapientia ), the ability to discern the appropriate course of action to be taken in a given situation at the appropriate time, with consideration of potential consequences; cautiousness.

Justice ( δικαιοσύνη , dikaiosýnē ; Latin : iustitia ): also considered as fairness; [ 4 ] the Greek word also having the meaning righteousness.

Courage ( ἀνδρεία , andreía ; Latin : fortitudo ): forbearance, strength, endurance, fortitude (patience and perseverance), dedication and the ability to confront fear, uncertainty, and intimidation (bravery, boldness, valor, daring). Notably, ἀνδρεία , being closely related to ἀνήρ ("adult male"), could also be translated "manliness". Some other definitions of courage are "Andrea, virtus, spirit, heart, mettle, thumos, tenacity, gameness, resolution, bravery, boldness, valor, daring, hardihood, assertiveness, frame, gravitas, determination".

Temperance ( σωφροσύνη , sōphrosýnē ; Latin : temperantia ): also known as restraint, the practice of self-control, abstention, discretion, and moderation tempering the appetition . Plato considered sōphrosynē , which may also be translated as sound-mindedness, to be the most important virtue.

σωφροσύνη was often used in reference to drinking and "knowing the right amount" to avoid belligerence.

Gallery, depiction of the cardinal virtues in 9th-century Europe [ edit ] An early European representation of the cardinal virtues from 845 AD is found in the Vivian Bible , Paris.

The four virtues (in the corners) face a scene with King David (center), along with men who served David and who wrote psalms.

Fortitudo or Courage, from the Vivian Bible, Bibliothèque nationale, Latin 1, folio 215v.

Prydentia or Prudentia (Prudence), from the Vivian Bible.

Iustitia or Justice, from the Vivian Bible.

Temperantia or Temperance, from the Vivian Bible.

Antiquity [ edit ] Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e The four cardinal virtues appeared as a group (sometimes included in larger lists) long before they were given this title.

Hellenistic philosophy [ edit ] Plato associated the four cardinal virtues with the social classes of the ideal city described in The Republic , and with the faculties of humanity. Plato narrates a discussion of the character of a good city where the following is agreed upon: Clearly, then, it will be wise, brave, temperate [literally: healthy-minded], and just.

— 427e; [ 5 ] see also 435b Temperance [ b ] was most closely associated with the producing classes, the farmers and craftsmen, to moderate their animal appetites.

Fortitude was assigned to the warrior class, to strengthen their fighting spirit.

Prudence was assigned to the rulers, to guide their reason.

Justice stood above these three to properly regulate the relations among them.

Plato sometimes [ c ] lists holiness ( hosiotes , eusebeia , aidos ) amongst the cardinal virtues. He especially associates holiness with justice, but leaves their precise relationship unexplained.

In Aristotle's Rhetoric , we read: The forms of Virtue are justice, courage, temperance, magnificence, magnanimity, liberality, gentleness, prudence, wisdom.

— Rhetoric 1366b1 [ 7 ] These are expounded fully in the Nicomachean Ethics III.6-V.2.

Philo of Alexandria , a Hellenistic Jewish philosopher, also recognized the four cardinal virtues as prudence, temperance, courage, and justice. In his writings, he states: In these words Moses intends to sketch out the particular virtues. And they also are four in number, prudence, temperance, courage, and justice.

— Philo, Philo's Works , Allegorical Interpretation 1.XIX [ 8 ] These virtues, according to Philo, serve as guiding principles for a virtuous and fulfilling life.

Roman philosophy [ edit ] The Roman philosopher and statesman Cicero (106-43 BC), like Plato, limits the list to four virtues: Virtue may be defined as a habit of mind ( animi ) in harmony with reason and the order of nature. It has four parts: wisdom ( prudentiam ), justice, courage, temperance.

— De Inventione , II, LIII [ d ] [ 9 ] Cicero discusses these further in De Officiis (I, V, and following).

Seneca writes in Consolatio ad Helviam Matrem about justice ( iustitia from Ancient Greek δικαιοσύνη ), self-control ( continentia from Ancient Greek σωφροσύνη ),  practical wisdom ( prudentia from Ancient Greek φρόνησις ) and devotion ( pietas ) instead of courage ( fortitudo from Ancient Greek ἀνδρεία ).

[ 10 ] The Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius discusses these in Book V:12 of Meditations and views them as the "goods" that a person should identify in one's own mind, as opposed to "wealth or things which conduce to luxury or prestige".

[ 11 ] Suggestions of the Stoic virtues can be found in fragments in the Diogenes Laertius and Stobaeus .

The Platonist view of the four cardinal virtues is described in Definitions .

Practical wisdom or prudence ( phrónēsis ) is the perspicacity necessary to conduct personal business and affairs of state. It encompasses the skill to distinguish the beneficial from the detrimental, to understand the attainment of happiness, and to discern the right course of action in every situation. Its antithesis or opposite is the vice of folly.

[ 12 ] Justice ( dikaiosunê ) is the harmonious alignment of one's inner self and the comprehensive integrity of the soul. It involves fostering sound discipline within each facet of our being, enabling us to live with others and extend the same regard to every individual. Additionally, justice pertains to a state's aptitude to equitably allocate resources based on individuals' deservingness, as determined by their merits. It entails refraining from undue harshness, fostering a universal perception of fairness. Furthermore, it entails embodying the qualities of a law-abiding citizen or member of society, upholding principles of social equality. Justice encompasses the formulation of laws that can be substantiated by valid justifications, leading to a society where actions align with these laws.

Moderation or temperance ( sôphrosunê ) is the capacity to temper the indulgence of desires and sensory pleasures within the bounds of what is customary for the individual, aligning only with experiences already familiar to the soul. It encompasses achieving a harmonious equilibrium and exercising disciplined control when it comes to overall pleasure and pain, ensuring that they remain within normal ranges. Moreover, moderation involves cultivating a harmonious relationship and a balanced rule between the soul's governing and being governed aspects. It signifies maintaining a state of natural self-reliance and exercising proper discipline as and when required by the soul. Rational consensus within the soul is essential concerning what merits admiration and what warrants disdain. This approach entails deliberate caution in one's choices, as one's selection navigates between the extremes.

Courage ( andreia ) can be defined as the ability to conquer fear within oneself when action is necessary. It encompasses military confidence, a deep understanding of warfare, and maintaining unwavering beliefs in the face of challenges. It involves self-discipline to overcome fear, obeying wisdom, and facing death boldly. Courage also entails maintaining sound judgment in tough situations, countering hostility, upholding virtues, remaining composed when faced with frightening (or encouraging) discussions and events, and not becoming discouraged. It reflects valuing the rule of law in our daily lives rather than diminishing its importance.

In the Bible [ edit ] In the Old Testament [ edit ] The cardinal virtues are listed in the deuterocanonical book Wisdom of Solomon 8:7 , which reads: She [Wisdom] teaches temperance, and prudence, and justice, and fortitude, which are such things as men can have nothing more profitable in life.

They are also found in other non-canonical scriptures like 4 Maccabees 1:18–19 , which relates: Now the kinds of wisdom are right judgment, justice, courage, and self-control. Right judgment is supreme over all of these since by means of it reason rules over the emotions.

In the New Testament [ edit ] Wisdom , usually sophia , rather than Prudence ( phrónēsis ), is discussed extensively in all parts of the New Testament . It is a major topic of 1 Corinthians 2 , where the author discusses how divine teaching and power are greater than worldly wisdom.

Justice ( δικαιοσύνη , dikaiosýnē ) is taught in the gospels, where most translators give it as "righteousness".

Plato's word for Fortitude ( ἀνδρεία ) is not present in the New Testament, but the virtues of steadfastness ( ὑπομονή , hypomonē ) and patient endurance ( μακροθυμία , makrothymia ) are praised. Paul exhorts believers to "act like men" ( ἀνδρίζομαι , andrizomai , 1 Corinthians 16:13 ).

Temperance ( σωφροσύνη , sōphrosýnē ), usually translated "sobriety," is present in the New Testament, along with self-control ( ἐγκράτεια , egkrateia ).

[ 13 ] In Christian tradition [ edit ] Part of a series on Thomas Aquinas Thomism Scholasticism Apophatic theology Aseity Divine simplicity Analogia entis Quinque viae Beatific vision Actus purus Actus essendi Primum Movens Correspondence theory Hylomorphism Substance theory ( ousia ) Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / accident nature ) Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Transcendentals Aristotelian ethics Cardinal / Theological Natural law Determinatio Just war Satisfaction theory of the atonement Thomistic sacramental theology Just price Concupiscence Intrinsic finality Thomistic theology of merit Compatibilism Theological intellectualism Works Summa Theologica Treatise on Law Summa contra Gentiles Contra Errores Graecorum Commentaries on Aristotle De regno, ad regem Cypri De regimine Judaeorum De principiis naturae, ad fratrem Sylvestrum De aeternitate mundi, contra murmurantes De motu cordis, ad Magistrum Philippum Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate Commentary on the Book of Causes De iudiciis astrorum Compendium Theologiae Catena aurea Hymns and prayers Adoro te devote Creator ineffabilis Lauda Sion O sacrum convivium Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium Tantum ergo Sacris solemniis Panis angelicus Verbum supernum prodiens O salutaris hostia Influences Aristotle St. Paul Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard Averroes Maimonides St. Albertus Magnus Classical Thomists Cantimpré Saint-Cher Beauvais Penyafort Innocent V Lessines Piperno Moerbeke Martí Trilia Houghton Apolda Sutton Auvergne Benedict XI Fontaines Winterburn Colonna Ymbert di Bologna Fiadoni Guidonis Nédellec Paludanus Holkott Regina Bromyard Kydones Eymerich Calecas Ferrer Dominici Gerson Gorkum Sabunde Capreolus Pierozzi de Flandria Torquemada de Rupe Niger Almadura Mirabilibus Savonarola Fabri Gostynin Głogów Tetzel Deza Mazzolini di Ferrara Gaetanus Koellin Pagnino Faber Vitoria Catherinus Ory Soto (Domingo) Cano Pelargus Soto (Pedro) Senensis Mercado Medina de Granada Fernandes Báñez Zumel Porrecta Duperron Medices Lessius Malvenda Lemos Álvarez Oliva Rispoli Riccardi Gravina Poinsot Ripada Molinier Torres Vallgornera Pallavicino Nicolaï Lynch Ferre Gonet Bancel Quétif Massoulié Alexandre Échard Benedict XIII Serry Plessis Gotti Leocata Concina Benedict XIV De Rubeis Burke de Boxadors Mamachi Gazzaniga Neo-Thomism Aertsen Anquín Anscombe Arintero Ashley Barron Bocheński Bouquillon Bourke Canals Coffey Copleston Coreth Cornoldi Daujat De Wulf Fabro Fairweather Farrer Feser Franca Gardet Garrigou-Lagrange Gauthier Geach George Grenier Hawkins von Donnersmarck Henle Hugon Inagaki Jolivet Kleutgen Knasas Komar Koninck Krąpiec Leo XIII Lira Lonergan MacIntyre Maréchal Maritain Marshall Mascall McInerny Meinvielle Millán-Puelles Newman Pace Pecci Pegis Piolanti Pirotta Pius X Ramírez Régis Ripperger Russo Ryan Sanseverino Sertillanges Simon Smith Stein Tanaka Taparelli Torre Ušeničnik White Wilhelmsen Wippel Woodbury Zigliara History Medieval philosophy Condemnations of 1210–1277 Canonization of Thomas Aquinas Second scholasticism Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas School of Salamanca Physical premotion Congregatio de Auxiliis Salmanticenses and Complutenses Neo-scholasticism Æterni Patris Editio Leonina Neo-Thomism in Brazil Analytical Thomism ICUSTA Scholarship Aquinas Index Thomisticus Nova et Vetera Revue thomiste The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas The Thomist Thomas Aquinas Dictionary Art 1476 Altarpiece Carafa Chapel Charles Bridge statue Cortona Triptych Enthroned Madonna and Child with Saints Fiesole Altarpiece Madonna and Child with St Dominic and St Thomas Aquinas San Pietro Martire Triptych The Apotheosis of Saint Thomas Aquinas The Vision of Fray Lauterio The Vision of Saint Thomas Aquinas Temptation of St. Thomas Triumph of Saint Thomas Aquinas Related topics Aristotelianism Actus primus Catholic theology Doctor of the Church Dominican Order Empiricism List of institutions named after Aquinas Saint Thomas Aquinas Church Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Catholic moral theology drew from both the Wisdom of Solomon and the Fourth Book of Maccabees in developing its thought on the virtues.

[ 14 ] Ambrose ( c.

330s – c.

397 ) used the expression "cardinal virtues": And we know that there are four cardinal virtues - temperance, justice, prudence, and fortitude.

— Commentary on Luke , V, 62 Augustine of Hippo , discussing the morals of the church, described them: For these four virtues (would that all felt their influence in their minds as they have their names in their mouths!), I should have no hesitation in defining them: that temperance is love giving itself entirely to that which is loved; fortitude is love readily bearing all things for the sake of the loved object; justice is love serving only the loved object, and therefore ruling rightly; prudence is love distinguishing with sagacity between what hinders it and what helps it.

— De moribus eccl., Chap. xv [ 15 ] In relation to the theological virtues [ edit ] The "cardinal" virtues are not the same as the three theological virtues : Faith, Hope, and Charity ( Love ), named in 1 Corinthians 13 .

And now these three remain: faith, hope, and love. But the greatest of these is love.

Because of this reference, a group of seven virtues is sometimes listed by adding the four cardinal virtues (prudence, temperance, fortitude, justice) and three theological virtues (faith, hope, charity).
While the first four date back to Greek philosophers and were applicable to all people seeking to live moral lives, the theological virtues appear to be specific to Christians as written by Paul in the New Testament.

Efforts to relate the cardinal and theological virtues differ. Augustine sees faith as coming under justice. Beginning with a wry comment about the moral mischief of pagan deities, he writes: They [the pagans] have made Virtue also a goddess, which, indeed, if it could be a goddess, had been preferable to many. And now, because it is not a goddess, but a gift of God, let it be obtained by prayer from Him, by whom alone it can be given, and the whole crowd of false gods vanishes. For as much as they have thought proper to distribute virtue into four divisions - prudence, justice, fortitude, and temperance - and as each of these divisions has its own virtues, faith is among the parts of justice, and has the chief place with as many of us as know what that saying means, ‘The just shall live by faith.’ — City of God , IV, 20 Dante Alighieri also attempts to relate the cardinal and theological virtues in his Divine Comedy , most notably in the complex allegorical scheme drawn in Purgatorio XXIX to XXXI. Depicting a procession in the Garden of Eden (which the author situates at the top of the mountain of purgatory), Dante describes a chariot drawn by a gryphon and accompanied by a vast number of figures, among which stand three women on the right side dressed in red, green, and white, and four women on the left, all dressed in purple. The chariot is generally understood to represent the holy church, with the women on right and left representing the theological and cardinal virtues respectively.

[ 16 ] The exact meaning of the allegorical women's role, behaviour, interrelation, and color-coding remains a matter of literary interpretation.

In relation to the seven deadly sins [ edit ] In the High Middle Ages, some authors opposed the seven virtues (cardinal plus theological) to the seven deadly sins . However, “treatises exclusively concentrating on both septenaries are actually quite rare.” and “examples of late medieval catalogues of virtues and vices which extend or upset the double heptad can be easily multiplied.” [ 17 ] And there are problems with this parallelism: The opposition between the virtues and the vices to which these works allude despite the frequent inclusion of other schemes may seem unproblematic at first sight. The virtues and the vices seem to mirror each other as positive and negative moral attitudes, so that medieval authors, with their keen predilection for parallels and oppositions, could conveniently set them against each other.  … Yet artistic representations such as Conrad’s trees are misleading in that they establish oppositions between the principal virtues and the capital vices which are based on mere juxtaposition. As to content, the two schemes do not match each other. The capital vices of lust and avarice, for instance, contrast with the remedial virtues of chastity and generosity, respectively, rather than with any theological or cardinal virtue; conversely, the virtues of hope and prudence are opposed to despair and foolishness rather than to any deadly sin. Medieval moral authors were well aware of the fact. Actually, the capital vices are more often contrasted with the remedial or contrary virtues in medieval moral literature than with the principal virtues, while the principal virtues are frequently accompanied by a set of mirroring vices rather than by the seven deadly sins.

[ 18 ] Contemporary thought [ edit ] Jesuit scholars Daniel J. Harrington and James F. Keenan , in their Paul and Virtue Ethics (2010), argue for seven "new virtues" to replace the classical cardinal virtues in complementing the three theological virtues, mirroring the seven earlier proposed in Bernard Lonergan 's Method in Theology (1972): "be humble, be hospitable, be merciful, be faithful, reconcile, be vigilant, and be reliable".

[ 19 ] [ further explanation needed ] Allegory [ edit ] Fresco with allegories of the four cardinal virtues in the ‘’Assunta’’ church in Manerba del Garda.

The Tomb of Sir John Hotham , supported by figures of the cardinal virtues.

The Cardinal Virtues are often depicted as female allegorical figures . These were a popular subject for funerary sculpture. The attributes and names of these figures may vary according to local tradition.

Yves Decadt, a Flemish artist, has created a series of artworks titled “Falling Angels: Allegories about the 7 Sins and 7 Virtues for Falling Angels and other Curious Minds”.

[ 20 ] The series explores the topic of morality, sins, and virtues, which have dominated Western cultures for more than 2000 years. In this work, Decadt follows in the footsteps of Pieter Breughel , who made a series of sketches on the 7 sins and 7 virtues about 500 years ago. The work takes the viewer on an adventurous trip through time and across the barriers and edges of reality, mythology, religion, and culture.

The virtues in art [ edit ] Four cardinal virtues, Louvre, Paris ( Brooklyn Museum Archives , Goodyear Archival Collection ) In many churches and artwork the Cardinal Virtues are depicted with symbolic items: [ citation needed ] Justice sword, balance and scales, a crown Temperance wheel, bridle and reins, vegetables and fish, cup, water and wine in two jugs Fortitude armor, club, with a lion, palm, tower, a yoke , a broken column Prudence book, scroll, mirror, an attacking serpent The cardinal virtues as depicted on the tomb of Pope Clement II in Bamberg Cathedral Iustitia (Justice), with balance and scales Temperantia (Temperance), with water and wine in two jugs Fortitudo (Fortitude), with a lion Prudentia (Prudence), with a serpent Notable depictions include sculptures on the tomb of Francis II, Duke of Brittany and the tomb of John Hotham . They were also depicted in the garden at Edzell Castle .

Allegories of the virtues Prudence by Gaetano Fusali, on the façade of the Gesuati church , Venice (1737) Justice by Francesco Bonazza, on the façade of the Gesuati church , Venice (1737) Fortitude by Giuseppe Torretto, on the façade of the Gesuati church , Venice (1737) Temperance by Alvise Tagliapietra, on the façade of the Gesuati church , Venice (1737) Prudence , on the façade of La Rochelle city hall Justice , on the façade of La Rochelle city hall Fortitude , on the façade of La Rochelle city hall Temperance , on the façade of La Rochelle city hall Justice , around the main altar of Saint Peter's Abbey, Ghent See also [ edit ] Cardinal and Theological Virtues (Raphael) – Fresco by Raphael Civic virtue – Set of moral qualities that promote the common good Five Constants – Cardinal ethical principles in Confucianism Seven deadly sins – Set of vices in Christian theology Seven virtues – Seven virtues in Christian tradition Theological virtues – Christian ethics Notes [ edit ] ^ See also Protagoras 330b, which also includes piety ( hosiotes ).

^ Cicero and Plato sometimes preferred the word sōphrosynē .

[ 6 ] ^ e.g., Protagoras 349b; cf. 324e, 329c, 330b, 331a-c.

^ Nam virtus est animi habitus naturae modo atque rationi consentaneus. … Habet igitur partes quattuor: prudentiam, iustitiam, fortitudinem, temperantiam.

References [ edit ] ^ Harper, Douglas.

"Cardinal" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Catholic Straight Answers website ^ Thomas Aquinas.

Summa Theologica . II(I).61.

^ "Cardinal Virtues of Plato, Augustine and Confucius" .

ThePlatonist.Com . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04.

^ Plato (1937) [1930].

The Republic of Plato: with an English translation by Paul Shorey .

Loeb Classical Library . Vol. 1. Translated by Shorey, Paul (Revised and Reprinted ed.).

Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London : Harvard University Press ; William Heinemann Ltd.

p.

347 .

LCCN a44004515 .

OCLC 669777366 .

OL 20425902M .

Cardinal virtues at the Internet Archive .

Clearly, then, it will be wise, brave, sober, and just.

^ Strauch, E.H. (2001).

Beyond Literary Theory: Literature as a Search for the Meaning of Human Destiny .

Lanham, Maryland : University Press of America . p.

166 .

^ Aristotle.

"Rhetoric Book I - Chapter 9" .

^ "Philo: Works of Philo Judaeus" .

Christian Classics Ethereal Library . Retrieved 2022-12-20 .

^ Cicero.

"de Inventione II" .

The Latin Library .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-10 . Retrieved 2014-01-17 .

^ Seneca (2004).

Seneca. La "Consolatio ad Helviam matrem" con un'antologia di testi (in Italian). Translated by Cotrozzi, Annamaria. Carocci. p. 76.

^ Marcus Aurelius (1976).

Meditations . Translated by Staniforth, Maxwell. Penguin Classics. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0-14-044140-6 .

^ Burges, George , ed. (1854). "Definitions".

Works of Plato . Bohn's Classical Library. Vol. VI. London: H. G. Bohn . p.

126 .

^ Plummer, Alfred (1888). "The Meaning and Value of Sobermindedness - The Use and Abuse of Religious Emotion". In Nicoll, W. Robertson (ed.).

The Expositor's Bible: The Pastoral Epistles . Vol. 44. London: Hodder & Stoughton . pp.

241-242 .

^ Curran, C. E.

(2008). "Virtue".

Catholic Moral Theology in the United States: A History .

Washington, D.C.

: Georgetown University Press . pp.

168–172 .

^ Brady, B.V. (2003).

Christian Love . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. p.

122 .

^ Musa, Mark, ed. (1981).

Dante: The Divine Comedy Vol. II: Purgatory . Penguin Books. pp. 315, 318– 319.

ISBN 0-14-044-442-4 .

^ Bejczy, István P. (2011).

The Cardinal Virtues in the Middle Ages: A Study in Moral Thought from the Fourth to the Fourteenth Century . Boston: Brill. pp.

228-229 .

ISBN 9789004210141 .

^ Bejczy, István Pieter (2011).

The Cardinal Virtues in the Middle Ages: A Study in Moral Thought from the Fourth to the Fourteenth Century . Brill. pp.

232-233 .

ISBN 9789004210141 .

^ Harrington, D. J.; Keenan, J. F. (2010).

Paul and Virtue Ethics .

Lanham, MD : Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

125-126 .

^ Gallery 'Le miroir de la mémoire', "Falling Angels : Allegories about the 7 Sins and 7 Virtues for Falling Angels and other Curious Minds" , Zurich , 2023.

Sources [ edit ] Ambrose, On the Duties of the Clergy (Book 1, chapter 24, paragraph 115 and following) Augustine of Hippo, Of the Morals of the Catholic Church External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Cardinal Virtues ".

Rickaby, John (1913).

"Cardinal Virtues" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Richert, Scott P.

"Temperance: A Cardinal Virtue" .

Learn Religions .

Aquinas, Thomas. "Question 61: the Cardinal Virtues".

Summa Theologiae – via New Advent.

v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Cardinal virtues at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cardinal_virtues&oldid=1295710098 " Categories : Christian ethics Virtue Republic (Plato) Christian terminology Hidden categories: Articles with Internet Archive links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Pages using gallery without a media namespace prefix Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 10:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cardinal virtues 34 languages Add topic

