Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Foundations 2 Political party Toggle Political party subsection 2.1 Marxism–Leninism 2.2 Frankfurt School 2.3 Other uses 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Vanguardism 19 languages العربية Asturianu Dansk Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Leninist political revolutionary ideology Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Vanguardism , a core concept of Leninism , is the idea that a revolutionary vanguard party, composed of the most conscious and disciplined workers, must lead the proletariat in overthrowing capitalism and establishing socialism , ultimately progressing to communism .

The vanguard works to engage the working class in revolutionary politics and to strengthen proletarian political power against the bourgeoisie .

This theory generally serves as a rationale for the leading role of the Communist party , often enshrined in the constitution if the party attains state power.

Foundations [ edit ] This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Vladimir Lenin popularised political vanguardism as conceptualised by Karl Kautsky , detailing his thoughts in one of his earlier works, What is to be done?

.

[ 1 ] Lenin argued that Marxism 's complexity and the hostility of the establishment (the autocratic , semi- feudal state of Imperial Russia ) required that a close-knit group of individuals pulled from the working class vanguard to safeguard the revolutionary ideology within the particular circumstances presented by the Tsarist régime ( Russian Empire ) at the time. While Lenin wished for a revolutionary organisation akin to the contemporary Social Democratic Party of Germany, which was open to the people and more democratic in organisation, the Russian autocracy prevented this.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Leninists argue that Lenin's ideal vanguard party would have open membership: "The members of the Party are they who accept the principles of the Party program and render the Party all possible support." [ 4 ] This party could be completely transparent, at least internally: the "entire political arena is as open to the public view as is a theatre stage to the audience".

[ 5 ] A party that supposedly implemented democracy to such an extent that "the general control (in the literal sense of the term) exercised over every party man in the politics brings into existence an automatically operating mechanism which produces what in biology is called the "survival of the fittest"". The party would be completely open while educating the proletariat to remove the false consciousness that had been instilled in them.

[ 5 ] In its first phase, the vanguard party would exist for two reasons. Firstly, it would protect Marxism from outside corruption from other ideas, as well as advance its plans. Secondly, it would educate the proletariat in Marxism in order to cleanse them of their "false individual consciousness" and instill the revolutionary " class consciousness " in them.

Our task is not to champion the degrading of the revolutionary to the level of an amateur, but to raise the amateurs to the level of revolutionaries.

[ 5 ] If the party is successful in their goal, on the eve of revolution, a critical mass of the working class population would be prepared to usher forth the transformation of society. Furthermore, a great number of them, namely their most dedicated members, would belong to the party cadres as professional revolutionaries , and would be elected to leadership positions by the mass party membership. Thus the organisation would quickly include the entire working class.

[ 5 ] Political party [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A vanguard party is a political party at the fore of a population-wide political movement and of a revolution . In the praxis of revolutionary political science the vanguard party was composed of professional revolutionaries, first effected by the Bolshevik Party in the Russian Revolution of 1917. Lenin, the first leader of the Bolsheviks, coined the term vanguard party , and argued that such a party was necessary in order to provide the practical and political leadership that would impel the proletariat to achieve a communist revolution . Hence, as a political-science term, vanguard party most often is associated with Leninism ; however, similar ideas (under different names) also are present in other revolutionary ideologies .

Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx presented the concept of the vanguard party as solely qualified to politically lead the proletariat in revolution; in Chapter II: "Proletarians and Communists" of The Communist Manifesto (1848), they said: The Communists, therefore, are, on the one hand, practically the most advanced and resolute section of the working-class parties of every country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding the lines of march, the conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian movement. The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all other proletarian parties: Formation of the proletariat into a class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of political power by the proletariat.

According to Lenin, the purpose of the vanguard party is to establish a dictatorship of the proletariat ; a rule of the working class . The change of ruling class, from the bourgeoisie to the proletariat, makes possible the full development of society . In early 20th-century Russia, Lenin argued that the vanguard party would lead the revolution to depose the incumbent Tsarist government, and transfer government power to the working class.

[ 6 ] In the pamphlet What is to be Done?

(1902), Lenin said that a revolutionary vanguard party, mostly recruited from the working class, should lead the political campaign, because it was the only way that the proletariat could successfully achieve a revolution; unlike the economist campaign of trade union struggle advocated by other socialist political parties and later by the anarcho-syndicalists . Like Karl Marx, Lenin distinguished between the two aspects of a revolution: the economic campaign (labour strikes for increased wages and work concessions), which featured diffused leadership; and the political campaign (socialist changes to society), which featured the decisive revolutionary leadership of the Bolshevik vanguard party.

Marxism–Leninism [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Main article: Marxism–Leninism This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Stalinism Concepts Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-revisionism Collectivization Cult of personality Five-year plans Great Break Korenizatsiia Marxism–Leninism New Soviet man Popular front Self-criticism Socialism in one country Socialist realism Soviet patriotism Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Vanguardism People Stalin Andreyeva Andreyev Berman Bierut Beria Ceaușescu Chervenkov Choibalsan Dimitrov Dugin Firin Foster Frinovsky Frenkel Kaganovich Kalinin Kim Kirov Khrulyov Khrushchev Kolmogorov Kotkin Kosygin Kryuchkov Kuybyshev Malenkov Merkulov Molotov Ochab Ordzhonikidze Petrovsky Pollitt Raikhman Rákosi Rosengolts Serov Sholokhov Thälmann Ulbricht Vyshinsky Voznesensky Yagoda Yenukidze Yezhov Yaroslavsky Zyuganov Theoretical works About the anti-Soviet elements Dialectical and Historical Materialism Dizzy with Success Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR Falsifiers of History Foundations of Leninism History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Marxism and the National Question History Stalinist Era First five-year plan Great Break Collectivisation Industrialisation Great Purge Moscow trials Azerbaijan repressions Mongolia repressions Spanish Civil War World War II Soviet atomic bomb project Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Cominform Chinese Communist Revolution First Indochina War Korean War Doctors' plot Death and funeral of Stalin De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Khrushchev Thaw Parties Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist–Leninist) All-Union Communist Party Bolsheviks Albanian Party of Labour Communist Party of Germany Communist Party of Greece Italian Marxist–Leninist Party CARC Party Communist Party of New Zealand Romanian Communist Party Workers' Party of Korea Communist Party of the Russian Federation National Bolshevik Party The Other Russia Stalin Bloc – For the USSR American Communist Party (2024) Related topics Anti-Stalinist left Joseph Stalin's rise to power Stalin and antisemitism Stalin Society Stalinist architecture Neo-Stalinism Anti-Soviet agitation Authoritarian socialism Comparison to Nazism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Juche Maoism National communism Red fascism Sino–Albanian split Sino–Soviet split Soviet–Albanian split Soviet–Yugoslav split Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Soviet Union portal v t e As he surveyed the European milieu in the late 1890s, Lenin found several theoretic problems with the Marxism of the late 19th century. Contrary to what Karl Marx had predicted, capitalism had become stronger in the last third of the 19th century. In Western Europe, the working class had become poorer; the workers and their trade unions , although they had continued to militate for better wages and working conditions, had failed to develop a revolutionary class consciousness , as predicted by Marx. To explain that undeveloped political awareness, Lenin said that the division of labour in a bourgeois capitalist society prevented the emergence of a proletarian class consciousness, because of the ten-to-twelve-hour workdays that the workers laboured in factories, which left them no time to learn and apply the philosophic complexities of Marxist theory . Finally, in trying to effect a revolution in Tsarist Imperial Russia (1721–1917), Lenin knew the problem of an autocratic régime that had outlawed almost all political activity. Although the Tsarist autocracy could not enforce a ban on political ideas, until 1905—when Tsar Nicholas II (ruled 1894–1917) agreed to the formation of a national duma —the Okhrana , the Tsarist secret police , suppressed every political group seeking social and political changes, including those with a democratic program. To counter such political conditions, Lenin said that a professional revolutionary organisation was necessary to organise and lead the most class-conscious workers into a politically cohesive movement. Concerning the Russian class struggle , in the book What Is to Be Done?

(1902), against the "economist" trend of the socialist parties (who proposed that the working class would develop a revolutionary consciousness from demanding solely economic improvements), Lenin said that the "history of all countries bears out that, through their own powers alone, the working class can develop only a trade-union consciousness"; and that under reformist, trade-union leadership, the working class could only engage spontaneous local rebellions to improve their political position within the capitalist system, and that revolutionary consciousness developed unevenly. Nonetheless, optimistic about the working class's ability to develop a revolutionary class consciousness , Lenin said that the missing element for escalating the class struggle to revolution was a political organisation that could relate to the radicalism of political vanguard of the working class, who then would attract many workers from the middling ranks of the reformist leaders of the trade unions.

It is often believed that Lenin thought the bearers of class consciousness were the common intellectuals who made it their vocation to conspire against the capitalist system, educate the public in revolutionary theory, and prepare the workers for the proletarian revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat that would follow. Yet, unlike his Menshevik rivals, Lenin distinguished himself by his hostility towards the bourgeois intelligentsia , and was routinely criticised for placing too much trust in the intellectual ability of the working class to transform society through its own political struggles.

[ citation needed ] Like other political organisations that sought to change Imperial Russian society, Lenin's Bolshevik Party resorted to conspiracy, and operated in the political underground. Against Tsarist repression, Lenin argued for the necessity of confining membership to people who were professionally trained to overthrow the Okhrana; [ citation needed ] however, at its core, the Bolshevik Party was an exceptionally flexible organisation who pragmatically adapted policy to changing political situations.

[ citation needed ] After the Revolution of 1905 , Lenin proposed that the Bolshevik Party "open its gates" to the unhappiest of the working class, who were rapidly becoming political radicals, in order for the Party to become a mass political party with genuine roots in the working class movement.

[ citation needed ] The notion of a 'vanguard', as used by Lenin before 1917, did not necessarily imply single-party rule. Lenin considered the Social-Democrats (Bolsheviks) the leading elements of a multi-class (and multi-party) democratic struggle against Tsarism.

[ 7 ] For a period after the October Revolution , the Bolsheviks (now renamed the Communist Party) operated in the soviets , trade unions, and other working-class mass organisations with other revolutionary parties, such as Mensheviks, Social-Revolutionaries and anarcho-communists , and local soviets often elected non-Bolshevik majorities.

[ 8 ] Lenin did consider the Bolsheviks the vanguard insofar as they were the most consistent defenders of Soviet power (which he considered the dictatorship of the proletariat or 'Commune-state').

[ 9 ] However, the situation changed drastically during the Russian Civil War and economic collapse, which decimated the working class and its independent institutions, and saw the development of irreconcilable conflicts between the Bolsheviks and their rivals. At the 10th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) in 1921, the Party made the de facto reality de jure by outlawing opposition parties and formalising single-Party rule.

[ 10 ] In Lenin's view, Russia was massive but inert, with a patiently suffering peasant majority and a proletarian minority, who could be progressive only when led by "shrewd, calculating, ruthless, and highly-educated" upper-classes Russians; so those intellectuals should create a party to organize the proletariat to seize power in the proletariat's interest, thence "the right and the duty to wipe out all other parties".

[ 11 ] From 1936 onward, Communist-inspired state constitutions enshrined the "father your own family and let your families live in a nation with society" rubric by giving the Communist parties formal leadership in society—a provision that was interpreted to either ban other parties altogether or force them to accept the Communists' guaranteed right to rule as a condition of being allowed to exist as an alternative party. Robert Mayer wrote that Lenin redefined class identity to exclude dissenters, effectively stripping workers who opposed Bolshevik rule of their proletarian status and democratic rights. This strategy allowed Lenin to suppress opposition while maintaining the illusion of proletarian democracy.

[ 12 ] Part of a series on Trotskyism Concepts Anti-fascism Anti-Stalinism Bureaucratic collectivism Critique of political economy Cross-class alliance Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state Democratic centralism Decentralized economic planning Entryism Leninism Permanent revolution Political revolution Proletarian internationalism Social revolution Soviet democracy State capitalism Substitutionism Transitional demand Uneven and combined development Union democracy United front Vanguard party World communism World revolution Variants Orthodox Trotskyism Third camp Posadism Pabloism People Trotsky Abern Ali Antonov-Ovseenko Bensaïd Blanco Callinicos Cannon Deutscher Dowson Draper Duxiu Cliff Frank Grant Hallas Hansen Healy James Khan Lambert Maitan Mandel Moreno North Novack Pablo Posadas Preobrazhensky Rakovsky Sedov Shachtman Smirnov Tạ Thu Thâu Taaffe Woods Works 1905 (1908) Terrorism and Communism (1920) Trotsky's Military Writings (1923-1925) Literature and Revolution (1924) New Course (1924) Lessons of October (1924) Towards Socialism or Capitalism?

(1925) Leon Trotsky on China (1925) History of the Russian Revolution (1930) The Spanish Revolution, 1931-1939 (1931-1939) The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (1931-40) The Revolution Betrayed (1936) Their Morals and Ours (1938) Transitional Program (1938) In Defence of Marxism (1942) Thesis of Pulacayo (1946) The Stalinist Legacy (1984) The Dilemmas of Lenin (2017) History Russian Revolution October Revolution Joseph Stalin's rise to power The Declaration of 46 Left Opposition Lenin's Testament Bloc of Soviet Oppositions French Turn Minneapolis general strike of 1934 Great Purge Moscow trials Proletarian Military Policy New York Intellectuals May 68 1968–1969 Japanese university protests 1970s Hong Kong student protests Militant in Liverpool Parties Active Internationalist Workers' Left (Greece) Lanka Sama Samaja Party Lutte Ouvrière People Before Profit Socialist Action (Hong Kong) Socialist Alternative (Australia) Socialist Alternative (U.S.) Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party (England and Wales) Socialist Workers Party (UK) Solidarity The Struggle Pakistan Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition Workers' Cause Party Workers' Left Front Workers Revolutionary Party (UK) Defunct Bolshevik–Leninist Party of India, Ceylon and Burma Communist League of America International Marxist Group International Socialist Organization League for Socialist Action (Canada) Militant tendency Revolutionary Communist Party (UK, 1944) Socialist Appeal (UK, 1992) Socialist Workers Party (U.S.) Young Socialist Alliance Workers Party of the United States Internationals Current Committee for a Workers' International (refounded) Fourth International (post-reunification) International Committee of the Fourth International International Communist League International Revolutionary Left International Socialist Alternative International Socialist Tendency International Workers' League Internationalist Communist Union League for the Fourth International Revolutionary Communist International Trotskyist Fraction – Fourth International Historical Committee for a Workers' International (1974–2019) Fourth International Fourth International–Posadist Permanent Revolution Revolutionary Workers Ferment By country Argentina Australia China Denmark France Greece Ireland Japan Pakistan Russia Soviet Union United Kingdom United States Vietnam Related topics Betrayal thesis Campism Chavismo Democracy in Marxism Fifth International Johnson–Forest Tendency Leon Trotsky bibliography Maoism Marxism–Leninism Orthodox Marxism Shachtmanism Socialist economics Socialist Equality Party Socialist Worker Stalinism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e In the 20th century, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) continued regarding itself as the institutionalisation of Marxist–Leninist political consciousness in the Soviet Union; therein lay the justification for its political control of Soviet society. Article 6 of the 1977 Soviet Constitution refers to the CPSU as the "leading and guiding force of Soviet society, and the nucleus of its political system, of all state organizations and public organizations". The CPSU, precisely because it was the bearer of Marxist–Leninist ideology, determined the general development of society, directed domestic and foreign policy, and "imparts a planned, systematic, and theoretically substantiated virtuosity" to the struggle of the Soviet people for the victory of communism .

Nonetheless, the politics of the vanguard party, as outlined by Lenin, is disputed among the contemporary communist movement . Lenin's contemporary in the Bolshevik Party, Leon Trotsky , further developed and established the vanguard party with the creation of the Fourth International . Trotsky, who believed in permanent revolution , proposed that a vanguard party must be an international political party.

[ citation needed ] Frankfurt School [ edit ] For some in the Frankfurt School such as Herbert Marcuse , the lumpenproletariat (the underclass , usually lacking class consciousness) have the potential to be supporters of the revolution. For others in the Frankfurt School such as Jürgen Habermas , they held views similar to that of Marx and classical Marxists who viewed the lumpenproletariat as likely counter-revolutionaries.

[ 13 ] The argument is that this underclass has the potential to help change the status quo because they are excluded from it and survive largely outside of the capitalist system. Marx viewed the lumpenproletariat with suspicion and as a reserve army of labour with a primarily counter-revolutionary character unlike the proletariat, whose role in production led Marx see them as the primary agents of change. For others, the lumpenproletariat existing outside the capitalist production process gives them the unique ability to attack the capitalist system from outside which other revolutionary elements can not.

[ 14 ] Other uses [ edit ] Although Lenin honed the idea in terms of a class leadership forged out of a proletarian vanguard specifically to describe Marxist–Leninist parties, [ 15 ] the term is also used for many kinds of movement shaping themselves as initially guided by a small elite.

Theodor Herzl , the theorist of Zionism , believed legitimation from the majority would only hinder from the outset his movement and therefore advised that "we cannot all be of one mind; the gestor will therefore simply take the leadership into his hands and march in the van." Herzl's principle antedated by some years the Leninist idea of Bolshevism as the vanguard of the revolution by characterizing the "Zionist movement as a vanguard of the Jewish people." [ 16 ] The Youth Guard at the forefront of Zionist mobilization in the Yishuv likewise conceived of itself as a revolutionary vanguard, [ 17 ] and the kibbutz movement itself is said to have thought of itself as a 'selfless vanguard'.

[ 18 ] It is occasionally used with of certain Islamist parties. Writers Abul Ala Maududi and Sayyid Qutb both urged the formation of an Islamic vanguard to restore Islamic society. Qutb discussed of an Islamist vanguard in his book Ma'alim fi al-Tariq ( Milestones ) [ 19 ] and Maududi formed the radical Islamist party Jamaat-e-Islami [ 20 ] in Pakistan whose goal was to establish a pan- Ummah worldwide Islamist ideological state starting from Pakistan, administered for God ( Allah ) solely by Muslims "whose whole life is devoted to the observance and enforcement" of Islamic law ( Shari'ah ), leading to the world becoming the House of Islam . The party members formed an elite group (called arkan ) with "affiliates" ( mutaffiq ) and then "sympathizers" ( hamdard ) beneath them.

[ 20 ] Today, the Jamaat-e-Islami has spread wings to other South Asian countries with large Muslim populations, such as Afghanistan, Bangladesh and India.

The literature of the Baháʼí Faith also frequently refers to those serving to raise the capacities of communities around the world as the "vanguard" of the Cause of Baha'u'llah [ 21 ] According to Roger Eatwell, some fascist parties have also operated in ways similar to the concept of a vanguard party.

[ 22 ] Most notably groups adhering to Siege-culture .

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Authoritarian socialism Avant-garde Blanquism Bonapartism Cadre (politics) Democratic centralism Dictatorship of the proletariat Elite theory Foco Jacobinism Maoism Organic centralism Transitional government References [ edit ] ^ Lazar, Marc (2011). "Communism". In Badie, Bertrand ; Berg-Schlosser, Dirk ; Morlino, Leonardo (eds.).

International Encyclopedia of Political Science . Vol. 1.

SAGE Publications . pp.

310– 314.

doi : 10.4135/9781412994163 .

ISBN 9781412959636 .

^ Nimtz, August H. (13 March 2014).

Lenin's Electoral Strategy from Marx and Engels Through the Revolution of 1905: The Ballot, the Streets—or Both .

Palgrave Macmillan . p. 56.

ISBN 9781137389961 – via Google Books .

^ Krupavičius, Algis [in German] (2011). "Communist Parties". In Badie, Bertrand ; Berg-Schlosser, Dirk ; Morlino, Leonardo (eds.).

International Encyclopedia of Political Science . Vol. 1.

SAGE Publications . pp.

314– 320.

doi : 10.4135/9781412994163 .

ISBN 9781412959636 .

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1901).

"IV" .

What is to be Done?

– via Marxists Internet Archive .

, quoting Clause 1 of the Rules of the German Social-Democratic Party.

^ a b c d Lenin 1901 .

^ Townson, Duncan (1994).

The New Penguin Dictionary of Modern History: 1789–1945 . London: Penguin Books . pp.

462– 464.

ISBN 978-0-14-051274-8 – via Internet Archive .

^ Le Blanc 1990 , p. 49.

^ Serge, Victor (1930).

Year One of the Russian Revolution . p. 243 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Le Blanc 1990 , p. 260.

^ Le Blanc 1990 , p. 306.

^ Meltzer, Albert (1996) [1981].

Anarchism: Arguments For and Against (PDF) (Second revised ed.). p. 56.

^ Mayer, R. (1997). "Lenin, the proletariat, and the legitimation of dictatorship".

Journal of Political Ideologies .

2 (1): 99– 115.

doi : 10.1080/13569319708420752 .

^ "Lumpenproletariat" .

Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 20 June 2024 .

^ Herazo, Luis Zúñiga (19 November 2010).

"La cultura de masas y la actualidad del proyecto emancipador de la Escuela de Frankfurt" .

Visitas al Patio (in Spanish) (4).

doi : 10.32997/2027-0585-vol.0-num.4-2010-1622 .

ISSN 2619-4023 .

^ Joseph, Jonathan (2002).

Hegemony: A Realist Analysis .

Routledge . p. 45.

ISBN 9781134493678 – via Google Books .

^ Biale, David (2010) [1986].

Power & Powerlessness in Jewish History .

Random House . p. 136.

ISBN 978-0-307-77253-4 – via Google Books .

^ Sofer, Sasson (1998).

Zionism and the Foundations of Israeli Diplomacy . Cambridge University Press. pp.

160– 178.

ISBN 9780521630122 – via Google Books .

^ Muravchik, Joseph (2013).

Heaven On Earth: The Rise and Fall of Socialism .

Encounter Books . p. 263.

ISBN 9781594033711 – via Google Books .

^ Kramer, Martin (June 1996).

"Fundamentalist Islam at Large: The Drive for Power" .

Middle East Quarterly .

3 (2): 37– 49. Archived from the original on 24 May 2024.

^ a b "Jamaat-e-Islami" .

GlobalSecurity.org .

^ "Search: vanguard" .

Bahá'í Reference Library . 2019.

^ Eatwell, Roger (1996).

Fascism: a history . Allen Lane. p. 215.

ISBN 978-1-84413-090-0 .

^ "Siege Culture and Accelerationism in the UK" .

Centre for Research and Evidence on Security Threats . Retrieved 2022-09-02 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Le Blanc, Paul (1990).

Lenin and the Revolutionary Party .

Humanities Press International .

Further reading [ edit ] Arts Burger, Peter.

Theory of the Avant-Garde . Theory & History of Literature Series. 135 pages.

University of Minnesota Press, February 1, 1984.

ISBN 0-8166-1068-1 .

Forster, Merlin H. and K. David Jackson, compilers.

Vanguardism in Latin American Literature : An Annotated Bibliographic Guide . Bibliographies and Indexes in World Literature Series. 232 pages.

Greenwood Press , May 23, 1990.

ISBN 0-313-24861-3 .

Maerhofer, John. 2009. Rethinking the Vanguard: Aesthetic and Political Positions in the Modernist Debate, 1917–1962. New Castle: Cambridge Scholars Press.

ISBN 1-4438-1135-1 Politics Vladimir Lenin What is to be done?

Yevgeny Bugaev.

What Is the Party?

Moscow: Progress Publishers . 1986.

Bakunin, Mikhail .

"Letter to Albert Richard" . August 1870. Reprinted in Bakunin on Anarchy , translated and edited by Sam Dolgoff . A. A. Knopf, 1st edition, 1972.

ISBN 0-394-41601-5 . Retrieved May 17, 2005.

Gray, Phillip W. 2020.

Vanguardism: Ideology and Organization in Totalitarian Politics . London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-367-33166-5 Mandel, Ernest .

"Trotsky’s conception of self-organisation and the vanguard party" . Originally published in French in Quatrième Internationale , No.36, pp. 35–49. November 1989. Translated by Mike Murray, marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for the Marxists’ Internet Archive . Retrieved May 24, 2005.

Mitchell, Roxanne and Frank Weiss.

Two, Three, Many Parties of a New Type? Against the Ultra-Left Line . Publisher: United Labor Press. 1977. Retrieved May 25, 2005.

Slaughter, Cliff.

"What is Revolutionary Leadership?" .

Labour Review .

Socialist Labor League . 1964?. Retrieved May 17, 2005.

Polemics Cooper, Nick.

Critique of Revolutionary Communism . Belgium Indymedia. Sep. 23, 2004. Retrieved June 3, 2005.

v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Revolutionary socialism Concepts Class conflict Communist revolution Communization Foco Impossibilism People's war Permanent revolution Platformism Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Revolutionary base area Revolutionary terror Situationist prank Social revolution United front Vanguardism World revolution Tendencies Blanquism De Leonism Insurrectionary anarchism Mao-spontex Syndicalism Groups The Invisible Committee Situationist International People Mikhail Bakunin Louis Auguste Blanqui Daniel De Leon Régis Debray Friedrich Engels Che Guevara Abimael Guzmán Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Vladimir Lenin Karl Liebknecht Rosa Luxemburg Mao Zedong Karl Marx Thomas Sankara Joseph Stalin Leon Trotsky Related topics Anarchist communism Anarcho-pacifism Collectivist anarchism General strike Popular front Radical feminism Reformism Refusal of work Socialism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9595l
Cached time: 20250817081853
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.832 seconds
Real time usage: 1.052 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4942/1000000
Revision size: 27634/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 237578/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8208/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 143708/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.483/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12104033/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  787.097      1 -total
 29.43%  231.639      1 Template:Reflist
 25.53%  200.977      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.25%  143.669      1 Template:Leninism_sidebar
 14.58%  114.736      2 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  9.07%   71.352      1 Template:Short_description
  7.65%   60.220     11 Template:Cite_book
  6.37%   50.113      7 Template:Sfn
  6.21%   48.856      3 Template:Ambox
  5.98%   47.075      1 Template:Primary_sources_section Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43134145:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817081853 and revision id 1305545009. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vanguardism&oldid=1305545009 " Categories : Communist terminology Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Leninism Political theories Political parties Revolution terminology Stalinism Hidden categories: CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from November 2017 Articles lacking reliable references from November 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from April 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 17:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vanguardism 19 languages Add topic

