Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Stoma complex 3 Cell differentiation in the epidermis 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Epidermis (botany) 43 languages العربية Asturianu Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latina മലയാളം 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Layer of cells that covers leaves, flowers, roots of plants For other uses, see Epidermis .

Cross-section of a flax plant stem: pith protoxylem xylem phloem sclerenchyma ( bast fibre ) cortex epidermis The epidermis (from the Greek ἐπιδερμίς , meaning "over-skin") is a single layer of cells that covers the leaves , flowers , roots and stems of plants . It forms a boundary between the plant and the external environment. The epidermis serves several functions: it protects against water loss, regulates gas exchange , secretes metabolic compounds, and (especially in roots) absorbs water and mineral nutrients. The epidermis of most leaves shows dorsoventral anatomy : the upper (adaxial) and lower (abaxial) surfaces have somewhat different construction and may serve different functions. Woody stems and some other stem structures such as potato tubers produce a secondary covering called the periderm that replaces the epidermis as the protective covering.

Description [ edit ] The epidermis is the outermost cell layer of the primary plant body. In some older works the cells of the leaf epidermis have been regarded as specialized parenchyma cells, [ 1 ] but the established modern preference has long been to classify the epidermis as dermal tissue , [ 2 ] whereas parenchyma is classified as ground tissue .

[ 3 ] The epidermis is the main component of the dermal tissue system of leaves (diagrammed below), and also stems, roots, flowers, fruits, and seeds; it is usually transparent (epidermal cells have fewer chloroplasts or lack them completely, except for the guard cells.) The cells of the epidermis are structurally and functionally variable. Most plants have an epidermis that is a single cell layer thick. Some plants like Ficus elastica and Peperomia , which have a periclinal cellular division within the protoderm of the leaves, have an epidermis with multiple cell layers. Epidermal cells are tightly linked to each other and provide mechanical strength and protection to the plant. Particularly, wavy pavement cells are suggested to play a pivotal role in preventing or guiding cracks in the epidermis.

[ 4 ] The walls of the epidermal cells of the above-ground parts of plants contain cutin , and are covered with a cuticle .  The cuticle reduces water loss to the atmosphere, it is sometimes covered with wax in smooth sheets,  granules, plates, tubes, or filaments. The wax layers give some plants a whitish or bluish surface color. Surface wax acts as a moisture barrier and protects the plant from intense sunlight and wind.

[ 5 ] Diagram of fine scale leaf internal anatomy The epidermal tissue includes several differentiated cell types: epidermal cells, guard cells , subsidiary cells, and epidermal hairs ( trichomes ). The epidermal cells are the most numerous, largest, and least specialized. These are typically more elongated in the leaves of monocots than in those of dicots .

Diagram of moderate scale leaf anatomy Trichomes or hairs grow out from the epidermis in many species. In the root epidermis, epidermal hairs termed root hairs are common and are specialized for the absorption of water and mineral nutrients.

In plants with secondary growth , the epidermis of roots and stems is usually replaced by a periderm through the action of a cork cambium .

Stoma complex [ edit ] Stoma in a tomato leaf (microscope image) Main articles: Stoma and Guard cell This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Epidermis" botany – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The leaf and stem epidermis is covered with pores called stomata (sing; stoma), part of a stoma complex consisting of a pore surrounded on each side by chloroplast-containing guard cells , and two to four subsidiary cells that lack chloroplasts. The stomata complex regulates the exchange of gases and water vapor between the outside air and the interior of the leaf. Typically, the stomata are more numerous over the abaxial (lower) epidermis of the leaf than the (adaxial) upper epidermis. An exception is floating leaves where most or all stomata are on the upper surface. Vertical leaves, such as those of many grasses , often have roughly equal numbers of stomata on both surfaces. 
The stoma is bounded by two guard cells. The guard cells differ from the epidermal cells in the following aspects: The guard cells are bean-shaped in surface view, while the epidermal cells are irregular in shape The guard cells contain chloroplasts, so they can manufacture food by photosynthesis (The epidermal cells of terrestrial plants do not contain chloroplasts) Guard cells are the only epidermal cells that can make sugar. According to one theory, in sunlight, the concentration of potassium ions (K+) increases in the guard cells. This, together with the sugars formed, lowers the water potential in the guard cells. As a result, water from other cells enters the guard cells by osmosis so they swell and become turgid. Because the guard cells have a thicker cellulose wall on one side of the cell, i.e. the side around the stomatal pore, the swollen guard cells become curved and pull the stomata open.

At night, the sugar is used up and water leaves the guard cells, so they become flaccid and the stomatal pore closes. In this way, they reduce the amount of water vapor escaping from the leaf.

Cell differentiation in the epidermis [ edit ] Scanning electron microscope image of Nicotiana alata leaf's epidermis, showing trichomes (hair-like appendages) and stomata (eye-shaped slits, visible at full resolution) The plant epidermis consists of three main cell types: pavement cells , guard cells and their subsidiary cells that surround the stomata and trichomes , otherwise known as leaf hairs. The epidermis of petals also form a variation of trichomes called conical cells .

[ 6 ] Trichomes develop at a distinct phase during leaf development, under the control of two major trichome specification genes : TTG and GL1 . The process may be controlled by the plant hormones gibberellins , and even if not completely controlled, gibberellins certainly have an effect on the development of the leaf hairs.

GL1 causes endoreplication , the replication of DNA without subsequent cell division as well as cell expansion.

GL1 turns on the expression of a second gene for trichome formation, GL2 , which controls the final stages of trichome formation causing the cellular outgrowth.

Arabidopsis thaliana uses the products of inhibitory genes to control the patterning of trichomes, such as TTG and TRY . The products of these genes will diffuse into the lateral cells, preventing them from forming trichomes and in the case of TRY promoting the formation of pavement cells.

Expression of the gene MIXTA , or its analogue in other species, later in the process of cellular differentiation will cause the formation of conical cells over trichomes.

MIXTA is a transcription factor .

Stomatal patterning is a much more controlled process, as the stoma affects the plant's water retention and respiration capabilities. As a consequence of these important functions, differentiation of cells to form stomata is also subject to environmental conditions to a much greater degree than other epidermal cell types.

Stomata are pores in the plant epidermis that are surrounded by two guard cells, which control the opening and closing of the aperture. These guard cells are in turn surrounded by subsidiary cells which provide a supporting role for the guard cells.

Stomata begin as stomatal meristemoids.

[ clarification needed ] The process differs between dicots and monocots . Spacing is thought to be essentially random in dicots though mutants do show it is under some form of genetic control, but it is more controlled in monocots, where stomata arise from specific asymmetric divisions of protoderm cells. The smaller of the two cells produced becomes the guard mother cells. Adjacent epidermal cells will also divide asymmetrically to form the subsidiary cells.

Because stomata play such an important role in the plants' survival, collecting information on their differentiation is difficult by the traditional means of genetic manipulation, as stomatal mutants tend to be unable to survive. Thus the control of the process is not well understood. Some genes have been identified.

TMM is thought to control the timing of stomatal initiation specification and FLP is thought to be involved in preventing the further division of the guard cells once they are formed.

Environmental conditions affect the development of stomata, in particular, their density on the leaf surface. It is thought that plant hormones, such as ethylene and cytokines , control the stomatal developmental response to the environmental conditions. Accumulation of these hormones appears to cause increased stomatal density such as when the plants are kept in closed environments.

See also [ edit ] Bark Cork cambium Periderm References [ edit ] ^ Hill, J. Ben; Overholts, Lee O; Popp, Henry W. Grove Jr., Alvin R. Botany. A textbook for colleges. Publisher: MacGraw-Hill 1960 ^ "9.3: Plant Tissues" .

Biology LibreTexts . 29 February 2020 . Retrieved 19 July 2023 .

^ Evert, Ray F; Eichhorn, Susan E. Esau's Plant Anatomy: Meristems, Cells, and Tissues of the Plant Body: Their Structure, Function, and Development. Publisher: Wiley-Liss 2006.

ISBN 978-0-471-73843-5 ^ Bidhendi, Amir J.; Lampron, Olivier; Gosselin, Frédérick P.; Geitmann, Anja (December 2023).

"Cell geometry regulates tissue fracture" .

Nature Communications .

14 (1): 8275.

Bibcode : 2023NatCo..14.8275B .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-023-44075-4 .

PMC 10719271 .

PMID 38092784 .

^ Raven, Peter H.; Evert, Ray F.; Curtis, Helena (1981), Biology of plants , New York, N.Y.: Worth Publishers, pp.

427–28 , ISBN 0-87901-132-7 , OCLC 222047616 ^ Glover, B. J. (2000).

"Differentiation in plant epidermal cells" .

Journal of Experimental Botany . pp.

497– 505.

doi : 10.1093/jexbot/51.344.497 .

PMID 10938806 .

External links [ edit ] Plant tissue systems Archived 2007-12-05 at the Wayback Machine v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category v t e Biological tissues Animals Connective Epithelial Muscular Nervous Plants Dermal tissue : Epidermis Bulliform cell Cuticle Guard cell Pavement cell Subsidiary cell Periderm Phellem Phelloderm Vascular tissue : Phloem Companion cell Phloem fiber Phloem parenchyma Sieve tube Xylem Tracheid Vessel element Xylem fiber Xylem parenchyma Ground tissue : Parenchyma Aerenchyma Chlorenchyma Mesophyll Pith Collenchyma Sclerenchyma Fiber Sclereid Meristematic tissue : Primary Ground meristem Procambium Protoderm Secondary Cork cambium Vascular cambium Mixed : Cortex Endodermis Exodermis Stele Category Histology Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐759fc646c5‐kzc76
Cached time: 20250812152457
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.443 seconds
Real time usage: 0.565 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1197/1000000
Revision size: 12007/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 60135/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1447/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50952/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.283/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7159295/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  469.251      1 -total
 29.47%  138.276      1 Template:Reflist
 24.67%  115.745      1 Template:Botany
 18.17%   85.252      2 Template:Cite_web
 11.89%   55.801      3 Template:Hlist
 11.75%   55.131      1 Template:Short_description
 11.65%   54.686      1 Template:Citations_needed
 10.55%   49.486      1 Template:Ambox
  6.89%   32.325      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.83%   32.027      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2959657:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812152457 and revision id 1233754456. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epidermis_(botany)&oldid=1233754456 " Categories : Plant anatomy Tissues (biology) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2023 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2016 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 July 2024, at 18:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epidermis (botany) 43 languages Add topic

