Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Behavior 2 Structure 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Habit (biology) 19 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Македонски Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Botany This article is about "habit" and "habitus" in biology. For usage in sociology, see Habitus (sociology) .

This cultivar of Japanese maple has a dome -like habit.

Habit , equivalent to habitus in some applications in biology , refers variously to aspects of behaviour or structure, as follows: In zoology (particularly in ethology ), habit usually refers to aspects of more or less predictable behaviour , instinctive or otherwise, though it also has broader application.

Habitus refers to the characteristic form or morphology of a species.

In botany, the plant habit is the characteristic form in which a given species of plant grows.

[ 1 ] Behavior [ edit ] In zoology , habit (not to be confused with habitus as described below) usually refers to a specific behavior pattern, either adopted, learned , pathological, innate , or directly related to physiology . For example: ...the [cat] was in the habit of springing upon the [door knocker] in order to gain admission...

[ 2 ] If these sensitive parrots are kept in cages, they quickly take up the habit of feather plucking.

[ 3 ] The spider monkey has an arboreal habit and rarely ventures onto the forest floor.

The brittle star has the habit of breaking off arms as a means of defense .

Mode of life (or lifestyle , modus vivendi ) is a concept related to habit , and it is sometimes referred to as the habit of an animal. It may refer to the locomotor capabilities, as in "( motile habit ", sessile , errant, sedentary), feeding behaviour and mechanisms, nutrition mode (free-living, parasitic , holozoic , saprotrophic , trophic type ), type of habitat ( terrestrial , arboreal , aquatic , marine , freshwater, seawater, benthic , pelagic , nektonic , planktonic , etc.),  period of activity ( diurnal , nocturnal ), types of ecological interaction , etc.

The habits of plants and animals often change responding to changes in their environment . For example: if a species develops a disease or there is a drastic change of habitat or local climate, or it is removed to a different region, then the normal habits may change. Such changes may be either pathological , or adaptive .

[ 4 ] Structure [ edit ] In botany , habit is the general appearance, growth form, or architecture . For example: Many species of maple have a shrubby habit and may form bushes or hedges rather than trees .

Certain alpine plants have been chosen for cultivation because of their dwarf habit .

Plants may be woody or herbaceous . The main types of woody plants are trees , shrubs and lianas . Climbing plants ( vines ) can be woody (lianas) or herbaceous (nonwoody vines). Plants can also be categorized in terms of their habit as subshrubs (dwarf shrub, bush), cushion plants and succulents .

[ 5 ] There is some overlap between the classifications of plants according to their habit and their life-form .

Other terms in biology refer similarly to various taxa ; for example: Fungi are described by their growth patterns : molds , yeasts , mushrooms and dimorphic fungi .

Lichens structure is described their growth form : foliose, crustose , fruticose or gelatinous.

Bryophytes structure is described as foliose or thallose .

The structure of a given species of algae is referred to as its type or level of organization [ de ] .

Bacteria are described by their morphology or shape .

Animal structure is described by  its body plan , which encompasses the body symmetry , the type of germ layers and of body cavities .

Since the distinction between the concepts – mode of behavior and morphological form – are significant in zoology, the term habitus (from which the word habit derives) is used to describe form as distinct from behaviour ( habit ). The term habitus also occurs in botanical texts, but there it is used almost interchangeably with habit , because plant behaviour generally does not correspond closely to the concept of habits in the zoological sense.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Habitat Animal migration Habit (psychology) References [ edit ] ^ Jackson, Benjamin, Daydon; A Glossary of Botanic Terms with their Derivation and Accent; Published by Gerald Duckworth & Co. London, 4th ed 1928 ^ William Chambers; Robert Chambers (1835).

Chambers's Edinburgh Journal . W. Orr. pp. 69–.

^ Werner Lantermann; Matthew M. Vriends (1986).

New Parrot Handbook . Barron's Educational Series. pp.

110 –.

ISBN 978-0-8120-3729-6 .

^ Wynne, Parry (20 January 2011).

"Disease May Help Shape Animals' Migration Habits" .

Live Science . Retrieved 17 May 2013 .

^ "growXpert" .

^ "Biology-Online.org" . 7 October 2019.

v t e Anatomy and morphology Fields Gross anatomy Superficial anatomy Neuroanatomy brain morphometry Comparative anatomy Microscopic anatomy histology molecular Morphometrics Bacteria and fungi Bacterial cell structure cellular morphologies morphological plasticity Colonial morphology Lichen morphology Protists Structures Plants Plant anatomy fruit Plant habit Plant life-form Plant morphology reproductive Soil morphology Invertebrates Decapod anatomy Gastropod anatomy Insect morphology Diptera Odonata Spider anatomy Arthropod cuticle Mammals Human anatomy Neanderthal anatomy Cat anatomy Dog anatomy Horse anatomy Elephant anatomy Giraffe anatomy Other vertebrates Amphibian anatomy Bird anatomy Fish anatomy Shark anatomy Glossaries Anatomical terminology Anatomical terms of location Glossary of dinosaur anatomy Glossary of plant morphology leaf morphology Related topics Allometry Anatomical variation Anatomical plane Body plan Form classification Gracility Hertwig rule History of anatomy 19th century Physiognomy Standard anatomical position Transcendental anatomy Category Portal Index of anatomy articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Habit_(biology)&oldid=1296762153 " Categories : Horticulture Behavior Plant morphology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 03:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Habit (biology) 19 languages Add topic

