Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Setting and story arc 2 Reception 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Sprawl trilogy 11 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Three cyberpunk novels (1984–1988) by William Gibson This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sprawl trilogy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sprawl trilogy Author William Gibson Country United States Language English Discipline Science fiction ( cyberpunk ) Published 1984, 1986, 1988 Media type Print, digital No. of books 3 The Sprawl trilogy (also known as the Neuromancer trilogy) is William Gibson 's first set of novels, and is composed of Neuromancer (1984), Count Zero (1986), and Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988).

[ 1 ] The novels are all set in the same fictional future. The Sprawl trilogy shares this setting with Gibson's short stories " Johnny Mnemonic " (1981), " Burning Chrome " (1982), and " New Rose Hotel " (1984).

[ 1 ] Setting and story arc [ edit ] The novels are set in a near-future world dominated by corporations and ubiquitous computing . The events of the novels are spaced over 16 years, and although there are familiar characters that appear, each novel tells a self-contained story. Gibson focuses on the effects of technology: the unintended consequences as it filters out of research labs and onto the street where it finds new purposes. He explores a world of direct mind-machine links ("jacking in"), emerging machine intelligence , and a global information space, which he calls " cyberspace ".  Some of the novels' action takes place in The Sprawl, officially the "Boston-Atlanta Metropolitan Axis", an urban environment extending along most of the East Coast of the United States (as a fictional extrapolation of the real-life Northeast megalopolis ).

The story arc which frames the trilogy follows a wide cast of characters in a persistent, ongoing narrative - the major commonality between the three being The Sprawl itself. It focuses on the self-contained stories of each character, and highlights their narrative links through suggestion, references, and imagery.

Neuromancer tells the story of Case, a cyberspace "cowboy" (hacker) who gets picked up for a job with an unknown benefactor. The book is the only one in the trilogy that follows a single cohesive plot, with the sequels both featuring multi-strand narrative structures that culminate in the end.

Count Zero consists of three major protagonists, and chapters alternate from one character's story to the next. The first of these is Turner, an ex-military mercenary. After becoming the victim of a bombing attack, Turner is hired by an old colleague to assist the dangerous extraction of a tech developer. The second is of Bobby Newmark, a teenager living in the slums with his mother. After an attempt at an illegal cyberspace run, Bobby is forced into hiding when it becomes apparent his experiment has put a target on his back. The third is of Marly Krushkova, a disgraced art museum curator who, after being caught in a major fraud scam, is hired by the immensely wealthy Josef Virek to find the artist behind a series of enigmatic artworks.

Finally , Mona Lisa Overdrive follows four narrative plot threads in a pattern similar to that of Count Zero . The first is of Kumiko, teenage daughter to a Yakuza boss, whose father sends her to London to keep her safe during an anticipated gang war. The second is of artist Slick Henry, who spends his time making robots from scrap metal. Slick is suddenly thrust into the intrigue of the novel when someone calls in a debt by asking him to watch over a cyberspace cowboy locked in a run. The third thread follows prostitute Mona and her relationship with her abusive boyfriend/pimp. The final plot thread follows Angie Mitchell, a "simstim" (virtual sensory movies) actress in rehabilitation who can access cyberspace mentally.

Reception [ edit ] Main article: Awards and nominations of William Gibson The trilogy was commercially and critically successful.

Steven Poole , writing in The Guardian , described " Neuromancer and the two novels which followed, Count Zero (1986) and the gorgeously titled Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988)" as making up "a fertile holy trinity, a sort of Chrome Koran (the name of one of Gibson's future rock bands) of ideas inviting endless reworkings".

[ 2 ] All three books were nominated for major science fiction awards, including: Neuromancer – Nebula & Philip K. Dick Awards winner, British Science Fiction Award nominee, 1984; [ 3 ] Hugo Award winner, 1985 [ 4 ] Count Zero – Nebula and British Science Fiction awards nominee, 1986; [ 5 ] Hugo and Locus Awards nominee, 1987 [ 6 ] Mona Lisa Overdrive – Hugo, Nebula, and Locus Awards nominee, 1989 [ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Summary Bibliography: William Gibson" .

www.isfdb.org . Retrieved 2024-08-09 .

^ Poole, Steven (3 October 1996).

"Virtually in Love" .

TheGuardian.com . Retrieved 8 August 2024 .

^ "1984 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End . Retrieved 2009-07-17 .

^ "1985 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End . Retrieved 2009-07-17 .

^ "1986 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End . Retrieved 2009-07-17 .

^ "1987 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End . Retrieved 2009-07-17 .

^ "1989 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End . Retrieved 2009-07-17 .

External links [ edit ] Neuromancer / Sprawl Trilogy series listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series Authority control databases MusicBrainz series Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sprawl_trilogy&oldid=1303367282 " Categories : Sprawl trilogy Works by William Gibson Cyberpunk novels Novel series Science fiction book series Science fiction novel trilogies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 15:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sprawl trilogy 11 languages Add topic

