Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Separation–individuation theory of child development 4 Object constancy 5 Selected works 6 See also 7 Notes 8 External links 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Margaret Mahler 28 languages العربية Asturianu تۆرکجه Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian born American psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Margaret Schönberger Mahler Born ( 1897-05-10 ) May 10, 1897 Sopron , Austria-Hungary Died October 2, 1985 (1985-10-02) (aged 88) New York City , U.S.

Nationality Austrian Alma mater University of Jena (Medicine,1922) Known for Separation–individuation theory of child development Awards APA Agnes Purceil McGavin Award Scientific career Fields Psychiatry , Psychoanalysis , Pediatrics Institutions Margaret S. Mahler Psychiatric Research Foundation Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e Margaret Schönberger Mahler (May 10, 1897 in Ödenburg , Austria-Hungary ; October 2, 1985 in New York) was an Austrian -American psychiatrist , [ 1 ] psychoanalyst , and pediatrician . She did pioneering work in the field of infant and young child research. On the basis of empirical studies, she developed a development model that became particularly influential in psychoanalysis and Object relations theory . Mahler developed the separation–individuation theory of child development .

Biography [ edit ] Born Margaret Schönberger on May 10, 1897, into a Jewish family in Ödenburg , a small town near Vienna to Gustav Schönberger, an Austrian physician and president of the Jewish community, one of the notables of Ödenburg, and Eugenia Schönberger, née Wiener.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] She and a younger sister had a difficult childhood as a result of their parents' troubled marriage. Margaret's father, however, encouraged her to excel in mathematics and other sciences. After completing the Höhere Mädchenschule , she attended Vaci Utcai Gimnazium in Budapest , even though it was unusual at the time for a woman to continue formal education. Budapest was of great influence on her life and career.

[ 3 ] She met the influential Hungarian psychoanalyst Sándor Ferenczi , became fascinated by the concept of the unconscious , and was encouraged to read Sigmund Freud .

[ 4 ] In September 1916, she began Art History studies at the University of Budapest, but in January 1917 switched to the Medical School. Three semesters later she began medical training at the university of Munich , but was forced to leave because of Antisemitism . In spring 1920 she transferred to the university of Jena and it was there that she began to realize how important play and love were for infants in order for them to grow up mentally and physically healthy. After graduating cum laude in 1922, she left for Vienna in order to get her license to practice medicine. There she turned from pediatrics to psychiatry and, in 1926, started her training analysis with Helene Deutsch . Seven years later, she was accepted as an analyst . Working with children became her passion. She loved the way the children gave her their attention and showed their joy in cooperating with her.

In 1936 she married Paul Mahler. Following the Nazis ' rise to power, the couple moved to Britain and then, in 1938, to the United States . After receiving a New York medical license, Margaret Mahler set up private practice in a basement and began to rebuild her clientele. In 1939 she met Benjamin Spock and, after giving a child analysis seminar in 1940, she became senior teacher of child analysis. She joined the Institute of Human Development, the Educational Institute and the New York Psychoanalytic Society . In 1948 she worked on clinical studies on Benign and Malignant Cases of Childhood Psychosis .

Barnard College , at its 1980 commencement ceremonies, awarded her its highest honor, the Barnard Medal of Distinction .

Schönberger Mahler died on October 2, 1985.

Work [ edit ] Margaret Mahler worked as a psychoanalyst with young disturbed children.

In 1950 she and Manuel Furer founded the Masters Children's Centre in Manhattan (it was connected with Mount Sinai hospital). There she developed the Tripartite Treatment Model, in which the mother participated in the treatment of the child.

[ 4 ] Mahler initiated a more constructive exploration of severe disturbances in childhood and emphasized the importance of the environment on the child. She was especially interested in mother-infant duality and carefully documented the impact of early separations of children from their mothers. This documentation of separation- individuation was her most important contribution to the development of psychoanalysis.

Separation-individuation can be viewed as the psychological birth of an infant, which occurs over a period of time when the child separates from the mother and begins to individuate.

Mahler shed light on the normal and abnormal features of the developmental ego psychology . She worked with psychotic children [ citation needed ] , while psychosis hadn't been covered in the psychoanalytic treatment yet.

[ 5 ] Symbiotic child psychosis struck her. The symptomatology she saw as a derailment of the normal processes whereby self-representations (the representation of one's self) and object-representations (the representation of a familiar person) become distinct.

[ 4 ] Her most important work is The Psychological Birth of the Human Infant: Symbiosis and Individuation , written in 1975 with Fred Pine and Anni Bergman.

Separation–individuation theory of child development [ edit ] In Mahler's theory, child development takes place in phases, each with several sub phases: Normal autistic phase – First few weeks of life. The infant is detached and self-absorbed. Spends most of his/her time sleeping. Mahler later abandoned this phase, based on new findings from her infant research.

[ 4 ] She believed it to be non-existent. The phase still appears in many books on her theories.

Normal symbiotic phase – Lasts until about 5 months of age. The child is now aware of his/her mother but there is not a sense of individuality. The infant and the mother are one, and there is a barrier between them and the rest of the world.

Separation–individuation phase – The arrival of this phase marks the end of the Normal symbiotic phase. Separation refers to the development of limits, the differentiation between the infant and the mother, whereas individuation refers to the development of the infant's ego, sense of identity, and cognitive abilities. Mahler explains how a child with the age of a few months breaks out of an "autistic shell" into the world with human connections. This process, labeled separation–individuation, is divided into subphases, each with its own onset, outcomes and risks. The following subphases proceed in this order but overlap considerably.

Hatching – first months. The infant ceases to be ignorant of the differentiation between him/her and the mother. "Rupture of the shell". Increased alertness and interest for the outside world. Using the mother as a point of orientation.

Practicing – from 9 to about 16 months. Brought about by the infant's ability to crawl and then walk freely, the infant begins to explore actively and becomes more distant from the mother. The child experiences himself still as one with his mother.

Rapprochement – 15–24 months. In this subphase, the infant once again becomes close to the mother. The child realizes that his physical mobility demonstrates psychic separateness from his mother. The toddler may become tentative, wanting his mother to be in sight so that, through eye contact and action, he can explore his world. The risk is that the mother will misread this need and respond with impatience or unavailability. This can lead to an anxious fear of abandonment in the toddler. A basic 'mood predisposition' may be established at this point.

Rapprochement is divided into a few subphases: Beginning – Motivated by a desire to share discoveries with the mother.

Crisis – Between staying with the mother, being emotionally close and being more independent and exploring.

Solution – Individual solutions are enabled by the development of language and the superego.

Disruptions in the fundamental process of separation–individuation can result in a disturbance in the ability to maintain a reliable sense of individual identity in adulthood.

[ 5 ] Object constancy [ edit ] Object constancy, similar to Jean Piaget 's object permanence , describes the phase when the child understands that the mother has a separate identity and is truly a separate individual. This leads to the formation of internalization , which is the internal representation that the child has formed of the mother. This Internalization is what provides the child with an image that helps supply them with an unconscious level of guiding support and comfort from their mothers. Deficiencies in positive Internalization could possibly lead to a sense of insecurity and low self-esteem issues in adulthood.

[ 6 ] Selected works [ edit ] On human symbiosis and the vicissitudes of individuation , 1969.

The psychological birth of the human infant : symbiosis and individuation , 1975.

Infantile psychosis and early contributions Rapprochement - critical subphase, separation - individuation Separation - individuation See also [ edit ] Autism Psychoanalysis Refrigerator mother theory Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Mahler Margaret, geb. Schönberger University Vienna, Juni 15, 2022 ^ Margaret Mahler geb. Schönberger (1897-1985) www.Psychoanalytikerinnen.de, Biografisches Lexikon, Juni 15, 2022] ^ Mahler at webster.edu Archived 2007-03-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d Coates, John Bowlby and Margaret S. Mahler: Their lives and theories , pp. 571–587. Also in J Am Psychoanal Assoc. 2004 Spring;52(2):571-601.

DOI: 10.1177/00030651040520020601 ^ a b Mitchell, Freud and Beyond , pp. 43, 46-47 ^ Engler, B. (2006).

Psychoanalysis. Personality Theories , pp. 176–179.

External links [ edit ] Literature by and about Margaret Mahler in the German National Library catalogue Mahler Margaret, geb. Schönberger , Uni Vienna Biografie Archived 2007-03-11 at the Wayback Machine Margaret Mahler www.Psychoanalytikerinnen.de References [ edit ] Ben-Aaron, Miriam, and Ruth Beloff. "Mahler, Margaret." Encyclopaedia Judaica, edited by Michael Berenbaum and Fred Skolnik, 2nd ed., vol. 13, Macmillan Reference USA, 2007, p. 361. Gale Virtual Reference Library.

Coates, S.W., John Bowlby and Margaret S. Mahler: Their lives and theories (2004) Also in J Am Psychoanal Assoc. 2004 Spring;52(2):571-601.

DOI: 10.1177/00030651040520020601 Mitchell, S.A., and Black, M.J. (1995).

Freud and Beyond . New York: Basic Books.

Notes on the development of basic moods: the depressive affect. In Drives, Affects, Behavior , vol. 2, ed Max Schur, NY: International Universities Press, pp. 161–169.

Mahler, S. and Pine, M.M. and  F., Bergman, A. (1973).

The Psychological Birth of the Human Infant , New York: Basic Books.

Thoughts about development and individuation. Psychoanalytic Study of the Child , 1963.

Mazet, Philippe. "Mahler-Schönberger, Margaret (1897-1985)." International Dictionary of Psychoanalysis, edited by Alain de Mijolla, vol. 2, Macmillan Reference USA, 2005, pp. 1001-1003. Gale Virtual Reference Library.

External links [ edit ] Margaret S. Mahler papers (MS 1138). Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library.

[1] Margaret Mahler Psychiatric Research Foundation Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Margaret_Mahler&oldid=1290771831 " Categories : 1897 births 1985 deaths People from Sopron Austrian Jews 20th-century Austrian scientists Jewish American scientists Physicians from New York City Austrian women psychiatrists Austrian psychiatrists Jewish physicians Austrian emigrants to the United States American people of Austrian-Jewish descent Austrian Holocaust survivors Austrian psychoanalysts Jewish psychoanalysts American pediatricians Analysands of Helene Deutsch Analysands of August Aichhorn American women psychiatrists American psychiatrists Jewish women scientists 20th-century American Jews 20th-century Austrian women physicians 20th-century Austrian physicians Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 23:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Margaret Mahler 28 languages Add topic

