Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Responsibilities 2 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 2.1 China 2.2 India 2.3 Japan 2.4 Philippines 2.4.1 Professional Practice of Agriculturists 2.4.2 Eligibility to take the Board Exam 3 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 3.1 European Union 3.1.1 Italy 4 North America Toggle North America subsection 4.1 Canada 4.2 United States 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Agriculturist 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip سنڌي Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Agronomist ) Professional in agriculture management Agriculturist An agriculturist doing routine check-up of agronomic crops Occupation Names Agriculturist, agrologist, agronomist, agricultural scientist Occupation type Profession Description Competencies Farming , biology , business , economics , environmental planning Education required Agriculture degree ( BS ) Fields of employment Agribusiness enterprises , farming enterprises , agriculture schools , government offices Related jobs Farmer , farm worker , agricultural engineer An agriculturist , agriculturalist , agrologist , or agronomist (abbreviated as agr.

) is a professional in the science , practice, and management of agriculture and agribusiness .

[ 1 ] It is a regulated profession in Canada, India, Japan, the Philippines, the United States, and the European Union. Other names used to designate the profession include agricultural scientist , agricultural manager , agricultural planner , agriculture researcher , or agriculture policy maker .

The primary role of agriculturists are in leading agricultural projects and programs, usually in agri business planning or research for the benefit of farms , food, and agribusiness -related organizations.

[ 2 ] Agriculturists usually are designated in the government as public agriculturists serving as agriculture policymakers or technical advisors for policy making.

[ 3 ] Agriculturists can also provide technical advice for farmers and farm workers such as in making crop calendars and workflows to optimize farm production, tracing agricultural market channels, [ 4 ] prescribing fertilizers and pesticides to avoid misuse , [ 5 ] and in aligning for organic accreditation [ 6 ] or the national agricultural quality standards .

[ 7 ] Preparation of technical engineering designs and construction for agriculture meanwhile are reserved for agricultural engineers .

[ 8 ] Agriculturists may pursue environmental planning and focus on agricultural and rural planning.

[ 9 ] Responsibilities [ edit ] Agriculturists are science based consultants with major fields of specialization including agribusiness management , crop science , agricultural extension , agriculture economics , development communication , animal science , soil science , food technology , crop protection , agricultural biotechnology , agricultural policy , and environmental science .

In modern practice, agriculturists are expected to be proficient in digital agriculture such as the use of geographic information systems , artificial intelligence , and remote sensing for better agricultural planning.

Agriculturists of today are involved with many issues, including producing food, creating healthier food, managing the environmental impact of agriculture , distribution of agriculture, recreation surfaces (sports fields, golf courses, and parks), and extracting energy from plants.

[ 10 ] Agriculturists often specialize in food and agriculture research areas such as crop rotation , irrigation and drainage , plant breeding , plant physiology , soil classification , soil fertility , weed control , turfgrass and insect and pest control .

Professional agriculturists may provide advice directly to farmers, vineyards, agricultural corporations, municipal and provincial governments, the fertilizer and seeds sector, consult on food processing, advise on range management , turf management and golf course operations, assess and provide remedial recommendations for brown lands (contaminated sites), watersheds, among many different areas of practice.

Asia [ edit ] China [ edit ] In the People's Republic of China, the professional designation is agricultural technician (农业技术员, nóngyè jìshùyuán) . These professionals operate within a state-led agricultural extension system coordinated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) and are primarily appointed at the county or township level by local government agencies.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Due to the competitive nature of public service employment, individuals who aspire to hold permanent positions within the civil service must pass the National Civil Service Exam (公务员考试).

[ 13 ] In addition to passing this exam, candidates are required to have completed a degree in agriculture or a closely related field and highly-intricate training programs to be eligible for appointment as public agricultural officers.

[ 14 ] India [ edit ] In India, the professional designation is Agricultural Scientist (abbreviated as ARS ). To qualify for entry level posts, the Agricultural Scientists Recruitment Board conducts competitive examinations pursuant to the Gajendragadkar Report of 1972.

[ 15 ] The post of entry level ARS is same with Jr. Class I cadre of Central government. The initial pay is fixed after granting advance increments for higher qualification, with PhDs getting the highest salary.

They are kept on 'tenure track' or 'probation' for two years and upon satisfactory completion of this period they are given tenure and confirmed in the ARS. On completing service for designated years and meeting set performance criteria, they are promoted to the next higher grades in a flexible complementation system known as Career Advancement Scheme (CAS).

Incumbents without a PhD degree are given paid study leave to acquire PhD qualification, which is necessary for career progression. Through CAS, scientists can rise up to principal scientist grade, which is equivalent to the scale of joint secretary to the Government of India . The ARS encourages fresh infusion of talent at all senior levels through lateral entry in which incumbent scientists can participate in the open competition and move their career ahead in much shorter time than CAS. All the research management positions are filled through open competition. The director general of ICAR is the highest-ranked member of the ARS, who is ex officio secretary to the Government of India, Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE), Ministry of Agriculture .

Japan [ edit ] In Japan, the professional designation is agricultural extension officer (農業指導士, Nōgyō Shidōshi) by virtue of the Agricultural Improvement Promotion Act.

[ 16 ] One must typically hold a degree in agriculture or a related field, accumulate years of practical technical experience, pass a national qualification exam, and then be appointed by a prefectural government, as guided by standards from the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF). These officers deliver technical advice, promote good agricultural practices, assist with compliance in programs like the Certified Farm Manager initiative (農業経営士), and support technology transfer to local farmers.

[ 17 ] Meanwhile Certified Farm Manager (農業経営士, Nōgyō Keieishi) , a designation formally awarded through a combination of academic credentials, government-administered training, certification programs, and skills assessments from the Japan Agricultural Cooperatives and that are aligned with the Japanese Agricultural Standards of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF).

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Philippines [ edit ] In the Philippines, the official professional designation is Registered Agriculturist (R.Agr.) by virtue of the Philippine Agriculturist Act of 2025 or Republic Act No. 12215.

[ 20 ] Prior to the enactment of the law, the profession has already been regulated by the Professional Regulation Commission and the Professional Board of Agriculture [ 21 ] by virtue of Republic Act No. 8435 or Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act of 1997, which mentioned: Section 75.

Agriculture and Fisheries Board.

- There shall be created an Agriculture and Fisheries Board in the Professional Regulation Commission to upgrade the Agriculture and Fisheries profession. Those who have not passed the Civil Service Examination for Fisheries and Agriculture but have served the industry in either private or public capacity for not less than five (5) years shall be automatically granted eligibility by the Board of Examiners. The first board of examination for B.S. Fisheries and/or Agriculture Graduates shall be conducted within one (1) year from the approval of this Act.

[ 22 ] A Registered Agriculturist can affix the title "R.Agr." (as name suffix) or "Agr." (as name prefix) to indicate the profession.

[ 23 ] The Professional Board of Agriculture was created and established in 2000 by virtue of PRC Resolution No. 2000-663 [ 21 ] [ 24 ] and the first Agriculturist Licensure Examination (ALE) was held in 2003 and has annually been held annually.

[ 25 ] Professional Practice of Agriculturists [ edit ] Registered Agriculturists (“RAgr”) are authorized to perform services related to: Crop, livestock, and poultry production, processing and marketing Soil, crop, and animal health management Consultancy, feasibility planning and cost estimation services Breeding, research, pest & disease control, and extension work Training, technology transfer, and agricultural education Marketing and agribusiness management Teaching agricultural subjects in recognized institutions Employment in private and government roles requiring professional agricultural knowledge Similar to other professions in the Philippines, malpractice and illegal practice of agriculture are grounds for suspension or revocation of certificates of registration and professional licenses.

[ 26 ] Licensed agriculturists in the Philippines are integrated into one accredited integrated professional organization, which is the Philippine Association of Agriculturists. Penalties A separate registry system for farmers, fisherfolk, and agri-youth was established by the Department of Agriculture through the Registry System for Basic Sectors in Agriculture (RSBSA).

[ 27 ] Eligibility to take the Board Exam [ edit ] A prospective professional agriculturist is typically required to have a four-year Bachelor of Science degree in Agriculture, although other degree programs directly related to agriculture are also allowed to take the licensure examination if they earn at least twenty-seven (27) units of fundamental agriculture credits from a recognized higher education institution.

[ 28 ] About 5,500 registered agriculturists pass the licensure examination annually.

[ 29 ] It is one of the hardest licensure examinations in the country with 29.84% passing rate in November 2021.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Professionals and educators with at least five (5) years of experience in agriculture are allowed to be registered as an Agriculturist without taking the licensure examination.

[ 32 ] Europe [ edit ] European Union [ edit ] In the European Union, the generic name of the profession is Agronomist/Agricultural Engineer.

[ 33 ] The profession is exercised for the public interest in defense of the principles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union [ 34 ] and Directive 2005/36/EC .

[ 35 ] Italy [ edit ] In Italy, the professional designation is "Dottori Agronomi" (translated as Agronomy Doctor ). The profession is exercised for the public interest in defense of the principles of Articles 9 and 32 of the Italian Constitution and of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Professionals enrolled in the Register of Dottori Agronomi while exercising the profession base their actions on the following principles: Contribute to the integrated and sustainable development through the planning and design compatible with the conservation of biodiversity; Ensure and promote the quality of food for animal feed and animal welfare; Ensure the safety and promote the quality of food products for the protection of the business system and the health and well-being of the consumer; Promote and enhance the landscapes and cultures of rural communities; Qualify and enhance urban ecosystems and the development of plant and animal heritage and biodiversity.

North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] In Canada, the professional designation is "agrologist", also called " agronome " in Québec . There are more than 10,000 professional agrologists and agronomes in Canada.

[ 36 ] Professional agrologists are accredited through provincial regulatory bodies, e.g. Saskatchewan Institute of Agrology, Nova Scotia Institute of Agrologists. The requirements to attain professional designation (PAg) are similar in each province. A prospective agrologist is typically required to have a four-year undergraduate science degree directly related to agrology.  If accepted by their provincial institute, the applicant is known as an articling agrologist (AAg) or agrologist-in-training (AIT) and must complete a two-year educational and mentorship program before being considered for a professional designation.

An alternative certification called "registered technical agrologist" (RTag), or (PTag) is also available, requiring a two-year college or university education in the agricultural sciences instead of a four-year degree. These technologists designations require a two-year mentorship and education program, and participate in the same mentorship processes as a professional agrologist.

United States [ edit ] An agronomist field sampling a trial plot of flax In the United States, the professional designation is Certified Professional Agronomist (abbreviated C.PAg ), the American Society of Agronomy is the regulatory organization responsible for certification.

[ 37 ] The American Society of Agronomy uses a sliding scale of education and experience to determine certification: it is required to have either a bachelor's degree in science and 5 years work experience, a master's degree related to agrology and 3 years work experience, or a Doctorate related to agrology and a single year of work experience.

[ 38 ] CPAgs are required to complete at least 50 hours of continuing education through the American Society of Agronomy every two years in order to retain their certification.

The American Society of Agronomy also provides certifications for Certified Crop Advisors (CCA).

[ 38 ] To become a Certified Crop Adviser an applicant must pass two exams that may both be written on the same day at the same location.  The International exam is written by CCAs in North America. The Prairie region exam is written by individuals wishing to work as advisers in the three Prairie provinces of Canada or in the heartland states of the US.

See also [ edit ] Agriculture Agronomy Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Horticulture Animal science Botany Forestry Aquaculture References [ edit ] ^ "Agriculturist" .

ble.dole.gov.ph . Archived from the original on 2021-04-30 . Retrieved 2021-04-30 .

^ "Agriculture | Professional Regulation Commission" .

www.prc.gov.ph . Retrieved 2021-04-30 .

^ "Qualification Standards for Agriculturist Position" (PDF) .

Civil Service Commission .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-06-15.

^ "Agribusiness and Marketing Assistance" .

Department of Agriculture .

Archived from the original on 2017-07-06.

^ "PD 1144 - Fertilizer and Pesticide Authority" .

fpa.da.gov.ph . Retrieved 2021-05-02 .

^ "Organic Agriculture Program" .

Archived from the original on 2018-09-07.

^ "BAFS | Bureau of Agriculture and Fisheries Standards" . 2021-01-18. Archived from the original on 2021-01-18 . Retrieved 2021-05-02 .

^ "Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering | Professional Regulation Commission" .

www.prc.gov.ph . Retrieved 2021-05-02 .

^ "Rural Planning" .

Queensland Farmers' Federation . 2016-11-01 . Retrieved 2021-11-19 .

^ "I'm An Agronomist!" . Imanagronomist.net. Archived from the original on 2017-11-16 . Retrieved 2013-05-02 .

^ Cai, Jinyang; Jia, Yao; Hu, Ruifa; Zhang, Chao (2020).

"Four decades of China's agricultural extension reform and its impact on agents' time allocation" .

Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics .

64 (1): 104– 125.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8489.12361 .

ISSN 1467-8489 .

^ Lin, Yang; Hu, Ruifa; Zhang, Chao; Chen, Kevin (2022-10-01).

"The role of public agricultural extension services in driving fertilizer use in rice production in China" .

Ecological Economics .

200 : 107513.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2022.107513 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ "India's and China's civil-service exams are notoriously difficult" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "PARTICIPATORY ENVIRONMENT EDUCATION AND TRAINING FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ Masa (2007-03-22).

"Swami's Capers: An Enquiry Commission Report: The Gajendragadkar Report on ICAR, 1972" .

Swami's Capers . Retrieved 2019-11-07 .

^ "普及指導員資格試験とは：農林水産省" .

www.maff.go.jp . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "普及指導員資格試験とは：農林水産省" .

www.maff.go.jp . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "Japanese Agricultural Standards (JAS) : MAFF" .

www.maff.go.jp . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "Steps for introducing ASIAGAP/JGAP" .

Japan GAP Foundation . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "Republic Act No. 12215" .

lawphil.net . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ a b "Board of Agriculture Resolution No. 02, Series of 2002" (PDF) .

Philippine Regulation Commission .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-04-30.

^ "R.A. 8435" .

lawphil.net . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "Proposed Philippine Agriculturist Bill" (PDF) .

Philippine Association of Agriculturists .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-06-14.

^ "PRC Resolution No. 663 s. 2000: Creation of the Board of Agriculture Under the Professional Regulation Commission and for Other Purposes" (PDF) .

^ Philippine Association of Agriculturists.

"ANNOUNCEMENT: All Licensed Agriculturists Required to Submit a COGS to Renew their License" .

Philippine Association of Agriculturists .

^ Professional Regulations Commission.

"PRC Resolution No. 2000-663, Series of 2000" (PDF) .

Professional Regulations Commission .

^ "Register to the Philippine farmer registry system to be an eligible recipient of government programs" .

Manila Bulletin . Archived from the original on 2023-05-08 . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "IRR of PRC Resolution No. 2000-663 (Resolution Creating the Board of Agriculture)" (PDF) .

Professional Regulation Commission . Board of Agriculturists . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ "RESULTS: November 2019 Agriculturists Licensure Examination" .

Rappler . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ "1,172 pass November Agriculturist Licensure Exam" .

Manila Bulletin . 19 November 2021 . Retrieved 2021-11-19 .

^ November 18, PRC Board; Agriculturist, 2021 38 comments Categories; Passers, List of (2021-11-18).

"RESULTS: November 2021 Agriculturist Board Exam Passers" .

PRC Board . Retrieved 2022-02-08 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Resolution No. 2 s. 2002: IRR of PRC Resolution No. 2000-663 (Resolution Creating the Board of Agriculture)" (PDF) .

^ "Generic name of profession - Agronomist / agricultural engineer" .

ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2022-06-16 .

^ "CHARTER OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF THE EUROPEAN UNION" (PDF) .

^ "Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on the recognition of professional qualifications" .

ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2021-11-27 .

^ "Overview: Ontario Institute of Agrologists" . Retrieved 22 June 2014 .

^ "What is CPAg Certification?" (PDF) . American Society of Agronomy . Retrieved 22 June 2014 .

^ a b "What is CPAg Certification?" (PDF) . American Society of Agronomy . Retrieved 22 June 2014 .

v t e Agriculture Outline History Index Occupations Agriculturist Agricultural Engineer Farmer Farm worker Herder General Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Precision Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animal-free agriculture Cash crop Cellular agriculture Cultural methods Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Plantation Polyculture Rice-duck farming Rice-fish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture History West Asia Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Austronesia Agricultural science Agricultural History Review Arab Agricultural Revolution Argentina Canada China Chile Columbian exchange Green Revolution Indian subcontinent Mesoamerica Middle Ages Neolithic Revolution Organic farming Palestine Peru United Kingdom British Agricultural Revolution Cheshire Scotland United States African-American California Farming Types Agrivoltaic Aquaculture Cattle Cannabis cultivation Dairy farming Desert farming Dryland farming Fur farming Goat farming Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Transhumance Hydroponics Insect farming Livestock Pasture Mixed Monoculture Paddy field Pastoral Bocage Pig farming Poultry farming Ranch Rainfed agriculture Orchards Subsistence agriculture Sheep farming Terrace Wildlife farming Environmental impact Agricultural expansion Agricultural pollution Agricultural wastewater Overgrazing Environmental impact of irrigation Overdrafting Climate change and agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology Cannabis cultivation History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Food origins Government ministries Universities and colleges Category Portal Commons Wikiproject v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Portals : Agriculture History Environment Food Ecology Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agriculturist&oldid=1305296087 " Categories : Agriculturalists Professional titles and certifications Agricultural occupations Agriculture Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 06:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agriculturist 35 languages Add topic

