Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 1.1 Ancient Society 1.2 Development of human society and the family 1.3 Family and property 2 Publication history Toggle Publication history subsection 2.1 Background 2.2 Writing process 2.3 Editions 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Bibliography 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Latina Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский کوردی Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State ) 1884 book by Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State First edition (1884) Author Friedrich Engels Original title Der Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigenthums und des Staats Language German Subjects Capitalism , Gender roles , Nuclear family , Patriarchy Publication date 1884 Published in English 1902 Text The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State at Wikisource This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State: in the Light of the Researches of Lewis H. Morgan ( German : Der Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigenthums und des Staats ) is an 1884 anthropological treatise by Friedrich Engels . It is partially based on notes by Karl Marx to Lewis H. Morgan 's book Ancient Society (1877). The book is an early historical materialist work and is regarded as one of the first major works on family economics .

Summary [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Feminist philosophy Major works A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) The Subjection of Women (1869) The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884) The Second Sex (1949) The Feminine Mystique (1963) Sexual Politics (1969) The Dialectic of Sex (1970) Speculum of the Other Woman (1974) This Sex Which is Not One (1977) Gyn/Ecology (1978) Throwing Like a Girl (1980) In a Different Voice (1982) The Politics of Reality (1983) Women, Race, and Class (1983) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) The Creation of Patriarchy (1986) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) Gender Trouble (1990) Sexual Personae (1990) Black Feminist Thought (1990) Feminism and the Mastery of Nature (1993) Whipping Girl (2007) The Promise of Happiness (2010) Major thinkers Bartky Baier de Beauvoir Bebel Boggs Butler Cixous Cleyre De la Cruz Cobain Collins Daly Davis Démar Dworkin Faust Federici Firestone Fourier Friedan Frye Gamond Goldman Grosz Hanna Haslanger hooks Irigaray Jaggar Kristeva Lerner Lorde Lugones Luxemburg MacKinnon Mama Michel Mill Taylor Mill Millett Nussbaum Paglia Pankhurst Pateman Plumwood Rubin Saadawi Showalter Solanas Spivak Voilquin Whedon Wittig Wollstonecraft Young Zetkin Ideas Feminism analytical epistemology ethics existentialism metaphysics science Gender equality Gender performativity Social construction of gender Care ethics Intersectionality Standpoint theory Journals Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Radical Philosophy Signs Category Feminist philosophy v t e Ancient Society [ edit ] The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State begins with an extensive discussion of Morgan's Ancient Society , which aims to describe the major stages of human development , and agrees with the work that the first domestic institution in human history was the matrilineal clan. Morgan was a pioneering American anthropologist and business lawyer who championed the land rights of Native Americans. Traditionally, the Iroquois had lived in communal longhouses based on matrilineal descent and matrilocal residence , giving women a great deal of power. Engels stressed the theoretical significance of Morgan's highlighting of the matrilineal clan: The rediscovery of the original mother-right gens as the stage preliminary to the father-right gens of the civilized peoples has the same significance for the history of primitive society as Darwin’s theory of evolution has for biology, and Marx’s theory of surplus value for political economy.

— Engels, Friedrich (1884). "Preface to the Fourth Edition".

The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State . New York: Pathfinder Press . pp.

27– 38, the quotation is on p.36.

Primitive communism , according to both Morgan and Engels, was based in the matrilineal clan where females lived with their classificatory sisters – applying the principle that "my sister’s child is my child". Because they lived and worked together, females in these communal households felt strong bonds of solidarity with one another, enabling them when necessary to take action against uncooperative men. Engels cites this passage from a letter to Morgan written by a missionary who had lived for many years among the Seneca Iroquois, As to their family system, when occupying the old long-houses, it is probable that some one clan predominated, the women taking in husbands, however, from the other clans; and sometimes, for a novelty, some of their sons bringing in their young wives until they felt brave enough to leave their mothers. Usually, the female portion ruled the house, and were doubtless clannish enough about it. The stores were held in common; but woe to the luckless husband or lover who was too shiftless to do his share of the providing. No matter how many children, or whatever goods he might have in the house, he might at any time be ordered to pack up his blanket and budge; and after such orders it would not be healthful for him to attempt to disobey. The house would be too hot for him; and, unless saved by the intercession of some aunt or grandmother, he must retreat to his own clan; or, as was often done, go and start a new matrimonial alliance in some other. The women were the great power among the clans, as everywhere else. They did not hesitate, when occasion required, to "knock off the horns", as it was technically called, from the head of a chief, and send him back to the ranks of the warriors. The original nomination of the chiefs also always rested with them.

— Morgan, Lewis H.

(1877).

Ancient Society . London: Macmillan. p. 455.

According to Morgan, the rise of alienable property disempowered women by triggering a switch to patrilocal residence and patrilineal descent: It thus reversed the position of the wife and mother in the household; she was of a different gens from her children, as well as her husband; and under monogamy was now isolated from her gentile kindred, living in the separate and exclusive house of her husband. Her new condition tended to subvert and destroy that power and influence which descent in the female line and the joint-tenement houses had created.

— Morgan, Lewis H.

(1881).

Houses and house-life of the American Aborigines . Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press . p. 128.

Development of human society and the family [ edit ] Engels added political impact to Morgan's studies of women in prehistory , describing the "overthrow of mother right" as "the world-historic defeat of the female sex"; he attributed this defeat to the onset of farming and pastoralism. In reaction, most twentieth-century social anthropologists considered the theory of matrilineal priority untenable, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] though feminist scholars of the 1970s-1980s (particularly socialist and radical feminists ) attempted to revive it with limited success.

[ 3 ] In recent years, some proponents have attempted to rehabilitate this view using the rare indications of matrilocal marriage in ancient remains as evidence. However, the vast majority of ancient remains show patrilocality and female out-marriage. This is true even of Neanderthal populations.

[ 4 ] Engels emphasizes the importance of social relations of power and control over material resources rather than supposed psychological deficiencies of "primitive" people. In the eyes of both Morgan and Engels, terms such as "savagery" and "barbarism" were respectful and honorific, not negative. Engels summarises Morgan's three main stages as follows: Lewis Henry Morgan (1818–1881), whose pioneering anthropological study of Native American peoples was adapted by Frederick Engels in The Origin of the Family .

Savagery – the period in which man's appropriation of products in their natural state predominates; the products of human art are chiefly instruments which assist this appropriation.

Barbarism – the period during which man learns to breed domestic animals and to practice agriculture, and acquires methods of increasing the supply of natural products by human activity.

Civilization – the period in which man learns a more advanced application of work to the products of nature, the period of industry proper and of art.

In the following chapter on family, Engels seeks to connect the transition into these stages with a change in the way that family is defined and the rules by which it is governed. Much of this is still taken from Morgan, although Engels begins to intersperse his own ideas on the role of family into the text. Morgan acknowledges four stages in the family.

The consanguine family is the first stage of the family and as such a primary indicator of our superior nature in comparison with animals. In this state marriage groups are separated according to generations. The husband and wife relationship is immediately and communally assumed between the male and female members of one generation. The only taboo is a sexual relationship between two generations (i.e. father and daughter, grandmother and grandson).

The punaluan family, the second stage, extends the incest taboo to include sexual intercourse between siblings, including all cousins of the same generation. This prevents most incestuous relationships. The separation of the patriarchal and matriarchal lines divided a family into gentes . Interbreeding was forbidden within gens (anthropology) , although first cousins from separate gentes could still breed.

In the pairing family, the first indications of pairing are found in families where the husband has one primary wife. Inbreeding is practically eradicated by the prevention of a marriage between two family members who were even just remotely related, while relationships also start to approach monogamy. Property and economics begin to play a larger part in the family, as a pairing family had responsibility for the ownership of specific goods and property.

Polygamy is still common amongst men, but no longer amongst women since their fidelity would ensure the child's legitimacy. Women have a superior role in the family as keepers of the household and guardians of legitimacy. The pairing family is the form characteristic of the lower stages of barbarism. However, at this point, when the man died his inheritance was still given to his gens, rather than to his offspring. Engels refers to this economic advantage for men coupled with the woman's lack of rights to lay claim to possessions for herself or her children (who became hers after a separation) as the overthrow of mother-right which was "the world historical defeat of the female sex". For Engels, ownership of property created the first significant division between men and women in which the woman was inferior.

On the monogamous family, Engels writes: It develops from the pairing family, as we have already shown, during the time of transition from the middle to the higher stage of barbarism. Its final victory is one of the signs of beginning civilization. It is founded on male supremacy for the pronounced purpose of breeding children of indisputable paternal lineage. The latter is required, because these children shall later on inherit the fortune of their father. The monogamous family is distinguished from the pairing family by the far greater durability of wedlock, which can no longer be dissolved at the pleasure of either party. As a rule, it is only the man who can still dissolve it and cast off his wife.

— Engels, Friedrich (1884). "Preface to the Fourth Edition".

The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State . New York: Pathfinder Press . p. 75.

Family and property [ edit ] Engels' ideas on the role of property in the creation of the modern family and as such modern civilization begin to become more transparent in the latter part of Chapter 2 as he begins to elaborate on the question of the monogamous relationship and the freedom to enter into (or refuse) such a relationship. Bourgeois law dictates the rules for relationships and inheritances. As such, two partners, even when their marriage is not arranged, will always have the preservation of inheritance in mind and as such will never be entirely free to choose their partner. Engels argues that a relationship based on property rights and forced monogamy will only lead to the proliferation of sexual immorality and prostitution .

The only class, according to Engels, which is free from these restraints of property, and as a result from the danger of moral decay, is the proletariat , as they lack the monetary means that are the basis of (as well as threat to) the bourgeois marriage. Monogamy is therefore guaranteed by the fact that theirs is a voluntary sex-love relationship.

The social revolution which Engels believed was about to happen would eliminate class differences, and therefore also the need for prostitution and the enslavement of women. If men needed only to be concerned with sex-love and no longer with property and inheritance, then monogamy would come naturally.

Publication history [ edit ] Background [ edit ] Following the death of his friend and co-thinker Karl Marx in 1883, Engels served as his literary executor, organizing his various writings and preparing them for publication. While time-consuming, this activity did not fully occupy Engels's available hours, and he continued to read and write on topics of his own.

[ citation needed ] While Engels' 1883 manuscript Dialectics of Nature was left uncompleted and unpublished, he successfully published Der Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigenthums und des Staats: Im Anschluss an Lewis H. Morgan's Forschungen ( The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State: in the Light of the Researches of Lewis H. Morgan ) in Zürich in the spring of 1884.

The writing of The Origin of the Family began in early April 1884, and was completed on 26 May.

[ 5 ] Engels began work on the treatise after reading Marx's handwritten synopsis of Lewis H. Morgan's Ancient Society; or, Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery, Through Barbarism to Civilization , first published in London in 1877.

[ 6 ] Engels believed that Marx had intended to create a critical book-length treatment of the ideas suggested by Morgan, and aimed to produce such a manuscript to fulfill his late comrade's wishes.

[ 6 ] Engels acknowledged these motives, noting in the preface to the first edition that "Marx had reserved to himself the privilege of displaying the results of Morgan's investigations in connection with his own materialist conception of history", as the latter had "in a manner discovered anew" in America the theory originated by Marx decades before.

[ 7 ] Writing process [ edit ] Engels's first inclination was to seek publication in Germany in spite of the passage of the first of the Anti-Socialist Laws by the government of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck . On April 26, 1884, Engels wrote a letter to his close political associate Karl Kautsky , saying he sought to "play a trick on Bismarck" by writing something "that he would be positively unable to ban".

[ 8 ] He felt this goal unrealizable owing to Morgan's discussions of the nature of monogamy and the relationship between private ownership of property and class struggle , however, these making it "absolutely impossible to couch in such a way as to comply with the Anti-Socialist Law".

[ 9 ] Engels viewed Morgan's findings as providing a "factual basis we have hitherto lacked" for a prehistory of contemporary class struggle.

[ 9 ] He believed that it would be an important supplement to the theory of historical materialism for Morgan's ideas to be "thoroughly worked on, properly weighed up, and presented as a coherent whole".

[ 9 ] This was to be the political intent behind his Origin of the Family project.

Work on the book was completed—with the exception of revisions to the final chapter—on May 22, 1884, when the manuscript was dispatched to Eduard Bernstein in Zürich.

[ 10 ] The final decision of whether to print the book in Stuttgart "under a false style", hiding Engels's forbidden name, or immediately without alteration in a Swiss edition, was deferred by Engels to Bernstein.

[ 10 ] The latter course of action was chosen, with the book finding print early in October.

[ 6 ] Editions [ edit ] Cover of the 1st English-language edition, published by Charles H. Kerr & Co.

of Chicago in 1902.

The first edition of Der Ursprung der Familie appeared in Zürich in October 1884, with the possibility of German publication forestalled by Bismarck's Anti-Socialist Law.

[ 6 ] Two subsequent German editions, each following the first Zürich edition exactly, were published in Stuttgart in 1886 and 1889.

[ 6 ] The book was translated into a number of European languages and published during the decade of the 1880s, including Polish , Romanian , Italian , Danish , and Serbian .

[ 6 ] Changes to the text were made by Engels for a fourth German language edition, published in 1891, with an effort made to incorporate contemporary findings in the fields of anthropology and ethnography into the work.

[ 6 ] The first English language edition did not appear until 1902, [ 6 ] when Charles H. Kerr commissioned Ernest Untermann to produce a translation for the "Standard Socialist Series" of popularly priced pocket editions produced by his Charles H. Kerr & Co.

of Chicago. The work was extensively reprinted throughout the 20th and into the 21st Centuries and is regarded as one of Engels' seminal works.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Malinowski, B.

(1956). Montagu, M. F. Ashley (ed.).

Marriage: Past and Present. A debate between Robert Briffault and Bronislaw Malinowski . Boston: Porter Sargent.

^ Harris, M. (1969).

The Rise of Anthropological Theory . London: Routledge . p. 305.

^ Leacock, E. B. 1981.

Myths of Male Dominance. Collected articles on women cross-culturally . New York: Monthly Review Press.

^ Laurits Skov et al, 2022.

[1] .

^ Andrushchenko, Marx & Engels 1990 , p. 130.

^ a b c d e f g h i Andrushchenko, Marx & Engels 1990 , p. 640.

^ Frederick Engels, "Author's Preface to the First Edition", in The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State . Ernest Untermann, trans. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr & Co., 1902; pg. 9.

^ Frederick Engels in London to Karl Kautsky in Zürich, April 26, 1884, in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works: Volume 47: Engels, 1883-86.

New York: International Publishers, 1995; pp. 131-132.

^ a b c Engels to Kautsky, April 26, 1884, pg. 132.

^ a b Frederick Engels in London to Eduard Bernstein in Zürich, May 22, 1884, in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works: Volume 47: Engels, 1883-86.

New York: International Publishers, 1995; pp. 136-137.

Bibliography [ edit ] Andrushchenko, Tatiana; Marx, Karl ; Engels, Friedrich (1990). "Prefatory note to The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State: In the Light of the Researches of Lewis H. Morgan ".

Collected Works . Vol. 26: Frederick Engels, 1882– 89. New York: International Publishers.

External links [ edit ] The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.

Ernest Untermann, trans. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr & Co., 1909.

—Identical to 1st English language edition.

The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State.

Alternate translation. New York: International Publishers, n.d. [c. 1933].

German language html version.

English language html at Marxist Internet Archive Soviet study booklet v t e Works by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Marx Das Kapital Das Kapital, Volume I (1867) Das Kapital, Volume II (1885, posthumous) Das Kapital, Volume III (1894, posthumous) Other works Scorpion and Felix (1837) Oulanem (1839) The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature (1841) " The Philosophical Manifesto of the Historical School of Law " (1842) Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right (1843, published 1927) " On the Jewish Question " (1843) " Notes on James Mill " (1844) Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 (1844, published 1932) " Theses on Feuerbach " (1845, published 1888) The Poverty of Philosophy (1847) " Wage Labour and Capital " (1847) The Class Struggles in France, 1848–1850 (1850) The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (1852) Grundrisse (1857, published 1939) A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) Theories of Surplus Value (three volumes, 1862) " Value, Price and Profit " (1865) " The Belgian Massacres " (1869) " The Civil War in France " (1871) Critique of the Gotha Programme (1875) Mathematical manuscripts (1968) Notebooks on the history of technology Marx and Engels The Holy Family (1844) The German Ideology (1845, published 1932) The Communist Manifesto (1848) The Civil War in the United States (1861) Engels The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845) Principles of Communism (1847) The Peasant War in Germany (1850) " The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man " (1876) Anti-Dühring (1878) Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880) Dialectics of Nature (1883) The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884) Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (1886) A Contribution to the History of Primitive Christianity (1894) Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (1896, posthumous) Collections Marx/Engels Collected Works (1975–2004) Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe (1975–today) Karl Marx Library (1971–1977) v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐747df9c9dd‐jxjs9
Cached time: 20250818132332
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.663 seconds
Real time usage: 0.832 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4101/1000000
Revision size: 20526/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 137761/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15216/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78607/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.397/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21643436/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  720.821      1 -total
 17.40%  125.437      3 Template:Quotation
 17.00%  122.542      7 Template:Cite_book
 14.38%  103.657      1 Template:Feminist_philosophy_sidebar
 14.12%  101.764      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.49%   90.065      1 Template:Langx
 10.19%   73.459      1 Template:Infobox_book
  8.05%   57.992      4 Template:Navbox
  7.77%   55.994      2 Template:Ambox
  7.70%   55.519      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3208843:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132332 and revision id 1270797368. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Origin_of_the_Family,_Private_Property_and_the_State&oldid=1270797368 " Categories : 1884 non-fiction books Books by Friedrich Engels Feminist books Historical materialism Marxist books Marxist feminism Works about the theory of history Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that link to Wikisource Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2024 All articles with style issues Articles containing German-language text Articles needing additional references from December 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 21 January 2025, at 07:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State 26 languages Add topic

