Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal charism Toggle Personal charism subsection 1.1 Asceticism 1.2 Devotion to Mary 2 Good books Toggle Good books subsection 2.1 Spirituality of discernment 3 Contribution to moral theology 4 Veneration 5 Writings 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Bruno Lanteri 5 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Piemontèis Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian priest Pio Bruno Lanteri Portrait by Michele Baretta Born ( 1759-05-12 ) 12 May 1759 Cuneo , Piedmont Residence Torino , Italy Died ( 1830-08-05 ) 5 August 1830 Pinerolo , Italy Influences St. Ignatius of Loyola , St. Alphonsus of Liguori , St. Teresa of Avila , Fr. Nicolas Joseph Albert von Diessbach Influenced Spiritual direction, parish missions, anti-Jansenistic moral theology, St.

Joseph Cafasso , St.

John Bosco , Bl. Pier Giorgio Frassati , St. Joseph Cottolengo Major works Réflexions sur la sainteté et la doctrine du Bienheureux Liguori (Paris, 1823) [ 1 ] Pio Bruno Pancrazio Lanteri , or simply Bruno Lanteri (12 May 1759 – 5 August 1830), was a Catholic priest and founder of the religious congregation of the Oblates of the Virgin Mary in the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia in northwestern Italy in the early 19th century. His spiritual life and work centered on the Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola .

[ 2 ] He was also renowned for challenging Jansenism by distributing books and other publications that promoted the moral theology of St. Alphonsus Liguori , as well as establishing societies to continue this work.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Lanteri has been declared Venerable by the Catholic Church.

Personal charism [ edit ] Asceticism [ edit ] Lanteri's life was marked by physical suffering from his pulmonary conditions that restricted his public speaking ability and his poor eyesight, because of which he often sought an assistant to read aloud to him. At age seventeen he sought the quiet and prayer of Carthusian monastic life and, although his entry was prevented by fragile health, he maintained this desire for silence and solitude throughout his life.

[ 4 ] Witnesses of his life suggest that he reached the heights of mystical prayer during his years of house-arrest under Napoleon (1811–14).

[ 5 ] Devotion to Mary [ edit ] At the death of Lanteri's mother in 1763, his father presented the four-year-old boy to a statue of Mary in their parish church, telling him, "She is your mother now." From this time, Lanteri maintained a deep and persistent devotion to Mary and communicated it to his colleagues and disciples, going so far as to declare that the religious institute he founded was principally the work of Mary and not his own.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Good books [ edit ] After meeting Nicolas Joseph Albert von Diessbach (25 February 1732 – 22 December 1798) in Torino in 1779, [ 8 ] Lanteri adopted Diessbach's passion for distributing good books as a remedy with both spiritual and human dimensions. Diessbach himself was converted from the Calvinism of his youth and the agnosticism of his military years by the chance reading of a good book that passionately expounded the truths of Catholicism.

[ 7 ] With Lanteri he established a close-knit group of laypeople and clergy called the Amicizia Cristiana (Christian Friendship), who worked together to disseminate well-written, edifying books that inspired people to grow in their faith, contribute to society and cope with the unwelcome changes in their lives at the dawn of the French Revolution . The Amicizia maintained catalogues of such books and managed a covert lending library in support of this work. Lanteri also communicated this passion for good literature to the Oblates of the Virgin Mary.

[ 9 ] Spirituality of discernment [ edit ] Diessbach, a former Jesuit (the Society of Jesus having been suppressed by Pope Clement XIV in 1773) also introduced Lanteri to the spiritual patrimony of St.

Ignatius of Loyola , particularly his Spiritual Exercises . In this series of guided meditations through which one becomes more attentive to the movements of the heart ( discernment ) and the accompanying rules for adapting them to individuals' particular spiritual needs, Lanteri recognized a powerful instrument for pastoral ministry, especially for conversion.

[ 10 ] He applied them continuously in his own life and prayer, recommended them to others, and established groups of people whom he trained to do the same. These groups eventually yielded to the formation of the Convitto Ecclesiastico (Priestly Residence) [ 11 ] and the Oblates of the Virgin Mary, whom he charged to continue this work.

Contribution to moral theology [ edit ] Lanteri worked to turn the tide of Jansenism, which had become popular in Europe in the preceding centuries and retained many adherents in his time, though formally condemned by the Catholic Church. He himself held certain Jansenistic tenets at age 20, but through the influence of Jesuit Diessbach he encountered the moral theology of Alphonsus Liguori and definitively rejected Jansenism.

[ 12 ] Lanteri subsequently promoted Liguorian moral theology, which is based on mercy and hope in contrast with a condemning and rigoristic Jansenism, both personally as he counseled people and young priests and institutionally through various publications. Of particular note is his 1823 book, published anonymously in French, entitled Réflexions sur la sainteté et la doctrine du Bienheureux Liguori ( Reflections on the Holiness and Teaching of Blessed Liguori ). It was soon translated into Italian and then Spanish. In this prose work, Lanteri describes the character of Liguori and his doctrinal teaching, particularly his moral theology. The book includes an exhaustive catalogue of Liguori's written works, which was a substantial aid to the Vatican committee reviewing Alphonsus' life and works.

[ 13 ] Scholars such as Guerber have shown that Lanteri, together with Diessbach and their associates in Northern Italy and France, was in large part responsible for the widespread familiarity among clergy with the moral theology of Alphonsus Liguori and its usefulness to both combat Jansenism and accomplish their evangelical mission.

[ 13 ] One persistent point of Lanteri's teaching was to always follow the magisterium of the Church; the writings of  Alphonsus Liguori had been officially declared "free of anything worthy of censure", and Lanteri always used this fact in support of his own promotion of Liguori's teaching.

[ 14 ] Veneration [ edit ] Lanteri's cause for canonization was begun in 1920.

[ 2 ] [ 15 ] His spiritual writings were approved by theologians on 27 November 1937, 20 November 1940, and 11 May 1945.

[ 16 ] His cause was formally opened on 4 May 1952, granting him the title of Servant of God .

[ 16 ] Lanteri was declared Venerable by Pope Paul VI in 1965.

[ 2 ] [ 15 ] Writings [ edit ] Lanteri, Bruno (1823).

Réflexions sur la sainteté et la doctrine du Bienheureux Liguori [ Reflections on the Holiness and Teaching of Blessed Liguori ] (in French). Lyon: Perisse Frères.

Lanteri, Bruno (1976). Calliari, Paolo (ed.).

Carteggio del Venerabile Pio Bruno Lanteri (1759–1830) fondatore della Congregazione degli Oblati di Maria Vergine [ Correspondence of the Venerable Pio Bruno Lanteri (1759–1830) founder of the Congregation of the Oblates of the Virgin Mary ] (in Italian). Torino: Editrice Lanteriana.

OCLC 3617374 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Bourdeau, François (1987).

Alphonse de Liguori: pasteur et docteur . Paris: Editions Beauchesne. pp. 239, 386.

ISBN 9782701011448 .

^ a b c Invernizzi, Marco.

"Venerabile Pio Brunone Lanteri" . Santi e Beati . Retrieved 5 December 2013 .

^ Pappalardo, Francesco (7 October 2011).

"Sant'Alfonso Maria de' Liguori (1696–1787)" . Retrieved 6 December 2013 .

^ Gallagher, Timothy (2013).

Begin Again: The Life and Spiritual Legacy of Bruno Lanteri . New York: Crossroad. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-8245-2579-8 .

^ Lanteri, Bruno (1945). Frutaz, Amato (ed.).

Pinerolien. Beatificationis et canonizationis Servi Dei Pii Brunonis Lanteri fundatoris Congregationis Oblatorum M. V. (1830): Positio super introductione causae et super virtutibus ex officio compilata [ On the beatification and canonization of the Servant of God Pio Bruno Lanteri founder of the Congregation of the Oblates of the Virgin Mary (1830): Position concerning the introduction of the cause and concerning the virtues compiled ] (in Latin and Italian). Rome: Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis.

^ Gallagher pp. 173, 220.

^ a b Cristiani, Léon (1981).

A Cross for Napoleon: The Life of Father Bruno Lanteri (1759–1830) . Boston: St. Paul Editions.

ISBN 9780819814050 .

^ Gallagher p. 25.

^ Gallagher p. 173.

^ Lanteri, Bruno (1976). Calliari, Paolo (ed.).

Carteggio del Venerabile Pio Bruno Lanteri (1759–1830) fondatore della Congregazione degli Oblati di Maria Vergine [ Correspondence of the Venerable Pio Bruno Lanteri (1759–1830) founder of the Congregation of the Oblates of the Virgin Mary ] (in Italian). Torino: Editrice Lanteriana.

OCLC 3617374 .

^ Gallagher p. 32.

^ Gallagher pp. 23–25.

^ a b Guerber, Jean (1973). "Le Ralliement du clergé Français a la morale Liguorienne" [The Rallying of the French Clergy to Liguorian Moral Theology].

Analecta Gregoriana (in French).

193 (62). Roma: Università Gregoriana Editrice: 116– 121.

^ Gallagher p. 159.

^ a b "Diarium Romanae Curiae: Sacra Congregazione dei Riti, p. 680" (PDF) .

Acta Apostolicae Sedis (1965) . Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis . Retrieved 22 December 2013 .

^ a b Index ac status causarum beatificationis servorum dei et canonizationis beatorum (in Latin). Typis polyglottis vaticanis. January 1953. p. 196.

External links [ edit ] PioBrunoLanteri.org , an online archive of his writings BrunoLanteri.org , the website promoting awareness of his process for canonization v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Vatican People Italian People Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bruno_Lanteri&oldid=1288837959 " Categories : 1759 births 1830 deaths 18th-century Italian Roman Catholic priests 19th-century Italian Roman Catholic priests Founders of Catholic religious communities Hidden categories: CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 00:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bruno Lanteri 5 languages Add topic

