Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years, family and education 2 Early career Toggle Early career subsection 2.1 Legal career 2.2 Massachusetts legislature 3 Personal life 4 Education reform Toggle Education reform subsection 4.1 Secular nature 4.2 Reading instruction 4.3 Admiration of the Prussian Model 5 A Whig in Congress 6 Abolitionism 7 Leadership of Antioch College and last years 8 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 8.1 Commemoration 8.2 Schools 8.3 College and university buildings 9 Works 10 See also 11 References 12 Works cited 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Horace Mann 27 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Kiswahili مصرى 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American educational reformer and politician (1796–1859) For the school also called "Horace Mann", see Horace Mann School . For other people, see Horace Mann (disambiguation) .

Horace Mann Mann, c. 1851 Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts 's 8th district In office April 3, 1848 – March 3, 1853 Preceded by John Quincy Adams Succeeded by Tappan Wentworth 1st Secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education In office 1837–1848 Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Barnas Sears Personal details Born ( 1796-05-04 ) May 4, 1796 Franklin, Massachusetts , U.S.

Died August 2, 1859 (1859-08-02) (aged 63) Yellow Springs, Ohio , U.S.

Resting place North Burial Ground , Providence, Rhode Island , U.S.

Political party Whig Spouses Charlotte Messer Mann (d. 1832) Mary Peabody Mann Children 3 Alma mater Brown University Litchfield Law School Occupation Lawyer Educator College president Signature Horace Mann (May 4, 1796 – August 2, 1859) was an American educational reformer, slavery abolitionist and Whig politician known for his commitment to promoting public education , he is thus also known as The Father of American Education .

[ 1 ] In 1848, after public service as Secretary of the Massachusetts State Board of Education , Mann was elected to the United States House of Representatives (1848–1853). From September 1852 to his death in 1859, he served as President of Antioch College .

Arguing that universal public education was the best way to provide a quality education for all of America's children, Mann won widespread approval from modernizers, especially in the Whig Party , for building public schools. Most U.S. states adopted a version of the system Mann established in Massachusetts, especially the program for normal schools to train professional teachers.

[ 2 ] Educational historians credit Horace Mann, along with Henry Barnard and Catharine Beecher , as one of the major advocates of the Common School Movement.

[ 3 ] Early years, family and education [ edit ] The great-grandson of Samuel Man , [ 4 ] Horace Mann was born in Franklin, Massachusetts .

[ 5 ] Throughout his childhood, Mann experienced a variety of educational experiences from a vocational education working on the family farm to religious education. Mann came to see education as an essential component of a healthy childhood.

[ 6 ] From age ten to age twenty, he had no more than six weeks' schooling during any year, [ 7 ] but he made use of the Franklin Public Library , the first public library in America. He enrolled at Brown University when he was twenty years old and graduated in three years [ 8 ] as valedictorian (1819). The theme of his oration was "The Progressive Character of the Human Race." [ 7 ] He learned Greek and Latin from Samuel Barrett , [ 9 ] who later became a Unitarian minister.

[ 10 ] Early career [ edit ] Legal career [ edit ] Mann studied law for a short time in Wrentham, Massachusetts and was a tutor of Latin and Greek (1820–1822) and a librarian (1821–1823) at Brown. During 1822, he also studied at Litchfield Law School and, in 1823, was admitted to the bar in Dedham, Massachusetts .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Mann defended James Allen in a robbery trial by placing a reasonable doubt in the minds of the jury by pointing out that the victim had previously identified someone else as the man who robbed him.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The strategy worked, and there was a hung jury .

[ 13 ] Massachusetts legislature [ edit ] Mann was elected to the Massachusetts legislature in 1827 and, in that role, was active in the interests of education, public charities, and laws for the suppression of alcoholic drinks and lotteries. He established an asylum in Worcester , and in 1833, was chairman of its board of trustees. Mann continued to be returned to the legislature as a representative from Dedham until his removal to Boston in 1833. While in the legislature, he was a member and part of the time chairman of the committee for the revision of the state statutes, and many salutary provisions were incorporated into the code at his suggestion. After their enactment, he was appointed one of the editors of the work and prepared its marginal notes and references to judicial decisions. He was elected to the Massachusetts State Senate from Boston in 1835 and was its president in 1836–1837. As a member of the Senate, he spent time as the majority leader and aimed his focus at infrastructure, funding the construction of railroads and canals.

[ 5 ] [ 15 ] Personal life [ edit ] In 1830, Mann married Charlotte Messer, the daughter of former Brown University president Asa Messer . She died two years later on August 1, 1832; he never fully recovered from the intense grief and shock that accompanied her death.

[ 16 ] In 1843, he married Mary Tyler Peabody . Afterward, the couple accompanied Samuel Gridley Howe and Julia Ward Howe on a dual honeymoon to Europe. They subsequently purchased a home in West Newton, Massachusetts , at the corner of Chestnut and Highland Streets.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Horace and Mary had three sons: Horace Mann Jr.

, George Combe Mann, and Benjamin Pickman Mann .

Education reform [ edit ] It was not until he was appointed Secretary in 1837 of the newly created Massachusetts Board of Education that he began the work which was to make him one of America's most influential educational reformers.

[ 11 ] Upon starting his duties, he withdrew from all other professional or business engagements as well as politics.

As Secretary of Education, Mann held teachers' conventions, delivered numerous lectures and addresses, carried on an extensive correspondence, and introduced numerous reforms. Mann persuaded his fellow modernizers, especially those in the Whig Party , to legislate tax-supported elementary public education in their states and to feminize the teaching force.  To justify the new taxes, Mann assured businessmen that more education in the workforce made for a richer and more profitable economy.

[ 19 ] Most northern states adopted one version or another of the system he established in Massachusetts, especially the program for " normal schools " to train professional teachers.

[ 2 ] Mann traveled to every school in the state so he could physically examine each school's grounds.

[ citation needed ] He planned and inaugurated the Massachusetts normal school system in Lexington (which shortly thereafter moved to Framingham), Barre (which shortly thereafter moved to Westfield) and Bridgewater , and began preparing a series of annual reports, which had a wide circulation and were considered as being "among the best expositions, if, indeed, they are not the very best ones, of the practical benefits of a common school education both to the individual and to the state".

[ 20 ] By his advocacy of the disuse of corporal punishment in school discipline, he was involved in a controversy with some of the Boston teachers that resulted in the adoption of his views.

[ 21 ] In 1838, he founded and edited The Common School Journal .

In 1843, he went to Europe to visit schools, especially in Prussia , under the board's auspices but at his own expense. His seventh annual report, published after his return, embodied the results of his tour. Many editions of this report were printed in Massachusetts and other states, in some cases by private individuals and in others by legislatures; several editions were issued in England.

Mann hoped that by bringing all children of all classes together, they could have a common learning experience. This would also allow the less fortunate to advance on the social scale, and education would "equalize the conditions of men." Moreover, it was viewed also as a road to social advancement by the early labor movement and as a goal of having common schools. Mann also suggested that having schools would help those students who did not have appropriate discipline in the home. Building a person's character was as important as reading, writing, and arithmetic. Instilling values such as obedience to authority, promptness in attendance, and organizing the time according to bell ringing helped students prepare for future employment.

Mann faced some resistance from parents who did not want to give up moral education to teachers and bureaucrats. The normal schools trained mostly women, giving them new career opportunities as teachers.

[ 22 ] Mann believed that women were better suited for teaching, regardless of their status as a mother, and partnered with Catharine Beecher to push for a feminization of the profession.

[ 23 ] The practical result of Mann's work was meaningful reform in the approach used in the common school system of Massachusetts, which in turn influenced the direction of other states. In carrying out his work, Mann met with bitter opposition by some Boston schoolmasters who strongly disapproved of his innovative pedagogical ideas, [ 24 ] and by various religious sectarians, who contended against the exclusion of all sectarian instruction from the schools.

[ 11 ] Secular nature [ edit ] As the Old Deluder Satan Act and other 17th-century Massachusetts School Laws attest, early education in Massachusetts had a clear religious intent. However, by the time of Mann's leadership in education, various developments (including a vibrant populist Protestant faith and increased religious diversity) fostered a secular school system with a religiously passive stance.

[ 25 ] While Mann affirmed that "our Public Schools are not Theological Seminaries" and that they were "debarred by law from inculcating the peculiar and distinctive doctrines of any one religious denomination amongst us ... or all that is essential to religion or salvation," he assured those who objected to this secular nature that "our system earnestly inculcates all Christian morals; it founds its morals based on religion; it welcomes the religion of the Bible; and, in receiving the Bible, it allows it to do what it is allowed to do in no other system—to speak for itself. But here it stops, not because it claims to have compassed all truth, but because it disclaims to act as an umpire between hostile religious opinions." Mann stated that this position resulted in a near-universal use of the Bible in the schools of Massachusetts and that this served as an argument against the assertion by some that Christianity was excluded from his schools, or that they were anti-Christian.

[ 26 ] A devotee of the pseudoscience of phrenology , Mann believed education could eliminate or reduce human failings and compensate for any biological flaws.

[ 27 ] Mann also once stated that "it may not be easy theoretically, to draw the line between those views of religious truth and of Christian faith which is common to all, and may, therefore, with propriety be inculcated in schools, and those which, being peculiar to individual sects, are therefore by law excluded; still it is believed that no practical difficulty occurs in the conduct of our schools in this regard." Rather than sanctioning a particular church as was often the norm in many states, the Legislature proscribed books "calculated to favor the tenets of any particular set of Christians." [ 28 ] Reading instruction [ edit ] Like many nineteenth century reformers, Horace Mann believed that "children would find it far more interesting and pleasurable to memorize words and read short sentences and stories without having to bother to learn the names of the letters".

[ 29 ] According to Diane Ravitch , he condemned the alphabet method, claiming that it was "repulsive and soul-deadening to children".

[ 29 ] He described the letters of the alphabet as "skeleton-shaped, bloodless, ghostly apparitions".

[ 29 ] To him, teaching the alphabet was entirely illogical: "When we wish to give a child the idea of a new animal, we do not present successively the different parts of it,—an eye, an ear, the nose, the mouth, the body, or a leg: but we present a whole animal, as one object".

[ 30 ] Mann believed that "children's earliest books should teach whole words, skipping the alphabet and the sounds of the letters", [ 29 ] though he may have been confused between "the alphabet method of learning letters through words and a word method, now called the look-and-say method, or learning to read through saying the word as a whole".

[ 31 ] Mann's endorsement of "word method" for reading instruction made a lasting impression on other reformers of the period, and "by 1890 the alphabet method had virtually died out".

[ 29 ] Francis Parker and John Dewey used the "word method" as one of the features of the "Progressive" system of education . As Nancy Millichap notes, "Despite the enthusiasm of educators for their new methods of teaching, the illiteracy rate remained high. Among American soldiers enlisted in World War I, 24.9 percent proved unable to read or write, and during World War II, approximately the same percentage of British servicemen [who were taught using the same method] were found to be similarly handicapped. In 1940, one-third of high school students were incapable of mastering reading and writing well enough to profit from textbook instruction, and one-half of the adult population in the United States was functionally illiterate ".

[ 31 ] The backlash against " word method " culminated in a 1955 book Why Johnny Can't Read by Rudolf Flesch , in which he condemned this method for "treating children as if they were dogs" and recommended returning to teaching phonics . Nevertheless, the "ill-informed, ineffective reading instruction" remains the norm in American colleges of education and, accordingly, in American elementary schools.

[ 32 ] Admiration of the Prussian Model [ edit ] Main article: Prussian education system § United States Mann's efforts to update and strengthen Massachusetts's public education system began before he was appointed secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education in 1837. He frequently communicated with fellow public education advocates and expressed an interest in learning how other governmental organizations approached educating their children.

[ 33 ] As part of his trip to Europe, Mann reported he visited: [ 34 ] England, Ireland, and Scotland; crossed the German Ocean to Hamburg; thence went to Magdeburg, Berlin, Potsdam, Halle, and Weissenfels, in the kingdom of Prussia; to Leipsic and Dresden, the two great cities in the kingdom of Saxony; thence to Erfurt, Weimar, Eisenach, on the great route from the middle of Germany to Frankfort on the Maine; thence to the Grand Duchy of Nassau, of Hesse Darmstadt, and of Baden; and, after visiting all the principal cities in the Rhenish Provinces of Prussia, passed through Holland and Belgium to Paris.

Mann explains the similarities and differences he saw in the various countries, and most notably, the lessons that American educators could learn from the various structures. Later in his report, he focuses on Prussia, given it had, in his words, "long enjoyed the most distinguished reputation for the excellence of its schools." The country's system would come to be known as the " Prussian model " and included tax-payer funded schools, professional teacher education, and a "common" experience across all schools. Although his report covered a number of topics, including the education of deaf and blind children and mental health institutions, he focused his arguments on convincing the legislatures of the importance of a common elementary education and the professionalization, including training, of teachers. The common-school movement quickly gained strength across the North. Connecticut adopted a similar system in 1849, and Massachusetts passed a compulsory attendance law in 1852.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Mann's crusading style attracted wide middle-class support. Historian Ellwood P. Cubberley asserts: No one did more than he to establish in the minds of the American people the conception that education should be universal, non-sectarian, free, and that its aims should be social efficiency, civic virtue, and character, rather than mere learning or the advancement of sectarian ends.

[ 37 ] Arguing that universal public education was the best way to turn the nation's unruly children into disciplined, judicious republican citizens, Mann won widespread approval for building public schools from modernizers, especially among fellow Whigs . Most northeast states adopted one version or another of the system he established in Massachusetts, especially the program for "normal schools" to train professional teachers.

[ 38 ] Critics of the common school, and later public school movement sometimes use the ahistorical phrase factory model school to describe the series of changes that happened to American schools over the 19th century.

A Whig in Congress [ edit ] In the spring of 1848, he was elected to the United States Congress as a Whig to fill the vacancy caused by the death of John Quincy Adams . His first speech in that role was in advocacy of its right and duty to exclude slavery from the territories, and in a letter, in December of that year, he said: "I think the country is to experience serious times. Interference with slavery will excite civil commotion in the South. But it is best to interfere. Now is the time to see whether the Union is a rope of sand or a band of steel." [ 39 ] Again he said: "I really think if we insist upon passing the Wilmot proviso for the territories that the south—a part of them—will rebel; but I would pass it, rebellion or not. I consider no evil so great as the extension of slavery." [ 40 ] During the first session, he volunteered as counsel for Drayton and Sayres , who were indicted for stealing 76 slaves in the District of Columbia , and at the trial was engaged for 21 successive days in their defense. In 1850, he was engaged in a controversy with Daniel Webster concerning the extension of slavery and the Fugitive Slave Law , calling Webster's support for the Compromise of 1850 a "vile catastrophe", and comparing him to "Lucifer descending from Heaven".

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Mann was defeated by a single vote at the ensuing nominating convention by Webster's supporters; but, on appealing to the people as an independent anti-slavery candidate, he was re-elected, serving from April 1848 until March 1853.

Abolitionism [ edit ] Mann was a staunch opponent of slavery as a member of Congress; in a written address to an 1852 "Convention of the Colored Freemen of Ohio" he stated: "[t]hat slavery is to continue always, it would be the grossest atheism to affirm.  A belief in the existence of a just Governor of the Universe, includes a belief in the final and utter abolition of slavery." In the same address, he opposed plans to forcibly deport freedmen from the United States to other nations: "The idea of forcibly expelling the American born negro from the place of his birth and residence, and driving him out of the country against his will, is as abhorrent to my notions of justice and equality, as it can be to those of anyone.  The next most cruel thing to kidnapping a race of men, forcing them from their home and dooming them to slavery in a foreign land, would be the seizure of the descendants of that race, and driving them from the new home they had acquired.  So great a crime as this second expatriation would be, could hardly be conceived unless by a mind that had prepared itself for it by participating in the commission of the first." Mann considered there to be three legitimate methods by which the Africans in captivity in the US could emancipate themselves, including, as a last resort, that "such as our revolutionary fathers adopted against Great Britain [...] not only with the justification but with the approval of the civilized world.  For this there are two conditions: a sufficient degree of oppression to authorize an appeal to force, and a chance, on the part of the oppressed, of bettering their condition.  The measure of the first condition is already full - heaped up - running over.  The second condition will be fulfilled, either when the slaves believe they can obtain their freedom by force, or when they are so elevated and enlarged in their moral conceptions as to appreciate that glorious supplication of Patrick Henry , 'Give me liberty or give me death!'" Mann's preferred method for the self-emancipation of the slaves was that free blacks should voluntarily form all-black communities of their own - either in Jamaica or in another Caribbean nation - or perhaps in the American West - in which men like Frederick Douglass , Henry Bibb and Henry Box Brown "instead of making speeches might be making laws.  Instead of commanding the types of a newspaper press [...] might be commanding armies and navies" and could more effectively organize the liberation of their enslaved brethren in the U.S. from these strongholds.

[ 43 ] Leadership of Antioch College and last years [ edit ] Original daguerreotype of Rep. Mann (Mass.) from Mathew Brady 's studio, c.

1849 In September 1852, he was nominated for governor of Massachusetts by the Free Soil Party , and the same day was chosen president of the newly established Antioch College at Yellow Springs, Ohio . Failing in the election for governor, he accepted the presidency of the college, which he continued until his death. He taught economics, philosophy, and theology; he was popular with students and lay audiences across the Midwest who attended his lectures promoting public schools. Mann also employed the first female faculty member to be paid on an equal basis with her male colleagues, Rebecca Pennell , his niece. His commencement message to the class of 1859 was to "Be ashamed to die until you have won some victory for humanity".

[ 44 ] Antioch College was founded by the Christian Connexion , which later withdrew its financial support, causing the college to struggle for many years with meager financial resources due to sectarian infighting. Mann himself was charged with nonadherence to sectarianism because, previously a Congregationalist by upbringing, he joined the Unitarian Church .

Mann was also drawn to Antioch because it was a coeducational institution, among the first in the country to teach men and women in the same classes. Mann and his wife had conflicts with female students, however, who came to Yellow Springs in search of greater equality. The young women chafed at restrictions on their behavior and wanted to meet with men in literary societies, which Mann and his wife opposed.

[ 45 ] He collapsed shortly after the 1859 commencement and died that summer of typhoid fever . Antioch historian Robert Straker wrote that Mann had been "crucified by crusading sectarians." Ralph Waldo Emerson lamented "what seems the fatal waste of labor and life at Antioch." Mann's wife, who wrote in anguish that "the blood of martyrdom waters the spot," later disinterred his body from Yellow Springs.

[ 46 ] He is buried in the North Burial Ground in Providence, Rhode Island , [ 47 ] next to his first wife.

Legacy [ edit ] Historians treat Mann as one of the most important leaders of education reform in the antebellum period.

[ 2 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Commemoration [ edit ] Mann on a 1940 stamp from the Famous Americans series Many places around the world are named after Mann. Among them are more than 50 public schools in the United States.

[ 51 ] Statue of Horace Mann (1863) by Emma Stebbins Horace Mann's statue stands in front of the Massachusetts State House along with that of Daniel Webster .

At Antioch College, a monument carries his quote, which has been recently adopted as the college motto: "Be Ashamed to Die Until You Have Won Some Victory for Humanity." The University of Northern Colorado named the gates to their campus in his dedication, a gift of the Class of 1910.

[ 52 ] The Springfield, Illinois - based Illinois Education Association Mutual Insurance Company was renamed in honor of Mann in 1950 as the Horace Mann Educators Corporation .

Pittsburg State University in Pittsburg, Kansas , has a building named Horace Mann School. It currently houses the Student Welcoming Center.

In Massachusetts , public charter schools that are authorized by local school districts are known as Horace Mann charters.

Horace Mann School, the Bronx, New York City Brown University Graduate School awards an annual Horace Mann Medal to one of its alumni.

[ 53 ] At Diamond Fork Middle School, a Horace Mann celebration was held on May 4, 2011, the same day he was born.

Schools [ edit ] Horace Mann Elementary School, ( closed), (Kansas City, Kansas) "Horace Mann Elementary" . Archived from the original on May 12, 2010.

Horace Mann Elementary School, (Detroit, Michigan) Horace Mann Academy, Chicago, Illinois Horace Mann Elementary School, Anaheim, California Horace Mann Elementary School, Bakersfield, California Horace Mann Elementary School, Bayonne, New Jersey Horace Mann Elementary School, Beverly Hills, California Horace Mann Elementary School, Binghamton, New York Horace Mann Elementary School (closed), Canton, Ohio Horace Mann Elementary School, Cherry Hill, New Jersey Horace Mann Elementary School (closed), Clinton, Iowa Horace Mann Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio Horace Mann Elementary School, Duncan, Oklahoma Horace Mann Elementary School, Fargo, North Dakota Horace Mann Elementary School, Glendale, California Horace Mann Elementary School, Hominy, Oklahoma [ 54 ] Horace Mann Elementary School, Huntington, Indiana Horace Mann Elementary School, Indiana, Pennsylvania Horace Mann Elementary School, Iowa City, Iowa Horace Mann Elementary School, Lakewood, Ohio Horace Mann Elementary School, Melrose, Massachusetts Horace Mann Elementary School, Newton, Massachusetts Horace Mann Elementary School, North Bergen, New Jersey Horace Mann Elementary School, Oakland, California Horace Mann Elementary School, Oak Park, Illinois Horace Mann Elementary School, Ogden, Utah Horace Mann Elementary School, Ottumwa, Iowa Horace Mann Elementary School (closed), Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania [ 55 ] Horace Mann Elementary School, Rapid City, South Dakota [ 56 ] Horace Mann Elementary School, Redmond, Washington Horace Mann Elementary (now Lincoln K-8) School, Rochester, Minnesota Horace Mann Elementary School, Saint Paul, Minnesota Horace Mann Elementary School, San Jose, California Horace Mann Elementary School, Sedalia, Missouri Horace Mann Elementary School, Sioux Falls, South Dakota Horace Mann Elementary School, Springfield, Ohio Horace Mann Elementary School, St Joseph, Missouri Horace Mann Elementary School, Washington, D.C.

Horace Mann Elementary School, West Allis, Wisconsin Horace Mann K-8 Dual Language Magnet School, Wichita, Kansas Horace Mann Elementary School, Woodward, Oklahoma Horace Mann Lab School, Northwest Missouri State University , Maryville, Missouri Horace Mann Middle School, Abilene, Texas Horace Mann Middle School, Amarillo, Texas Horace Mann Junior School, Baytown, Texas [ 57 ] Horace Mann Middle School, Brandon, Florida Horace Mann Middle School, Charleston, West Virginia Horace Mann Middle School, Colorado Springs, Colorado Horace Mann Middle School, El Portal, Florida Horace Mann Middle School, Franklin, Massachusetts Horace Mann Middle School, Neenah, Wisconsin Horace Mann Middle School, North Fond Du Lac, Wisconsin Horace Mann Middle School, San Diego, California Horace Mann Hall, Pittsburg State University, Pittsburg, Kansas Horace Mann Middle School, Sheboygan, Wisconsin Horace Mann Middle School, Wausau, Wisconsin [ 58 ] Horace Mann High School, North Fond du Lac, Wisconsin Horace Mann School , Bronx, New York Horace Mann School, Amesbury, Massachusetts Horace Mann School, Seattle, Washington Horace Mann School, Salem, Massachusetts Horace Mann School for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing , Allston, Massachusetts Mann Arts and Science Magnet Middle School , Little Rock, Arkansas Mann Elementary School, Long Beach, California Mann Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri Mann Elementary School, Tacoma, Washington P.S. 90 - Horace Mann, Queens, New York Trevista at Horace Mann Elementary School, Denver, CO Buena Vista Horace Mann K-8, San Francisco, California Horace Mann House at Brown University , Mann's alma mater College and university buildings [ edit ] Horace Mann Auditorium, Bridgewater State University , Bridgewater, Massachusetts Horace Mann Building, East Central University in Ada, Oklahoma Horace Mann Building, Pittsburg State University , Pittsburg, Kansas Horace Mann Center, Westfield State University in Westfield, Massachusetts Horace Mann Hall, Teachers College, Columbia University , New York City Horace Mann Hall, Framingham State University , Framingham, Massachusetts Horace Mann Hall, Rhode Island College , Providence, Rhode Island Horace Mann House , Brown University , Providence, Rhode Island Works [ edit ] A Few Thoughts for a Young Man (Boston, 1850) Slavery: Letters and Speeches (1851) Powers and Duties of Woman (1853) Sermons (1861) Life and Complete Works of Horace Mann (2 vols., Cambridge, 1869) Thoughts Selected from the Writings of Horace Mann (1869) The Case for Public Schools Mann, Horace.

The Life and Works of Horace Mann , with an introduction by his second wife, Mary Peabody Mann .

See also [ edit ] History of education in Massachusetts References [ edit ] ^ Carleton, David (2009).

"Horace Mann" .

^ a b c Groen, Mark (Spring–Summer 2008). "The Whig Party and the Rise of Common Schools, 1837–1854".

American Educational History Journal .

35 (1/2): 251– 260.

^ Good, Thomas L. (2008).

21st century education: a reference handbook . p. 267.

^ Yale University (1921).

Obiturary Record of Graduates . Tuttle, Morehouse & Taylor Company. p. 579.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2023 . Retrieved April 25, 2021 .

^ a b "Horace Mann | American educator" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2017 . Retrieved May 1, 2017 .

^ Altenbaugh, Richard J., ed. (1999).

Historical dictionary of American education . Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0-313-28590-5 .

^ a b Tarbell, Isa Arlington (1900).

"Mann, Horace" . In Wilson, J. G.

; Fiske, J.

(eds.).

Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography . New York: D. Appleton.

^ McFarland, Philip (2004).

Hawthorne in Concord . New York: Grove Press. p.

72 .

ISBN 0-8021-1776-7 .

^ "Horace Mann | Biography & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on June 25, 2020 . Retrieved April 26, 2020 .

^ "Samuel Barrett" .

uudb.org .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2020 . Retrieved April 26, 2020 .

^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Mann, Horace ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 17 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 587.

^ Catalogue of the Litchfield Law School . Hartford, Connecticut: Press of Case, Tiffany and Company. 1849.

^ a b Parr 2009 , p. 39.

^ Hanson 1976 , p. 225.

^ Mondale, Sarah (2001).

School: The Story of American Public Education . New York: Beacon.

^ McFarland, Philip (2004).

Hawthorne in Concord . New York: Grove Press. p.

73 .

ISBN 0-8021-1776-7 .

^ "Allen Family Papers 1846-1915" .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2018 . Retrieved June 14, 2018 .

^ "Horace Mann Papers" .

Massachusetts Historical Society .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2018 . Retrieved June 14, 2018 .

^ Maris A. Vinovskis, "Horace Mann on the Economic Productivity of Education." New England Quarterly (1970) 43#4 pp. 550–571.

online ^ Hinsdale (1898).

^ Mintz, S.; McNeil, S. (2016).

"The Struggle for Public Schools" .

Digital History .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 11, 2015 .

^ Eisenmann, Linda (1988).

Historical dictionary of women's education in the United States . p. 259.

^ S., Sugg, Redding (1978).

Motherteacher : the feminization of American education . Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.

ISBN 0813907578 .

OCLC 3708082 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Glenn, Myra (1984).

Campaigns Against Corporal Punishment . SUNY Press. pp.

104– 6.

ISBN 0-87395-813-6 .

^ Monsma, Stephen V.; Soper, J. Christopher (September 5, 2008). "2. The United States".

The Challenge of Pluralism: Church and State in Five Democracies . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. pp.

18– 22.

ISBN 9780742557406 .

^ Mann, Horace (1849).

Twelfth Annual Report for 1848 of the Secretary of the Board of Education of Massachusetts . pp. 116, 177, 121, 122.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2020 .

^ Dana., Goldstein (2015).

The teacher wars: a history of America's most embattled profession (First Anchor books ed.). New York.

ISBN 9780345803627 .

OCLC 895117195 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Massachusetts Board of Education (1838) [Covering the year 1837].

Annual Report of the Board of Education . pp. 14, 15.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2020 .

^ a b c d e Ravitch, Diane (2000). "Chapter 9: The great meltdown".

Left back: a century of failed school reforms . Simon & Schuster. pp.

356– 357.

ISBN 0-684-84417-6 .

^ Mathews, Mitford (1966). "From a lecture delivered by Mann in 1841".

Teaching to Read, Historically Considered . The University of Chicago Press. pp.

76– 81.

ASIN B000Z58E5S .

^ a b Millichap, Nancy (1986).

"Dyslexia, theories of causation and methods of management: an historical perspective" . Loyola University Chicago.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Emily Hanford (September 10, 2018).

"Hard Words: Why aren't kids being taught to read?" . APM.

Archived from the original on June 2, 2020 . Retrieved June 18, 2020 .

^ Altenbaugh, Richard J., ed. (1999).

Historical dictionary of American education . Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0-313-28590-5 .

^ "Annual reports on education / by Horace Mann" .

HathiTrust . Retrieved April 1, 2025 .

^ Peterson, Paul E. (2010).

Saving Schools: From Horace Mann to Virtual Learning . pp.

21– 36.

^ Messerli, Jonathan (1972).

Horace Mann: A Biography .

^ Cubberley, Ellwood P. (1919).

Public Education in the United States . p. 167.

^ Groen, Mark (2008). "The Whig Party and the Rise of Common Schools, 1837–1854".

American Educational History Journal .

35 (1/2): 251– 260.

^ Mann, Horace (1848).

Speech of Horace Mann, on the right of Congress to legislate for the territories of the United States, and its duty to exclude slavery therefrom . Boston: William B. Fowle.

^ James Ford Rhodes, History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 to the Mckinley-Bryan Campaign of 1896 (1892) vol 1, Page 132.

online ^ "U.S. Senate: Speech Costs Senator His Seat" .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2017 . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ Kennedy (2004).

Profiles in Courage . pp.

69– 70.

^ Mann, Horace (December 31, 1851).

"Letter, Horace Mann to 1852 Convention of the Colored Freemen of Ohio" .

Special Collections and University Archives, University of Massachusetts Amherst Libraries: W.E.B. Du Bois Papers . David Graham Du Bois Trust. pp.

19– 23.

Archived from the original on January 30, 2022 . Retrieved January 30, 2022 .

However disastrous may be the result of the first, or the tenth, or the hundredth struggle on the part of the slave; however many of the colored Hancocks and Adams' of that revolution may be singled out for vengeance and placed beyond the reach of pardon [...] each death will be transfigured into a multitude of more glorious lives, and for every drop of heroic blood which the earth shall drink, it will send back an armed man.

^ "Antioch College - Winning Victories Grant" .

alumni.antiochcollege.edu .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2019 . Retrieved April 26, 2020 .

^ Rury, John; Harper, Glenn (Winter 1986). "Mann and Women at Antioch".

History of Education Quarterly .

26 (4): 481.

doi : 10.2307/369009 .

JSTOR 369009 .

S2CID 144827867 .

^ Clark, Burton R. (1970).

The Distinctive College . Adline Publishing Co. p. 16.

^ Horace Mann ^ Finkelstein, Barbara (Winter 1990). "Perfecting Childhood: Horace Mann and the Origins of Public Education in the United States".

Biography .

13 (1): 6– 20.

doi : 10.1353/bio.2010.0400 .

S2CID 144976387 .

^ Hunt, Thomas C. (2005).

Moral Education in America's Schools . pp.

31– 48.

^ Downs, R. B. (1974).

Horace Mann: Champion of the Public Schools .

^ "Search for Public Schools - Search Results" .

nces.ed.gov .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2021 . Retrieved June 19, 2021 .

^ "University History: A Photographic History of UNC" . University of Northern Colorado. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016.

^ "Horace Mann Medal | Graduate School" .

www.brown.edu .

Archived from the original on May 31, 2022 . Retrieved June 6, 2022 .

^ "Horace Mann Elementary" . Hominy Public Schools. Archived from the original on April 15, 2017 . Retrieved April 14, 2017 .

^ "What Happens When A Neighborhood Loses Its School?" .

90.5 WESA . October 24, 2018.

Archived from the original on June 24, 2021 . Retrieved June 19, 2021 .

^ "Pages - default" .

public.rcas.org .

Archived from the original on April 13, 2019 . Retrieved April 13, 2019 .

^ "Horace Mann Junior High School Home Page" .

Goose Creek Independent School District .

Archived from the original on December 31, 2021 . Retrieved December 31, 2021 .

^ "Middle Schools - Wausau School District" .

www.wausauschools.org . Archived from the original on September 2, 2014.

Works cited [ edit ] Hanson, Robert Brand (1976).

Dedham, Massachusetts, 1635-1890 . Dedham Historical Society.

Parr, James L. (2009).

Dedham: Historic and Heroic Tales From Shiretown . The History Press.

ISBN 978-1-59629-750-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Cremin, Lawrence A.

American Education: The National Experience (1982).

Curti, Merle.

The Social Ideas of American Educators (1935) pp. 101–38 online Downs, Robert B.

Horace Mann: Champion of the Public Schools (1974) online Finkelstein, Barbara. "Perfecting Childhood: Horace Mann and the Origins of Public Education in the United States," Biography, Winter 1990, Vol. 13#1 pp. 6–20 Hinsdale, Burke A.

Horace Mann and the Common School Revival in the United States (New York, 1898), in the Great Educators series online Kalvin, Louis. "The Educational Philosophy of Horace Mann" (PhD dissertation, New York University; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  1936 7303222).

Kendall, Kathleen Edgerton. "Education as 'The Balance Wheel of Social Machinery': Horace Mann's Arguments and Proofs," Quarterly Journal of Speech (1968) 54#1 pp. 13–21.

Messerli, Jonathan.

Horace Mann; a biography (1972) online , a standard scholarly biography Messerli, Jonathan. "The Early Education of Horace Mann: Home, Meeting House, and Village" Historian (1967) 29#3.

Murphy, Garry Paul.  "Professional development of Massachusetts school teachers: An examination of the Horace Mann Teacher Program" (PhD dissertation, Boston College; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1990. 9101677).

Peterson, Paul E.

Saving schools: From Horace Mann to Virtual Learning (Harvard University Press, 2010) Stornello, Joe Allen. "Horace Mann and twentieth-century educational historians: Problems of ideology and knowledge in historical texts" (PhD dissertation, University of Missouri - Kansas City; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  1998. 9900319).

Taylor, Bob Pepperman.

Horace Mann's Troubling Legacy: The Education of Democratic Citizens (University Press of Kansas, 2010).

Vinovskis, Maris A. "Horace Mann on the Economic Productivity of Education," New England Quarterly (1970) 43#4 pp. 550–571.

online Whiting, George C. "Horace Mann: A comparison of a traditional and a revisionist biography" (PhD dissertation,   The College of William and Mary; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1989. 8923063).

Woodworth, Jed.  "Horace Mann and the Revolution in American Childhood" (PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin - Madison; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  2016. 10190139).

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Horace Mann .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Horace Mann .

United States Congress.

"Horace Mann (id: M000102)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Mission & History. (2017). Retrieved from http://www.antiochcollege.edu/about/mission_and_history.html Archived June 6, 2017, at the Wayback Machine The Horace Mann Center Archived August 21, 2018, at the Wayback Machine at Westfield State College Horace Mann on Education and National Welfare at the Wayback Machine (archived December 17, 2016) Mann's contribution's to education at the Wayback Machine (archived December 6, 2013) Works by Horace Mann at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Party political offices Preceded by John G. Palfrey Free Soil nominee for Governor of Massachusetts 1852 Succeeded by Henry Wilson U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by John Quincy Adams Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts's 8th congressional district April 3, 1848 – March 3, 1853 Succeeded by Tappan Wentworth v t e Presidents of the Massachusetts Senate Cushing Powell Adams S. Phillips Adams Cobb Otis J. Bacon S. Dana Otis S. Dana J. Phillips Silsbee Mills S. Leland Lathrop Fowler Saltonstall Thorndike Pickman Bliss Mann M. Lawrence King Quincy P. Leland Robinson Quincy Lincoln Calhoun Scudder Bell Wilder Wilson Warren Cook Benchley Baker Upham Phelps Claflin Clifford Field Pond Brastow Pitman Brastow H. Coolidge Loring Cogswell Bishop Crocker Bruce Pillsbury Boardman Hartwell Sprague Pinkerton Butler G. Lawrence Smith Soule Jones W. Dana Chapple Treadway Greenwood C. Coolidge H. Wells McKnight Allen W. Wells G. Bacon Fish Moran Wragg Cotton Goodwin Hunt A. Coolidge Nicholson Richardson Dolan Richardson Furbush Holmes Powers Donahue Harrington Bulger Birmingham Travaglini Murray Rosenberg Chandler Spilka v t e Members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts 1st district F. Ames Dexter Goodhue Holten Sedgwick Skinner Sedgwick J. Bacon Eustis Quincy Ward Jr.

Mason Gorham Webster Gorham N. Appleton Gorham A. Lawrence Fletcher A. Lawrence Winthrop N. Appleton Winthrop S. Eliot W. Appleton Scudder T. D. Eliot Hall T. D. Eliot Buffington Crapo R. Davis Randall Wright G. Lawrence Treadway Heselton Conte Olver Neal 2nd district Goodhue Foster W. Lyman Sedgwick Ward Sr.

W. Lyman Shepard J. Crowninshield Story Pickman W. Reed Pickering Silsbee Barstow B. Crowninshield Choate Phillips Saltonstall D. King Rantoul Fay Crocker Buffington O. Ames Harris Long E. Morse Gillett Churchill Bowles Kaynor Granfield Clason Furcolo Boland Neal McGovern 3rd district Gerry Bourne Coffin S. Lyman Mattoon Cutler Nelson Livermore White Pickering Nelson Varnum Nelson Osgood Cushing A. Abbott Duncan Edmands Damrell C. Adams Thomas A. Rice Twichell Whiting I Pierce Field B. Dean Field Ranney L. Morse J. Andrew Walker J. R. Thayer R. Hoar C. Washburn J. A. Thayer Wilder Paige F. Foss Casey Philbin Drinan Donohue Early Blute McGovern N. Tsongas Trahan 4th district Sedgwick Dearborn G. Thatcher Wadsworth Foster L. Lincoln Sr.

Hastings Varnum W. Richardson Dana Stearns Fuller E. Everett Sa. Hoar Parmenter Thompson Palfrey Thompson Sabine Walley Comins A. Rice Hooper Frost J. Abbott L. Morse Collins O'Neil Apsley Weymouth Tirrell Mitchell Wilder Winslow Stobbs P. Holmes Donohue Drinan Frank Kennedy III Auchincloss 5th district Partridge Bourne Freeman L. Williams T. Dwight Ely Mills Lathrop Sibley J. Davis L. Lincoln Jr.

Hudson C. Allen W. Appleton Burlingame W. Appleton Hooper Alley Butler Gooch Banks Bowman L. Morse Hayden Banks Sh. Hoar Stevens Knox B. Ames J. Rogers E. Rogers B. Morse Cronin P. Tsongas Shannon Atkins Meehan N. Tsongas Markey Clark 6th district G. Thatcher Leonard J. Reed Sr.

J. Smith Taggart S. Allen Locke Kendall Grennell Alvord Baker Ashmun G. Davis Upham T. Davis Alley Gooch Banks Butler Thompson Loring Stone Lovering Lodge Cogswell Moody Gardner Lufkin A.P. Andrew G. Bates W. Bates Harrington Mavroules Torkildsen Tierney Moulton 7th district Leonard Ward Sr.

Leonard Bullock Bishop Mitchell Barker Baylies Turner Baylies Hulbert Shaw H. Dwight S. Allen Grennell Briggs J. Rockwell Goodrich Banks Gooch Boutwell Brooks Esty E. Hoar Tarbox Butler W. Russell Stone Cogswell W. Everett Barrett Roberts Phelan Maloney W. Connery L. Connery Lane Macdonald Markey Capuano Pressley 8th district Grout G. Thatcher F. Ames Otis Eustis L. Williams Green Gardner Green J. Reed Jr.

Baylies Sampson Hobart Lathrop Bates Calhoun J. Adams Mann Wentworth Knapp Train Baldwin G. Hoar J. M. S. Williams Warren Claflin Candler W Russell C. H. Allen Greenhalge Stevens McCall Deitrick Dallinger H. Thayer Dallinger Healey Goodwin Macdonald O'Neill Kennedy II Capuano Lynch 9th district Varnum Bishop J. Dean Wheaton J. Reed Jr.

Folger J. Reed Jr.

H. Dwight Briggs Jackson Hastings H. Williams Hale Fowler Little De Witt E. Thayer Bailey A. Walker W. Washburn Crocker G. Hoar W. Rice T. Lyman Ely Burnett Candler G. Williams O'Neil Fitzgerald Conry Keliher Murray Roberts Fuller Underhill Luce R. Russell Luce T. H. Eliot Gifford Nicholson Keith McCormack Hicks Moakley Lynch Keating 10th district Goodhue Sewall Read Hastings Upham J. Allen Brigham Wheaton Morton F Baylies Bailey H. A. S. Dearborn W. Baylies Borden H. Williams Borden Burnell Grinnell Scudder Dickinson Chaffee Delano Dawes Crocker Stevens Seelye Norcross W. Rice J. E. Russell J. Walker McEttrick Atwood Barrows Naphen McNary O'Connell Curley Murray Tague Fitzgerald Tague Douglass Tinkham Herter Curtis Martin Heckler Studds Delahunt Keating 11th district Bradbury Bartlett Cutler Stedman A. Bigelow Brigham B. Adams J. Russell Hobart J. Richardson J. Adams J. Reed Jr.

Burnell Goodrich Trafton Dawes Chapin Robinson Whiting II Wallace Coolidge Draper Sprague Powers Sullivan Peters Tinkham Douglass Higgins Flaherty Curley Kennedy O'Neill Burke Donnelly 12th district H. Dearborn I. Parker Lee S. Thatcher Skinner Larned Bidwell Bacon Dewey Hulbert Strong Kendall L. Bigelow Baylies Hodges J. Adams Robinson F. Rockwell Crosby E. Morse Lovering Powers Weeks Curley Gallivan McCormack Keith Studds 13th district Wadsworth Seaver Ruggles Dowse Eustis J. Reed Jr.

Randall Simpkins Greene Weeks Mitchell Carter Luce Wigglesworth Burke 14th district G. Thatcher Cutts C. King J. Holmes Lovering E. Foss Harris Gilmore Olney Frothingham Wigglesworth Martin 15th district Wadsworth Ilsley Whitman Widgery Bradbury Whitman Greene Leach Martin Gifford 16th district S. Thatcher Cook Tallman S. Davis Brown Orr Hill Thacher Walsh Gifford 17th district Bruce Chandler Gannett F. Carr Wood J. Carr Wilson Kinsley 18th district Wilson T. Rice J. Parker 19th district J. Parker Conner Gage Cushman 20th district Hubbard Parris E. Lincoln At-large Cobb v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Italy Spain Netherlands Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dmmfj
Cached time: 20250817043630
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.189 seconds
Real time usage: 1.390 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20308/1000000
Revision size: 55590/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 259939/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15655/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 235923/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.609/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11835347/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1124.183      1 -total
 25.96%  291.890      1 Template:Reflist
 21.85%  245.639      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 13.67%  153.717     22 Template:Cite_web
 11.15%  125.359      3 Template:Navbox
 11.14%  125.201     27 Template:Cite_book
  9.69%  108.961     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office
  6.23%   70.088      1 Template:Short_description
  5.84%   65.678      1 Template:Presidents_of_the_Massachusetts_Senate
  5.84%   65.638     23 Template:Ushr Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:177530:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043630 and revision id 1303495787. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Horace_Mann&oldid=1303495787 " Categories : 1796 births 1859 deaths Abolitionists from Ohio American educational theorists American Unitarians Antioch College Bridgewater State University Brown University alumni Burials at North Burying Ground (Providence) Democratic education Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Litchfield Law School alumni Massachusetts Free Soilers Massachusetts state senators Members of the Massachusetts House of Representatives People from Franklin, Massachusetts People from Yellow Springs, Ohio Presidents of Antioch College Presidents of the Massachusetts Senate Whig Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts Educators from Dedham, Massachusetts 19th-century American educators 19th-century members of the Massachusetts General Court 19th-century members of the United States House of Representatives Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Appleton's Cyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: location missing publisher All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 09:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Horace Mann 27 languages Add topic

