Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Growing block universe 4 languages Español 한국어 Română Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Block universe or Eternalism (philosophy of time) .

Past and present exist while the future does not The growing block universe , or the growing block view , is a theory of time arguing that the past and present both exist, while the future does not yet exist. The present is the perpetuating factor of time, where new moments are added to the past. By the passage of time more of the world comes into being; therefore, the block universe is said to be growing. The growth of the block is supposed to happen in the present, a very thin slice of spacetime , where more of spacetime is continually coming into being. Growing block theory should not be confused with block universe theory , also known as eternalism.

The growing block view is an alternative to both eternalism (according to which past, present, and future all exist) and presentism (according to which only the present exists). It is held to be closer to common-sense intuitions than the alternatives.

C. D. Broad was a proponent of the theory (1923). Some modern defenders are Michael Tooley (in 1997) and Peter Forrest (in 2004).

Fabrice Correia and Sven Rosenkranz (2015) have developed their own distinctive view of this theory.

[ clarification needed ] Overview [ edit ] Broad first proposed the theory in 1923. He described the theory as follows: It will be observed that such a theory as this accepts the reality of the present and the past, but holds that the future is simply nothing at all. Nothing has happened to the present by becoming past except that fresh slices of existence have been added to the total history of the world. The past is thus as real as the present. On the other hand, the essence of a present event is, not that it precedes future events, but that there is quite literally nothing to which it has the relation of precedence. The sum total of existence is always increasing, and it is this which gives the time-series a sense as well as an order.  A moment t is later than a moment t' if the sum total of existence at t includes the sum total of existence at t' together with something more.

[ 1 ] This dynamic theory of time conforms with the common-sense intuition that the past is fixed, the future is unreal, and the present is constantly changing. The theory resolves the paradox that time has a beginning but does not seem to have an end. There are also other reasons for supporting the growing block view of time that go beyond the common-sense. For example, Tooley bases his argument on the causal relation. His main argument as outlined by Dainton is as follows: [ 2 ] Events in our world are causally related.

The causal relation is inherently asymmetrical. Effects depend on their causes in a way that causes do not depend on their effects.

This asymmetry is only possible if a cause's effects are not real as of the time of their cause.

Causes occur before their effects. "X is earlier than Y" means roughly that some event simultaneous with X causes some event simultaneous with Y.

Our universe must therefore be a growing block.

Criticism [ edit ] This section includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this section by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the 21st century, several philosophers, such as David Braddon-Mitchell (2004), Craig Bourne, and Trenton Merricks , observed that if the growing block view is correct then it must be concluded that it is unknown whether now is now. The first occurrence of "now" is an indexical and the second occurrence of "now" is the objective tensed property . Their observation implies the following sentence: "This part of spacetime has the property of being present." For example, Socrates discussing in the past with Gorgias , and at the same time thinking that the discussion is occurring now. According to the growing block view, tense is a real property of the world so his thought is about now, the objective present. He thinks tenselessly that his thought is occurring on the edge of being but is wrong because he is in the past; he does not know that now is now, yet how can one be sure they are not in the same position. As there is nothing special with Socrates, it cannot be know whether now is now. Some argued that there is an ontological distinction between the past and the present. For instance, Forrest (2004) argues that although there exists a past, it is lifeless and inactive. Consciousness, as well as the flow of time, is not active within the past and can only occur at the boundary of the block universe in which the present exists in all existence.

See also [ edit ] An Experiment with Time , which proposes a similar concept Eternity Philosophy of space and time References [ edit ] ^ Broad, C. D. (2002).

Scientific Thought . London: Routledge. pp.

66– 67.

^ Dainton, Barry (2010).

Time and Space (Second ed.). Durham: Acumen Publishing Limited. p. 77.

Bibliography [ edit ] Broad, C. D.

(1923).

Scientific Thought (pdf) . New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co.

Tooley, Michael (1997).

Time, Tense, and Causation (PDF) . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198235798 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 October 2016 . Retrieved 30 August 2016 .

Bourne, Craig (2002). "When am I?".

Australasian Journal of Philosophy .

80 (3): 359– 71.

doi : 10.1080/713659472 .

hdl : 2299/8627 .

S2CID 169173490 .

Braddon-Mitchell, David (2004). "How do we know it is now now?".

Analysis .

64 (283): 199– 203.

doi : 10.1111/j.0003-2638.2004.00485.x .

Forrest, Peter (2004). "The real but dead past: a reply to Braddon-Mitchell".

Analysis .

64 (284): 358– 62.

doi : 10.1111/j.0003-2638.2004.00510.x .

Merricks, Trenton (2006). Zimmerman, Dean (ed.).

Good-Bye Growing Block (PDF) . Oxford Studies in Metaphysics. Vol. 2. Oxford University Press. p. 103.

ISBN 9780199290598 .

External links [ edit ] "Time" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

UTM .

v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Growing_block_universe&oldid=1290922543 " Categories : Concepts in metaphysics Conceptual models Philosophy of time Theories of time Time Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2022 Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 17 May 2025, at 23:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Growing block universe 4 languages Add topic

