Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early history 1.2 Naive set theory 2 Basic concepts and notation 3 Ontology 4 Formalized set theory 5 Applications 6 Areas of study Toggle Areas of study subsection 6.1 Combinatorial set theory 6.2 Descriptive set theory 6.3 Fuzzy set theory 6.4 Inner model theory 6.5 Large cardinals 6.6 Determinacy 6.7 Forcing 6.8 Cardinal invariants 6.9 Set-theoretic topology 7 Controversy 8 Mathematical education 9 See also 10 Notes 11 Citations 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Set theory 119 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Furlan Gaeilge Galego Gĩkũyũ 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Axiomatic set theory ) Branch of mathematics that studies sets This article is about the branch of mathematics. For other uses, see Set theory (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Set theory (music) .

A Venn diagram illustrating the intersection of two sets Part of a series on Mathematics History Index Areas Number theory Geometry Algebra Calculus and Analysis Discrete mathematics Logic Set theory Probability Statistics and Decision theory Relationship with sciences Physics Chemistry Geosciences Computation Biology Linguistics Economics Philosophy Education Mathematics Portal v t e Set theory is the branch of mathematical logic that studies sets , which can be informally described as collections of objects. Although objects of any kind can be collected into a set, set theory – as a branch of mathematics – is mostly concerned with those that are relevant to mathematics as a whole.

The modern study of set theory was initiated by the German mathematicians Richard Dedekind and Georg Cantor in the 1870s. In particular, Georg Cantor is commonly considered the founder of set theory. The non-formalized systems investigated during this early stage go under the name of naive set theory . After the discovery of paradoxes within naive set theory (such as Russell's paradox , Cantor's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox ), various axiomatic systems were proposed in the early twentieth century, of which Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (with or without the axiom of choice ) is still the best-known and most studied.

Set theory is commonly employed as a foundational system for the whole of mathematics, particularly in the form of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice. Besides its foundational role, set theory also provides the framework to develop a mathematical theory of infinity , and has various applications in computer science (such as in the theory of relational algebra ), philosophy , formal semantics , and evolutionary dynamics . Its foundational appeal, together with its paradoxes , and its implications for the concept of infinity and its multiple applications have made set theory an area of major interest for logicians and philosophers of mathematics . Contemporary research into set theory covers a vast array of topics, ranging from the structure of the real number line to the study of the consistency of large cardinals .

History [ edit ] Early history [ edit ] Porphyrian tree by Purchotius (1730), presenting Aristotle 's Categories The basic notion of grouping objects has existed since at least the emergence of numbers , and the notion of treating sets as their own objects has existed since at least the Tree of Porphyry in 3rd-century AD. The simplicity and ubiquity of sets makes it hard to determine the origin of sets as now used in mathematics; however, Bernard Bolzano 's Paradoxes of the Infinite ( Paradoxien des Unendlichen , 1851) is generally considered the first rigorous introduction of sets to mathematics. In his work, he (among other things) expanded on Galileo's paradox , and introduced one-to-one correspondence of infinite sets, for example between the intervals [ 0 , 5 ] {\displaystyle [0,5]} and [ 0 , 12 ] {\displaystyle [0,12]} by the relation 5 y = 12 x {\displaystyle 5y=12x} . However, he resisted saying these sets were equinumerous , and his work is generally considered to have been uninfluential in mathematics of his time.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Before mathematical set theory, basic concepts of infinity were considered to be in the domain of philosophy (see: Infinity (philosophy) and Infinity § History ). Since the 5th century BC, beginning with Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea in the West (and early Indian mathematicians in the East), mathematicians had struggled with the concept of infinity. With the development of calculus in the late 17th century, philosophers began to generally distinguish between potential and actual infinity , wherein mathematics was only considered in the latter.

[ 3 ] Carl Friedrich Gauss famously stated: "Infinity is nothing more than a figure of speech which helps us talk about limits. The notion of a completed infinity doesn't belong in mathematics." [ 4 ] Development of mathematical set theory was motivated by several mathematicians.

Bernhard Riemann 's lecture On the Hypotheses which lie at the Foundations of Geometry (1854) proposed new ideas about topology . His lectures also introduced the concept of basing mathematics in terms of sets or manifolds in the sense of a class (which he called Mannigfaltigkeit ) now called point-set topology . The lecture was published by Richard Dedekind in 1868, along with Riemann's paper on trigonometric series (which presented the Riemann integral ), The latter was a starting point a movement in real analysis for the study of “seriously” discontinuous functions . A young Georg Cantor entered into this area, which led him to the study of point-sets . Around 1871, influenced by Riemann, Dedekind began working with sets in his publications, which dealt very clearly and precisely with equivalence relations , partitions of sets , and homomorphisms . Thus, many of the usual set-theoretic procedures of twentieth-century mathematics go back to his work. However, he did not publish a formal explanation of his set theory until 1888.

Naive set theory [ edit ] Main article: Naive set theory Georg Cantor , 1894 Set theory, as understood by modern mathematicians, is generally considered to be founded by a single paper in 1874 by Georg Cantor titled On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In his paper, he developed the notion of cardinality , comparing the sizes of two sets by setting them in one-to-one correspondence. His "revolutionary discovery" was that the set of all real numbers is uncountable , that is, one cannot put all real numbers in a list. This theorem is proved using Cantor's first uncountability proof , which differs from the more familiar proof using his diagonal argument .

Cantor introduced fundamental constructions in set theory, such as the power set of a set A , which is the set of all possible subsets of A . He later proved that the size of the power set of A is strictly larger than the size of A , even when A is an infinite set; this result soon became known as Cantor's theorem . Cantor developed a theory of transfinite numbers , called cardinals and ordinals , which extended the arithmetic of the natural numbers. His notation for the cardinal numbers was the Hebrew letter ℵ ℵ {\displaystyle \aleph } ( ℵ , aleph ) with a natural number subscript; for the ordinals he employed the Greek letter ω ω {\displaystyle \omega } ( ω , omega ).

Set theory was beginning to become an essential ingredient of the new “modern” approach to mathematics. Originally, Cantor's theory of transfinite numbers was regarded as counter-intuitive – even shocking. This caused it to encounter resistance from mathematical contemporaries such as Leopold Kronecker and Henri Poincaré and later from Hermann Weyl and L. E. J. Brouwer , while Ludwig Wittgenstein raised philosophical objections (see: Controversy over Cantor's theory ).

[ a ] Dedekind's algebraic style only began to find followers in the 1890s.

Gottlob Frege , c.

1879 Despite the controversy, Cantor's set theory gained remarkable ground around the turn of the 20th century with the work of several notable mathematicians and philosophers. Richard Dedekind, around the same time, began working with sets in his publications, and famously constructing the real numbers using Dedekind cuts . He also worked with Giuseppe Peano in developing the Peano axioms , which formalized natural-number arithmetic, using set-theoretic ideas, which also introduced the epsilon symbol for set membership . Possibly most prominently, Gottlob Frege began to develop his Foundations of Arithmetic .

In his work, Frege tries to ground all mathematics in terms of logical axioms using Cantor's cardinality. For example, the sentence "the number of horses in the barn is four" means that four objects fall under the concept horse in the barn . Frege attempted to explain our grasp of numbers through cardinality ('the number of...', or N x : F x {\displaystyle Nx:Fx} ), relying on Hume's principle .

Bertrand Russell , 1936 However, Frege's work was short-lived, as it was found by Bertrand Russell that his axioms lead to a contradiction . Specifically, Frege's Basic Law V (now known as the axiom schema of unrestricted comprehension ). According to Basic Law V , for any sufficiently well-defined property , there is the set of all and only the objects that have that property. The contradiction, called Russell's paradox , is shown as follows: Let R be the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. (This set is sometimes called "the Russell set".)  If R is not a member of itself, then its definition entails that it is a member of itself; yet, if it is a member of itself, then it is not a member of itself, since it is the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. The resulting contradiction is Russell's paradox. In symbols: Let R = { x ∣ ∣ x ∉ x } , then R ∈ ∈ R ⟺ ⟺ R ∉ R {\displaystyle {\text{Let }}R=\{x\mid x\not \in x\}{\text{, then }}R\in R\iff R\not \in R} This came around a time of several paradoxes or counter-intuitive results. For example, that the parallel postulate cannot be proved, the existence of mathematical objects that cannot be computed or explicitly described, and the existence of theorems of arithmetic that cannot be proved with Peano arithmetic . The result was a foundational crisis of mathematics .

Basic concepts and notation [ edit ] Main articles: Set (mathematics) and Algebra of sets Set theory begins with a fundamental binary relation between an object o and a set A . If o is a member (or element ) of A , the notation o ∈ A is used. A set is described by listing elements separated by commas, or by a characterizing property of its elements, within braces { }.

[ 8 ] Since sets are objects, the membership relation can relate sets as well, i.e., sets themselves can be members of other sets.

A derived binary relation between two sets is the subset relation, also called set inclusion . If all the members of set A are also members of set B , then A is a subset of B , denoted A ⊆ B . For example, {1, 2} is a subset of {1, 2, 3} , and so is {2} but {1, 4} is not. As implied by this definition, a set is a subset of itself. For cases where this possibility is unsuitable or would make sense to be rejected, the term proper subset is defined, variously denoted A ⊂ ⊂ B {\displaystyle A\subset B} , A ⊊ ⊊ B {\displaystyle A\subsetneq B} , or A ⫋ ⫋ B {\displaystyle A\subsetneqq B} (note however that the notation A ⊂ ⊂ B {\displaystyle A\subset B} is sometimes used synonymously with A ⊆ ⊆ B {\displaystyle A\subseteq B} ; that is, allowing the possibility that A and B are equal).  We call A a proper subset of B if and only if A is a subset of B , but A is not equal to B . Also, 1, 2, and 3 are members (elements) of the set {1, 2, 3} , but are not subsets of it; and in turn, the subsets, such as {1} , are not members of the set {1, 2, 3} . More complicated relations can exist; for example, the set {1} is both a member and a proper subset of the set {1, {1}} .

Just as arithmetic features binary operations on numbers , set theory features binary operations on sets.

[ 9 ] The following is a partial list of them: Union of the sets A and B , denoted A ∪ B , is the set of all objects that are a member of A , or B , or both.

[ 10 ] For example, the union of {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} is the set {1, 2, 3, 4} .

Intersection of the sets A and B , denoted A ∩ B , is the set of all objects that are members of both A and B .

[ 11 ] For example, the intersection of {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} is the set {2, 3} .

Set difference of U and A , denoted U ∖ A , is the set of all members of U that are not members of A .

[ 12 ] The set difference {1, 2, 3} ∖ {2, 3, 4} is {1} , while conversely, the set difference {2, 3, 4} ∖ {1, 2, 3} is {4} . When A is a subset of U , the set difference U ∖ A is also called the complement of A in U . In this case, if the choice of U is clear from the context, the notation A c is sometimes used instead of U ∖ A , particularly if U is a universal set as in the study of Venn diagrams .

[ 13 ] Symmetric difference of sets A and B , denoted A △ B or A ⊖ B , is the set of all objects that are a member of exactly one of A and B (elements which are in one of the sets, but not in both). For instance, for the sets {1, 2, 3} and {2, 3, 4} , the symmetric difference set is {1, 4} . It is the set difference of the union and the intersection, ( A ∪ B ) ∖ ( A ∩ B ) or ( A ∖ B ) ∪ ( B ∖ A ) .

Cartesian product of A and B , denoted A × B , is the set whose members are all possible ordered pairs ( a , b ) , where a is a member of A and b is a member of B . For example, the Cartesian product of {1, 2} and {red, white} is {(1, red), (1, white), (2, red), (2, white)}.

[ 14 ] Some basic sets of central importance are the set of natural numbers , the set of real numbers and the empty set – the unique set containing no elements. The empty set is also occasionally called the null set , [ 15 ] though this name is ambiguous and can lead to several interpretations. The empty set can be denoted with empty braces " { } {\displaystyle \{\}} " or the symbol " ∅ ∅ {\displaystyle \varnothing } " or " ∅ ∅ {\displaystyle \emptyset } ".

The power set of a set A , denoted P ( A ) {\displaystyle {\mathcal {P}}(A)} , is the set whose members are all of the possible subsets of A . For example, the power set of {1, 2} is { {}, {1}, {2}, {1, 2} } . Notably, P ( A ) {\displaystyle {\mathcal {P}}(A)} contains both A and the empty set.

Ontology [ edit ] Main article: von Neumann universe An initial segment of the von Neumann hierarchy A set is pure if all of its members are sets, all members of its members are sets, and so on. For example, the set containing only the empty set is a nonempty pure set. In modern set theory, it is common to restrict attention to the von Neumann universe of pure sets, and many systems of axiomatic set theory are designed to axiomatize the pure sets only. There are many technical advantages to this restriction, and little generality is lost, because essentially all mathematical concepts can be modeled by pure sets. Sets in the von Neumann universe are organized into a cumulative hierarchy , based on how deeply their members, members of members, etc. are nested. Each set in this hierarchy is assigned (by transfinite recursion ) an ordinal number α α {\displaystyle \alpha } , known as its rank.

The rank of a pure set X {\displaystyle X} is defined to be the least ordinal that is strictly greater than the rank of any of its elements. For example, the empty set is assigned rank 0, while the set containing only the empty set is assigned rank 1. For each ordinal α α {\displaystyle \alpha } , the set V α α {\displaystyle V_{\alpha }} is defined to consist of all pure sets with rank less than α α {\displaystyle \alpha } . The entire von Neumann universe is denoted V {\displaystyle V} .

Formalized set theory [ edit ] Elementary set theory can be studied informally and intuitively, and so can be taught in primary schools using Venn diagrams . The intuitive approach tacitly assumes that a set may be formed from the class of all objects satisfying any particular defining condition. This assumption gives rise to paradoxes, the simplest and best known of which are Russell's paradox and the Burali-Forti paradox .

Axiomatic set theory was originally devised to rid set theory of such paradoxes.

[ note 1 ] The most widely studied systems of axiomatic set theory imply that all sets form a cumulative hierarchy .

[ b ] Such systems come in two flavors, those whose ontology consists of: Sets alone . This includes the most common axiomatic set theory, Z ermelo– F raenkel set theory with the axiom of c hoice (ZFC). Fragments of ZFC include: Zermelo set theory , which replaces the axiom schema of replacement with that of separation ; General set theory , a small fragment of Zermelo set theory sufficient for the Peano axioms and finite sets ; Kripke–Platek set theory , which omits the axioms of infinity, powerset , and choice, and weakens the axiom schemata of separation and replacement .

Sets and proper classes . These include Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory , which has the same strength as ZFC for theorems about sets alone, and Morse–Kelley set theory and Tarski–Grothendieck set theory , both of which are stronger than ZFC.

The above systems can be modified to allow urelements , objects that can be members of sets but that are not themselves sets and do not have any members.

The New Foundations systems of NFU (allowing urelements ) and NF (lacking them), associate with Willard Van Orman Quine , are not based on a cumulative hierarchy. NF and NFU include a "set of everything", relative to which every set has a complement. In these systems urelements matter, because NF, but not NFU, produces sets for which the axiom of choice does not hold. Despite NF's ontology not reflecting the traditional cumulative hierarchy and violating well-foundedness, Thomas Forster has argued that it does reflect an iterative conception of set .

[ 16 ] Systems of constructive set theory , such as CST, CZF, and IZF, embed their set axioms in intuitionistic instead of classical logic . Yet other systems accept classical logic but feature a nonstandard membership relation. These include rough set theory and fuzzy set theory , in which the value of an atomic formula embodying the membership relation is not simply True or False . The Boolean-valued models of ZFC are a related subject.

An enrichment of ZFC called internal set theory was proposed by Edward Nelson in 1977.

[ 17 ] Applications [ edit ] Many mathematical concepts can be defined precisely using only set theoretic concepts. For example, mathematical structures as diverse as graphs , manifolds , rings , vector spaces , and relational algebras can all be defined as sets satisfying various (axiomatic) properties.

Equivalence and order relations are ubiquitous in mathematics, and the theory of mathematical relations can be described in set theory.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Set theory is also a promising foundational system for much of mathematics. Since the publication of the first volume of Principia Mathematica , it has been claimed that most (or even all) mathematical theorems can be derived using an aptly designed set of axioms for set theory, augmented with many definitions, using first or second-order logic . For example, properties of the natural and real numbers can be derived within set theory, as each of these number systems can be defined by representing their elements as sets of specific forms.

[ 20 ] Set theory as a foundation for mathematical analysis , topology , abstract algebra , and discrete mathematics is likewise uncontroversial; mathematicians accept (in principle) that theorems in these areas can be derived from the relevant definitions and the axioms of set theory. However, it remains that few full derivations of complex mathematical theorems from set theory have been formally verified, since such formal derivations are often much longer than the natural language proofs mathematicians commonly present. One verification project, Metamath , includes human-written, computer-verified derivations of more than 12,000 theorems starting from ZFC set theory, first-order logic and propositional logic .

[ 21 ] Areas of study [ edit ] Set theory is a major area of research in mathematics with many interrelated subfields: Combinatorial set theory [ edit ] Main article: Infinitary combinatorics Combinatorial set theory concerns extensions of finite combinatorics to infinite sets. This includes the study of cardinal arithmetic and the study of extensions of Ramsey's theorem such as the Erdős–Rado theorem .

Descriptive set theory [ edit ] Main article: Descriptive set theory Descriptive set theory is the study of subsets of the real line and, more generally, subsets of Polish spaces . It begins with the study of pointclasses in the Borel hierarchy and extends to the study of more complex hierarchies such as the projective hierarchy and the Wadge hierarchy . Many properties of Borel sets can be established in ZFC, but proving these properties hold for more complicated sets requires additional axioms related to determinacy and large cardinals.

The field of effective descriptive set theory is between set theory and recursion theory . It includes the study of lightface pointclasses , and is closely related to hyperarithmetical theory . In many cases, results of classical descriptive set theory have effective versions; in some cases, new results are obtained by proving the effective version first and then extending ("relativizing") it to make it more broadly applicable.

A recent area of research concerns Borel equivalence relations and more complicated definable equivalence relations . This has important applications to the study of invariants in many fields of mathematics.

Fuzzy set theory [ edit ] Main article: Fuzzy set theory In set theory as Cantor defined and Zermelo and Fraenkel axiomatized, an object is either a member of a set or not. In fuzzy set theory this condition was relaxed by Lotfi A. Zadeh so an object has a degree of membership in a set, a number between 0 and 1. For example, the degree of membership of a person in the set of "tall people" is more flexible than a simple yes or no answer and can be a real number such as 0.75.

Inner model theory [ edit ] Main article: Inner model theory An inner model of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF) is a transitive class that includes all the ordinals and satisfies all the axioms of ZF. The canonical example is the constructible universe L developed by Gödel.
One reason that the study of inner models is of interest is that it can be used to prove consistency results. For example, it can be shown that regardless of whether a model V of ZF satisfies the continuum hypothesis or the axiom of choice , the inner model L constructed inside the original model will satisfy both the generalized continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice. Thus the assumption that ZF is consistent (has at least one model) implies that ZF together with these two principles is consistent.

The study of inner models is common in the study of determinacy and large cardinals , especially when considering axioms such as the axiom of determinacy that contradict the axiom of choice. Even if a fixed model of set theory satisfies the axiom of choice, it is possible for an inner model to fail to satisfy the axiom of choice. For example, the existence of sufficiently large cardinals implies that there is an inner model satisfying the axiom of determinacy (and thus not satisfying the axiom of choice).

[ 22 ] Large cardinals [ edit ] Main article: Large cardinal property A large cardinal is a cardinal number with an extra property. Many such properties are studied, including inaccessible cardinals , measurable cardinals , and many more. These properties typically imply the cardinal number must be very large, with the existence of a cardinal with the specified property unprovable in Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory .

Determinacy [ edit ] Main article: Determinacy Determinacy refers to the fact that, under appropriate assumptions, certain two-player games of perfect information are determined from the start in the sense that one player must have a winning strategy. The existence of these strategies has important consequences in descriptive set theory, as the assumption that a broader class of games is determined often implies that a broader class of sets will have a topological property. The axiom of determinacy (AD) is an important object of study; although incompatible with the axiom of choice, AD implies that all subsets of the real line are well behaved (in particular, measurable and with the perfect set property). AD can be used to prove that the Wadge degrees have an elegant structure.

Forcing [ edit ] Main article: Forcing (mathematics) Paul Cohen invented the method of forcing while searching for a model of ZFC in which the continuum hypothesis fails, or a model of ZF in which the axiom of choice fails. Forcing adjoins to some given model of set theory additional sets in order to create a larger model with properties determined (i.e. "forced") by the construction and the original model. For example, Cohen's construction adjoins additional subsets of the natural numbers without changing any of the cardinal numbers of the original model. Forcing is also one of two methods for proving relative consistency by finitistic methods, the other method being Boolean-valued models .

Cardinal invariants [ edit ] Main article: Cardinal characteristics of the continuum A cardinal invariant is a property of the real line measured by a cardinal number. For example, a well-studied invariant is the smallest cardinality of a collection of meagre sets of reals whose union is the entire real line. These are invariants in the sense that any two isomorphic models of set theory must give the same cardinal for each invariant. Many cardinal invariants have been studied, and the relationships between them are often complex and related to axioms of set theory.

Set-theoretic topology [ edit ] Main article: Set-theoretic topology Set-theoretic topology studies questions of general topology that are set-theoretic in nature or that require advanced methods of set theory for their solution. Many of these theorems are independent of ZFC, requiring stronger axioms for their proof. A famous problem is the normal Moore space question , a question in general topology that was the subject of intense research. The answer to the normal Moore space question was eventually proved to be independent of ZFC.

Controversy [ edit ] Main article: Controversy over Cantor's theory From set theory's inception, some mathematicians have objected to it as a foundation for mathematics . The most common objection to set theory, one Kronecker voiced in set theory's earliest years, starts from the constructivist view that mathematics is loosely related to computation. If this view is granted, then the treatment of infinite sets, both in naive and in axiomatic set theory, introduces into mathematics methods and objects that are not computable even in principle. The feasibility of constructivism as a substitute foundation for mathematics was greatly increased by Errett Bishop 's influential book Foundations of Constructive Analysis .

[ 23 ] A different objection put forth by Henri Poincaré is that defining sets using the axiom schemas of specification and replacement , as well as the axiom of power set , introduces impredicativity , a type of circularity , into the definitions of mathematical objects. The scope of predicatively founded mathematics, while less than that of the commonly accepted Zermelo–Fraenkel theory, is much greater than that of constructive mathematics, to the point that Solomon Feferman has said that "all of scientifically applicable analysis can be developed [using predicative methods]".

[ 24 ] Ludwig Wittgenstein condemned set theory philosophically for its connotations of mathematical platonism .

[ 25 ] He wrote that "set theory is wrong", since it builds on the "nonsense" of fictitious symbolism, has "pernicious idioms", and that it is nonsensical to talk about "all numbers".

[ 26 ] Wittgenstein identified mathematics with algorithmic human deduction; [ 27 ] the need for a secure foundation for mathematics seemed, to him, nonsensical.

[ 28 ] Moreover, since human effort is necessarily finite, Wittgenstein's philosophy required an ontological commitment to radical constructivism and finitism .  Meta-mathematical statements – which, for Wittgenstein, included any statement quantifying over infinite domains, and thus almost all modern set theory – are not mathematics.

[ 29 ] Few modern philosophers have adopted Wittgenstein's views after a spectacular blunder in Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics : Wittgenstein attempted to refute Gödel's incompleteness theorems after having only read the abstract. As reviewers Kreisel , Bernays , Dummett , and Goodstein all pointed out, many of his critiques did not apply to the paper in full. Only recently have philosophers such as Crispin Wright begun to rehabilitate Wittgenstein's arguments.

[ 30 ] Category theorists have proposed topos theory as an alternative to traditional axiomatic set theory. Topos theory can interpret various alternatives to that theory, such as constructivism , finite set theory, and computable set theory.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Topoi also give a natural setting for forcing and discussions of the independence of choice from ZF, as well as providing the framework for pointless topology and Stone spaces .

[ 33 ] An active area of research is the univalent foundations and related to it homotopy type theory . Within homotopy type theory, a set may be regarded as a homotopy 0-type, with universal properties of sets arising from the inductive and recursive properties of higher inductive types . Principles such as the axiom of choice and the law of the excluded middle can be formulated in a manner corresponding to the classical formulation in set theory or perhaps in a spectrum of distinct ways unique to type theory. Some of these principles may be proven to be a consequence of other principles. The variety of formulations of these axiomatic principles allows for a detailed analysis of the formulations required in order to derive various mathematical results.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Mathematical education [ edit ] As set theory gained popularity as a foundation for modern mathematics, there has been support for the idea of introducing the basics of naive set theory early in mathematics education .

In the US in the 1960s, the New Math experiment aimed to teach basic set theory, among other abstract concepts, to primary school students but was met with much criticism.

[ 36 ] The math syllabus in European schools followed this trend and currently includes the subject at different levels in all grades.

Venn diagrams are widely employed to explain basic set-theoretic relationships to primary school students (even though John Venn originally devised them as part of a procedure to assess the validity of inferences in term logic ).

Set theory is used to introduce students to logical operators (NOT, AND, OR), and semantic or rule description (technically intensional definition ) [ 37 ] of sets (e.g. "months starting with the letter A "), which may be useful when learning computer programming , since Boolean logic is used in various programming languages . Likewise, sets and other collection-like objects, such as multisets and lists , are common datatypes in computer science and programming.

[ 38 ] In addition to that, certain sets are commonly used in mathematical teaching (such as the sets N {\displaystyle \mathbb {N} } of natural numbers , Z {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} } of integers , R {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} } of real numbers , etc.). These are commonly used when defining a mathematical function as a relation from one set (the domain ) to another set (the range ).

[ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Mathematics portal Glossary of set theory Class (set theory) List of set theory topics Relational model – borrows from set theory Venn diagram Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets Structural set theory Notes [ edit ] ^ In his 1925 paper ""An Axiomatization of Set Theory", John von Neumann observed that "set theory in its first, "naive" version, due to Cantor, led to contradictions. These are the well-known antinomies of the set of all sets that do not contain themselves (Russell), of the set of all transfinite ordinal numbers (Burali-Forti), and the set of all finitely definable real numbers (Richard)." He goes on to observe that two "tendencies" were attempting to "rehabilitate" set theory. Of the first effort, exemplified by Bertrand Russell , Julius König , Hermann Weyl and L. E. J. Brouwer , von Neumann called the "overall effect of their activity . . . devastating". With regards to the axiomatic method employed by second group composed of Zermelo, Fraenkel and Schoenflies, von Neumann worried that "We see only that the known modes of inference leading to the antinomies fail, but who knows where there are not others?" and he set to the task, "in the spirit of the second group", to "produce, by means of a finite number of purely formal operations . . . all the sets that we want to see formed" but not allow for the antinomies. (All quotes from von Neumann 1925 reprinted in van Heijenoort, Jean (1967, third printing 1976), From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931 , Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA, ISBN 0-674-32449-8 (pbk). A synopsis of the history, written by van Heijenoort, can be found in the comments that precede von Neumann's 1925 paper.

^ The objections to Cantor's work were occasionally fierce: Leopold Kronecker's public opposition and personal attacks included describing Cantor as a "scientific charlatan", a "renegade" and a "corrupter of youth". Kronecker objected to Cantor's proofs that the algebraic numbers are countable, and that the transcendental numbers are uncountable, results now included in a standard mathematics curriculum. Writing decades after Cantor's death, Wittgenstein lamented that mathematics is "ridden through and through with the pernicious idioms of set theory", which he dismissed as "utter nonsense" that is "laughable" and "wrong".

^ This is the converse for ZFC; V is a model of ZFC.

Citations [ edit ] ^ Ferreirós, José (2024), "The Early Development of Set Theory" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2024 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 2023-03-20 , retrieved 2025-01-04 ^ Bolzano, Bernard (1975), Berg, Jan (ed.), Einleitung zur Größenlehre und erste Begriffe der allgemeinen Größenlehre , Bernard-Bolzano-Gesamtausgabe, edited by Eduard Winter et al., vol. II, A, 7, Stuttgart, Bad Cannstatt: Friedrich Frommann Verlag, p. 152, ISBN 3-7728-0466-7 ^ Zenkin, Alexander (2004), "Logic Of Actual Infinity And G. Cantor's Diagonal Proof Of The Uncountability Of The Continuum" , The Review of Modern Logic , vol. 9, no. 30, pp.

27– 80, archived from the original on 2020-09-22 , retrieved 2025-01-04 ^ Dunham, William (1991), Journey through Genius: The Great Theorems of Mathematics , Penguin, p.

254 , ISBN 9780140147391 ^ Cantor, Georg (1874), "Ueber eine Eigenschaft des Inbegriffes aller reellen algebraischen Zahlen" , Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik (in German), 1874 (77): 258– 262, doi : 10.1515/crll.1874.77.258 , S2CID 199545885 , archived from the original on 2012-06-04 , retrieved 2013-01-31 ^ Johnson, Philip (1972), A History of Set Theory , Prindle, Weber & Schmidt, ISBN 0-87150-154-6 ^ Dauben, Joseph (1979), Georg Cantor: His Mathematics and Philosophy of the Infinite , Harvard University Press, pp.

30– 54, ISBN 0-674-34871-0 .

^ "Introduction to Sets" , www.mathsisfun.com , archived from the original on 2006-07-16 , retrieved 2020-08-20 ^ Kolmogorov, A.N.

; Fomin, S.V.

(1970), Introductory Real Analysis (Rev. English ed.), New York: Dover Publications, pp.

2–3 , ISBN 0486612260 , OCLC 1527264 ^ "set theory | Basics, Examples, & Formulas" , Encyclopedia Britannica , archived from the original on 2020-08-20 , retrieved 2020-08-20 ^ Kaplansky, Irving (1972), De Prima, Charles (ed.), Set Theory and Metric Spaces , Boston: Allyn and Bacon, p. 4 ^ Kaplansky, Irving (1972), De Prima, Charles (ed.), Set Theory and Metric Spaces , Boston: Allyn and Bacon, p. 5–6 ^ Kaplansky, Irving (1972), De Prima, Charles (ed.), Set Theory and Metric Spaces , Boston: Allyn and Bacon, p. 5–6 ^ Kaplansky, Irving (1972), De Prima, Charles (ed.), Set Theory and Metric Spaces , Boston: Allyn and Bacon, p. 19 ^ Bagaria, Joan (2020), "Set Theory" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-08-20 ^ Forster, T. E. (2008), "The iterative conception of set" (PDF) , The Review of Symbolic Logic , 1 : 97– 110, doi : 10.1017/S1755020308080064 , S2CID 15231169 ^ Nelson, Edward (November 1977), "Internal Set Theory: a New Approach to Nonstandard Analysis" , Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society , 83 (6): 1165, doi : 10.1090/S0002-9904-1977-14398-X ^ "6.3: Equivalence Relations and Partitions" , Mathematics LibreTexts , 2019-11-25, archived from the original on 2022-08-16 , retrieved 2022-07-27 ^ "Order Relations and Functions" (PDF) , Web.stanford.edu , archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-07-27 , retrieved 2022-07-29 ^ Mendelson, Elliott (1973), Number Systems and the Foundations of Analysis , Academic Press, MR 0357694 , Zbl 0268.26001 ^ "A PARTITION CALCULUS IN SET THEORY" (PDF) , Ams.org , retrieved 2022-07-29 ^ Jech, Thomas (2003), Set Theory , Springer Monographs in Mathematics (Third Millennium ed.), Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag , p. 642, ISBN 978-3-540-44085-7 , Zbl 1007.03002 ^ Bishop, Errett (1967), Foundations of Constructive Analysis , New York: Academic Press, ISBN 4-87187-714-0 ^ Feferman, Solomon (1998), In the Light of Logic , New York: Oxford University Press, pp.

280– 283, 293– 294, ISBN 0-195-08030-0 ^ Rodych, Victor (Jan 31, 2018), "Wittgenstein's Philosophy of Mathematics" , in Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2018 ed.) ^ Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1975), Philosophical Remarks, §129, §174 , Oxford: Basil Blackwell, ISBN 0-631-19130-5 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Rodych 2018 , §2.1 : "When we prove a theorem or decide a proposition, we operate in a purely formal, syntactical manner. In doing mathematics, we do not discover pre-existing truths that were 'already there without one knowing' (PG 481)—we invent mathematics, bit-by-little-bit." Note, however, that Wittgenstein does not identify such deduction with philosophical logic ; cf. Rodych §1 , paras. 7-12.

^ Rodych 2018 , §3.4 : "Given that mathematics is a ' motley of techniques of proof' (RFM III, §46), it does not require a foundation (RFM VII, §16) and it cannot be given a self-evident foundation (PR §160; WVC 34 & 62; RFM IV, §3). Since set theory was invented to provide mathematics with a foundation, it is, minimally, unnecessary." ^ Rodych 2018 , §2.2 : "An expression quantifying over an infinite domain is never a meaningful proposition, not even when we have proved, for instance, that a particular number n has a particular property." ^ Rodych 2018 , §3.6 .

^ Ferro, Alfredo; Omodeo, Eugenio G.; Schwartz, Jacob T. (September 1980), "Decision Procedures for Elementary Sublanguages of Set Theory. I. Multi-Level Syllogistic and Some Extensions", Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics , 33 (5): 599– 608, doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160330503 ^ Cantone, Domenico; Ferro, Alfredo; Omodeo, Eugenio G. (1989), Computable Set Theory , International Series of Monographs on Computer Science, Oxford Science Publications, Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press , pp.

xii, 347 , ISBN 0-198-53807-3 ^ Mac Lane, Saunders ; Moerdijk, leke (1992), Sheaves in Geometry and Logic: A First Introduction to Topos Theory , Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-0-387-97710-2 ^ homotopy type theory at the n Lab ^ Homotopy Type Theory: Univalent Foundations of Mathematics Archived 2021-01-22 at the Wayback Machine . The Univalent Foundations Program.

Institute for Advanced Study .

^ Taylor, Melissa August, Harriet Barovick, Michelle Derrow, Tam Gray, Daniel S. Levy, Lina Lofaro, David Spitz, Joel Stein and Chris (14 June 1999), "The 100 Worst Ideas Of The Century" , TIME , archived from the original on 12 April 2025 , retrieved 12 April 2025 {{ cite magazine }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Frank Ruda (6 October 2011), Hegel's Rabble: An Investigation into Hegel's Philosophy of Right , Bloomsbury Publishing, p. 151, ISBN 978-1-4411-7413-0 ^ Adams, Stephen (October 1993), "Functional Pearls Efficient sets—a balancing act" , Journal of Functional Programming , 3 (4): 553– 561, doi : 10.1017/S0956796800000885 , ISSN 1469-7653 , retrieved 12 April 2025 ^ Abbott, Stephen (2015), Understanding analysis (Second ed.), New York: Springer, p. 3, ISBN 978-1-4939-2711-1 References [ edit ] Kunen, Kenneth (1980), Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs , North-Holland, ISBN 0-444-85401-0 Johnson, Philip (1972), A History of Set Theory , Prindle, Weber & Schmidt, ISBN 0-87150-154-6 Devlin, Keith (1993), The Joy of Sets: Fundamentals of Contemporary Set Theory , Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics (2nd ed.), Springer Verlag, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4612-0903-4 , ISBN 0-387-94094-4 Ferreirós, Jose (2001), Labyrinth of Thought: A History of Set Theory and Its Role in Modern Mathematics , Berlin: Springer, ISBN 978-3-7643-5749-8 Monk, J. Donald (1969), Introduction to Set Theory , McGraw-Hill Book Company, ISBN 978-0-898-74006-6 Potter, Michael (2004), Set Theory and Its Philosophy: A Critical Introduction , Oxford University Press , ISBN 978-0-191-55643-2 Smullyan, Raymond M.

; Fitting, Melvin (2010), Set Theory and the Continuum Problem , Dover Publications , ISBN 978-0-486-47484-7 Tiles, Mary (2004), The Philosophy of Set Theory: An Historical Introduction to Cantor's Paradise , Dover Publications , ISBN 978-0-486-43520-6 Dauben, Joseph W.

(1977), "Georg Cantor and Pope Leo XIII: Mathematics, Theology, and the Infinite", Journal of the History of Ideas , 38 (1): 85– 108, doi : 10.2307/2708842 , JSTOR 2708842 Dauben, Joseph W. (1979), [Unavailable on archive.org] Georg Cantor: his mathematics and philosophy of the infinite , Boston: Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-02447-9 External links [ edit ] Set theory at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Discrete mathematics/Set theory Daniel Cunningham, Set Theory article in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Jose Ferreiros, "The Early Development of Set Theory" article in the [Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy] .

Foreman, Matthew , Akihiro Kanamori , eds.

Handbook of Set Theory . 3 vols., 2010. Each chapter surveys some aspect of contemporary research in set theory. Does not cover established elementary set theory, on which see Devlin (1993).

"Axiomatic set theory" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press , 2001 [1994] "Set theory" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press , 2001 [1994] Schoenflies, Arthur (1898).

Mengenlehre in Klein's encyclopedia .

Online books , and library resources in your library and in other libraries about set theory Rudin, Walter B.

(April 6, 1990), "Set Theory: An Offspring of Analysis" , Marden Lecture in Mathematics , University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee , archived from the original on 2021-10-31 – via YouTube v t e Set theory Overview Set (mathematics) Axioms Adjunction Choice countable dependent global Constructibility (V=L) Determinacy projective Extensionality Infinity Limitation of size Pairing Power set Regularity Union Martin's axiom Axiom schema replacement specification Operations Cartesian product Complement (i.e. set difference) De Morgan's laws Disjoint union Identities Intersection Power set Symmetric difference Union Concepts Methods Almost Cardinality Cardinal number ( large ) Class Constructible universe Continuum hypothesis Diagonal argument Element ordered pair tuple Family Forcing One-to-one correspondence Ordinal number Set-builder notation Transfinite induction Venn diagram Set types Amorphous Countable Empty Finite ( hereditarily ) Filter base subbase Ultrafilter Fuzzy Infinite ( Dedekind-infinite ) Recursive Singleton Subset · Superset Transitive Uncountable Universal Theories Alternative Axiomatic Naive Cantor's theorem Zermelo General Principia Mathematica New Foundations Zermelo–Fraenkel von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Morse–Kelley Kripke–Platek Tarski–Grothendieck Paradoxes Problems Russell's paradox Suslin's problem Burali-Forti paradox Set theorists Paul Bernays Georg Cantor Paul Cohen Richard Dedekind Abraham Fraenkel Kurt Gödel Thomas Jech John von Neumann Willard Quine Bertrand Russell Thoralf Skolem Ernst Zermelo v t e Major mathematics areas History Timeline Future Lists Glossary Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Type theory Algebra Abstract Commutative Elementary Group theory Linear Multilinear Universal Homological Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Hypercomplex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Harmonic analysis Measure theory Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Arithmetic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology General Algebraic Differential Geometric Homotopy theory Applied Engineering mathematics Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical sociology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Systems science Control theory Game theory Operations research Computational Computer science Theory of computation Computational complexity theory Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Related topics Mathematicians lists Informal mathematics Films about mathematicians Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Mathematics portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qgzq6
Cached time: 20250817221121
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.095 seconds
Real time usage: 1.385 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7539/1000000
Revision size: 55278/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 229152/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8356/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 222501/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.647/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9381635/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1059.313      1 -total
 25.82%  273.567      3 Template:Reflist
 15.46%  163.745     24 Template:Citation
  8.46%   89.618      6 Template:Navbox
  7.67%   81.257      1 Template:Math_topics_TOC
  7.40%   78.345      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.06%   74.754      1 Template:NoteTag
  7.04%   74.577      4 Template:Sfn
  6.93%   73.399      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  6.91%   73.152      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27553:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817221121 and revision id 1306464453. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Set_theory&oldid=1306464453#Formalized_set_theory " Categories : Set theory Mathematical logic Formal methods Georg Cantor Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: publisher location Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Set theory 119 languages Add topic

