Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Second-wave feminism and the Goddess movement 3 Triple goddess and other deities 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Matriarchal religion 15 languages العربية অসমীয়া Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Religion that focuses on a goddess or goddesses The Minoan snake goddess figurines , though an almost unique find, feature frequently in literature postulating matriarchal religion Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e A matriarchal religion is a religion that emphasizes a goddess or multiple goddesses as central figures of worship and spiritual authority. The term is most often used to refer to theories of prehistoric matriarchal religions that were proposed by scholars such as Johann Jakob Bachofen , Jane Ellen Harrison , and Marija Gimbutas , and later popularized by second-wave feminism . These scholars speculated that early human societies may have been organized around female deities and matrilineal social structures. In the 20th century, a movement to revive these practices resulted in the Goddess movement .

History [ edit ] See also: Matriarchy § By chronology The concept of a prehistoric matriarchy was introduced in 1861 when Johann Jakob Bachofen published Mother Right: An Investigation of the Religious and Juridical Character of Matriarchy in the Ancient World . He postulated that the historical patriarchates were a comparatively recent development, having replaced an earlier state of primeval matriarchy , and postulated a " chthonic -maternal" prehistoric religion . Bachofen presents a model where matriarchal society and chthonic mystery cults are the second of four stages of the historical development of religion . The first stage, he called "Hetaerism," was characterized as a Paleolithic hunter-and-gatherer society that practiced a polyamorous and communistic lifestyle. The second stage is the Neolithic , a matriarchal lunar stage of agriculture with an early form of Demeter , the dominant deity. This was followed by a "Dionysian" stage of emerging patriarchy, finally succeeded by the "Apollonian" stage of patriarchy and the appearance of civilization in classical antiquity . The idea that this period was a golden age that was displaced by the advent of patriarchy was first described by Friedrich Engels in his The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State .

The British archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans , the main rediscoverer and promoter of Minoan civilization , believed that Minoan religion more or less exclusively worshiped a mother goddess , and his view held sway for the first part of the 20th century, with a wide-ranging influence on thinking in various fields.  Modern scholars agree that a mother or nature goddess was probably a dominant deity, but that there were also male deities.

In the early 1900s, historian Jane Ellen Harrison put forward the theory that the Olympian pantheon replaced an earlier worship of earth goddesses.

[ 1 ] Robert Graves postulated a prehistoric matriarchal religion in the 1950s, in his The Greek Myths and The White Goddess , and gave a detailed depiction of a future society with a matriarchal religion in his novel Seven Days in New Crete .

[ 2 ] Verbotenes Land ("Forbidden Land"), 1936 Inspired by Graves and other sources was the Austrian Surrealist Wolfgang Paalen who, in his painting Pays interdit ("Forbidden Land"), draws an apocalyptic landscape dominated by a female goddess and, as symbols of the male gods, fallen, meteorite-like planets.

Second-wave feminism and the Goddess movement [ edit ] Main articles: Second-wave feminism and Goddess movement The ideas of Bachofen and Graves were taken up in the 1970s by second-wave feminists, such as author Merlin Stone , who took the Paleolithic Venus figurines as evidence of prehistorical matriarchal religion. She presents matriarchal religions as involving a "cult of serpents " as a major symbol of spiritual wisdom, fertility, life, strength.

[ 3 ] Additionally, anthropologist Marija Gimbutas introduced the field of feminist archaeology in the 1970s. Her books The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe (1974), The Language of the Goddess (1989), and The Civilization of the Goddess (1991) became standard works for the theory that a patriarchic or "androcratic" culture originated in the Bronze Age , replacing a Neolithic Goddess-centered worldview.

[ 4 ] These theories were presented as scholarly hypotheses, albeit from an ideological viewpoint, in the 1970s, but they also influenced feminist spirituality and especially feminist branches of Neo-paganism that also arose during the 1970s (see Dianic Wicca and Reclaiming (Neopaganism) ), so that Matriarchal Religion is also a contemporary new religious movement within the larger field of neopaganism, generally known as the Goddess movement .

[ 5 ] Triple goddess and other deities [ edit ] There is a deity known within the movement and other spiritual groups as the Triple Goddess, who represents a woman's stages of life. Members say it's not strictly for women but for a general guide through childhood, maturity, and old age, but it strongly correlates with women. The Triple Goddess is a deity worshiped by many neopagan groups: women, children, and men. In these movements, she is seen as a deity that helps people understand what is happening in their lives at all ages. Many [ who?

] believe the stages within women that the Triple Goddess guides them through their maiden/youth, mother and lover, and finally, wise woman. This is rooted in Pagan people and their beliefs but has changed throughout time, yet her central representation has remained the same.[7] Triple goddess symbol Aphrodite - goddess of love Aditi - mother of the gods Calypso - goddess of silence Durga - warrior goddess Inanna - queen of heaven, goddess of rain and moonlight Harmonia - goddess of harmony Tripura Sundari - supreme almighty goddess See also [ edit ] Emma Curtis Hopkins Erich Neumann (psychologist) Eternal feminine Feminist theology Gender and religion Goddess movement Great Goddess hypothesis Mother goddess#Christianity Mariolatry Thealogy Witch-cult hypothesis References [ edit ] ^ Wheeler-Barclay, Marjorie (2010). "Jane Ellen Harrison".

The Science of Religion in Britain, 1860-1915 . Victorian Literature and Culture Series. University of Virginia Press. p. 231.

ISBN 9780813930107 .

[I]t was her interest in matriarchal religion and her insistence on its importance that most distinctly set her apart from other British scholars.... As early as 1900, she made note of the evidence of an older stratum of religion--the worship of earth goddesses--lying beneath Olympianism and supplanted it.

^ Smeds, John (Winter 1990–1991).

"Graves, Bachofen and the Matriarchy Debate" (PDF) .

Focus on Robert Graves and His Contemporaries .

1 (10): 1– 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 December 2012 .

^ Stone, Merlin (1978).

When God was a Woman . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 9780156961585 .

^ Husain, Shahrukh (1997).

"The Paleolithic and Neolithic ages" .

The Goddess: Power, Sexuality, and the Feminine Divine . University of Michigan Press. p. 13.

ISBN 9780472089345 . Retrieved 12 December 2012 .

Marija Gimbutas is indivisibly linked with the study of the prehistoric Goddess.

^ Christ, Carol P. (2002).

"Feminist theology as post-traditional thealogy" . In Susan Frank Parsons (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Feminist Theology . Cambridge University Press. p. 80.

ISBN 9780521663809 .

Marija Gimbutas unwittingly supplied the fledgling movement with a history, through her analysis of the symbolism of the Goddess in the religion of palaeolithic and neolithic Old Europe.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Matriarchal_religion&oldid=1305733136 " Categories : Matriarchy Feminist spirituality Gender and religion Mythology by culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 20:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Matriarchal religion 15 languages Add topic

