Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design factors 2 Common types of cushioning 3 Design for shock protection 4 Design for vibration protection 5 Evaluation of finished package 6 ASTM Standards 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Package cushioning 5 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Français 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cushioning ) Protective packaging Molded expanded polystyrene cushioning Package cushioning is used to protect items during shipment .

Vibration and impact shock during shipment and loading/unloading are controlled by cushioning to reduce the chance of product damage.

Cushioning is usually inside a shipping container such as a corrugated box . It is designed to absorb shock by crushing and deforming, and to dampen vibration, rather than transmitting the shock and vibration to the protected item. Depending on the specific situation, package cushioning is often between 50 and 75 mm (2 and 3 in) thick.

Internal packaging materials are also used for functions other than cushioning, such as to immobilize the products in the box and lock them in place, or to fill a void.

Design factors [ edit ] Transit case showing internal shock mounting When designing packaging the choice of cushioning depends on many factors, including but not limited to: effective protection of product from shock and vibration resilience (whether it performs for multiple impacts) resistance to creep – cushion deformation under static load material costs labor costs and productivity effects of temperature, [ 1 ] humidity, and air pressure on cushioning cleanliness of cushioning (dust, insects, etc.) effect on size of external shipping container environmental and recycling issues sensitivity of product to static electricity Common types of cushioning [ edit ] End caps and corner blocks Molded pulp cushioning Thermoformed end caps for a hard drive Coiled cable mount for heavy duty reusable containers Loose fill Some cushion products are flowable and are packed loosely around the items in the box. The box is closed to tighten the pack. This includes expanded polystyrene foam pieces ( foam peanuts ), similar pieces made of starch-based foams, and common popcorn . The amount of loose fill material required and the transmitted shock levels vary with the specific type of material.

[ 2 ] Paper Paper can be manually or mechanically wadded up and used as a cushioning material. Heavier grades of paper provide more weight-bearing ability than old newspapers. Creped cellulose wadding is also available.

Movers often wrap objects with several layers of kraft paper or embossed pulp before putting them into boxes.

Corrugated fiberboard pads Multi-layer or cut-and-folded shapes of corrugated board can be used as cushions.

[ 3 ] These structures are designed to crush and deform under shock stress and provide some degree of cushioning.

Paperboard composite honeycomb structures are also used for cushioning.

[ 4 ] Foam structures Several types of polymeric foams are used for cushioning, the most common being expanded polystyrene, polypropylene , polyethylene , and polyurethane . These can be molded engineered shapes or sheets which are cut and glued into cushion structures.

[ 5 ] Convoluted (or finger ) foams are sometimes used.

[ 6 ] Some degradable foams are also available.

[ 7 ] Foam-in-place is another method of using polyurethane foams. These fill the box, fully encapsulating the product to immobilize it. It is also used to form engineered structures.

Molded pulp Pulp can be molded into shapes suitable for cushioning and for immobilizing products in a package.

Molded pulp is made from recycled newsprint and is recyclable.

Inflated products Bubble wrap consists of sheets of plastic film with enclosed “bubbles” of air. These sheets can be layered or wrapped around items to be shipped. A variety of engineered inflatable air cushions are also available. Note that inflated air pillows used for void-fill are not suited for cushioning.

Other Several other types of cushioning are available including suspension cushions, biofoams , thermoformed end caps, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] viscoelastic materials, [ 10 ] and various types of shock mounts .

Design for shock protection [ edit ] Equipment for a drop test of cushioned package to measure the transmitted shock Proper performance of cushioning is dependent on its proper design and use. It is often best to use a trained packaging engineer , reputable vendor, consultant, or independent laboratory.  
An engineer needs to know the severity of shock (drop height, etc.) to protect against.  This can be based on an existing specification , published industry standards and publications, field studies, etc.

Knowledge of the product to be packaged is critical.  Field experience may indicate the types of damage previously experienced.  Laboratory analysis can help quantify the fragility [ 11 ] of the item, often reported in g's .  Engineering judgment can also be an excellent starting point. Sometimes a product can be made more rugged or can be supported to make it less susceptible to breakage.

The amount of shock transmitted by a particular cushioning material is largely dependent on the thickness of the cushion, the drop height, and the load-bearing area of the cushion (static loading).  A cushion must deform under shock for it to function.  If a product is on a large load-bearing area, the cushion may not deform and will not cushion the shock.  If the load-bearing area is too small, the product may “bottom out” during a shock; the shock is not cushioned.  Engineers use “cushion curves” to choose the best thickness and load-bearing area for a cushioning material. Often two to three inches (50 – 75 mm) of cushioning are needed to protect fragile items.

Computer simulations and finite element analysis are also being used.  Some correlations to laboratory drop tests have been successful.

[ 12 ] Cushion design requires care to prevent shock amplification caused by the cushioned shock pulse duration being close to the natural frequency of the cushioned item.

[ 13 ] Design for vibration protection [ edit ] The process for vibration protection (or isolation) involves similar considerations as that for shock. Cushions can be thought of as performing like springs.  Depending on cushion thickness and load-bearing area and on the forcing vibration frequency, the cushion may 1) not have any influence on input vibration, 2) amplify the input vibration at resonance , or 3) isolate the product from the vibration.  Proper design is critical for cushion performance.

Evaluation of finished package [ edit ] Verification and validation of prototype designs are required.  The design of a package and its cushioning is often an iterative process involving several designs, evaluations, redesigns, etc.  Several (ASTM, ISTA, and others) published package testing protocols are available to evaluate the performance of a proposed package.  Field performance should be monitored for feedback into the design process.

ASTM Standards [ edit ] D1596  Standard Test Method for Dynamic Shock Cushioning Characteristics of Packaging Material D2221 Standard Test Method for Creep Properties of Package Cushioning Materials D3332 Standard Test Methods for Mechanical-Shock Fragility of Products, Using Shock Machines D3580 Standard Test Methods for Vibration (Vertical Linear Motion) Test of Products D4168 Standard Test Methods for Transmitted Shock Characteristics of Foam-in-Place Cushioning Materials D4169 Standard Practice for Performance Testing of Shipping Containers and Systems D6198 Standard Guide for Transport Packaging Design D6537 Standard Practice for Instrumented Package Shock Testing For Determination of Package Performance and others See also [ edit ] Betagel , utilizes gel and silicone to absorb violent shocks Buffer (disambiguation) Coefficient of restitution Damped wave Damper (disambiguation) Damping ratio Impact force Packaging and labeling Shock Shock absorber Shock detector Shock response spectrum Vibration Vibration isolation Notes [ edit ] ^ Hatton, Kayo Okubo (July 1998).

Effect of temperature on the cushioning properties of some foamed plastic materials (Thesis) . Retrieved 18 Feb 2016 .

^ Singh, S. P.; Chonhenchob and Burges (1994). "Comparison of Various Loose Fill Cushioning Materials Based on Protective and Environmental Performance".

Packaging Technology and Science .

7 (5): 229– 241.

doi : 10.1002/pts.2770070504 .

^ Stern, R. K.; Jordan, C.A. (1973).

"Shock cushioning by corrugated fiberboard pads to centrally applied loading" . Forest Products Laboratory Research Paper, FPL-RP-184 . Retrieved 12 December 2011 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Wang, Dong-Mei; Wang, Zhi-Wei (October 2008). "Experimental investigation into the cushioning properties of honeycomb paperboard".

Packaging Technology and Science .

21 (6): 309– 373.

doi : 10.1002/pts.808 .

S2CID 135800336 .

^ Liu, X (2022).

"The Effect of Foam Configuration on the Cushion Performance" .

Journal of Applied Packaging Research .

14 . Retrieved 20 August 2024 .

^ Burgess, G (1999). "Cushioning properties of convoluted foam".

Packaging Technology and Science .

12 (3): 101– 104.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1522(199905/06)12:3<101::AID-PTS457>3.0.CO;2-L .

^ Mojzes, Akos; Folders, Borocz (2012).

"Define Cushion Curves for Environmentally Friendly Foams" (PDF) .

ANNALS OF FACULTY ENGINEERING HUNEDOARA – International Journal of Engineering : 113– 118 . Retrieved 8 Mar 2012 .

^ Khangaldy, Pal; Scheumeman, Herb (2000), Design Parameters for Deformable Cushion Systems (PDF) , IoPP, Transpack 2000 , retrieved 8 Mar 2012 ^ US 5515976 , Moren, Michael S.; Schindler, Fred & Loga, Randall K., "Packaging for fragile articles within container", published 1996-05-14,  assigned to Plastofilm Inc. and Robert Stephens, VanAmburg Packaging Inc.

^ Rice, N C (March 2020).

"The use of visco-elastic materials for the design of helmets and packaging" .

Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids .

141 . link is to abstract only. Full text is available via Google Scholar: 103966.

Bibcode : 2020JMPSo.14103966R .

doi : 10.1016/j.jmps.2020.103966 .

S2CID 218992908 .

^ Burgess, G (March 2000). "Extension and Evaluation of fatigue Model for Product Shock Fragility Used in Package Design".

Journal of Testing and Evaluation .

28 (2): 116– 120.

doi : 10.1520/JTE12084J .

^ Neumayer, Dan (2006), Drop Test Simulation of a Cooker Including Foam, Packaging and Pre-stressed Plastic Foil Wrapping (PDF) , 9th International LS-DYNA Users Conference, Simulation Technology (4) , retrieved 7 April 2020 ^ Morris, S A (2011), "Transportation, Distribution, and Product Damage" , Food and Package Engineering , Wiley-Blackwell, pp.

367– 369, ISBN 978-0-8138-1479-7 , retrieved 13 Feb 2015 Further reading [ edit ] MIL-HDBK 304C, “Package Cushioning Design”, 1997, [1] Russel, P G,  and Daum, M P, "Product Protection Test Book", Institute of Packaging Professionals Root, D, “Six-Step Method for Cushioned Package Development”, Lansmont, 1997, http://www.lansmont.com/ Yam, K. L., "Encyclopedia of Packaging Technology", John Wiley & Sons, 2009, ISBN 978-0-470-08704-6 Singh, J., Ignatova, L., Olsen, E. and Singh, P., "Evaluation of the Stress-Energy Methodology to Predict Transmitted Shock through Expanded Foam Cushions", ASTM Journal of Testing and Evaluation, Volume 38, Issue 6, November 2010 External links [ edit ] Institute of Packaging Professionals International Safe Transit Association Westpak webinar on protective packaging v t e Packaging General topics Active packaging Child-resistant packaging Contract packager Edible packaging Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging Overpackaging Package delivery Package pilferage Package testing Package theft Packaging engineering Resealable packaging Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Shelf life Shelf-ready packaging Shelf-stable Sustainable packaging Tamper-evident Tamper resistance Wrap rage Product packages Alternative wine closure Ammunition box Banana box Beer bottle Box wine Case-ready meat Coffee bag Cosmetic packaging Currency packaging Disposable food packaging Drink can Egg carton Evidence packaging Field ration Flour sack Foam food container Food packaging Fuel container Gas cylinder Glass milk bottle Growler Juicebox Low plastic water bottle Luxury packaging Milk bag Optical disc packaging Oyster pail Popcorn bag Pharmaceutical packaging Pizza box Plastic milk container Purdue Improved Crop Storage bags Sand bag Seasonal packaging Self-heating food packaging Screw cap (wine) Single-serve coffee container Spray paint Toothpaste pump dispenser Unit dose Water bottle Wine bottle Containers Aerosol spray dispenser Aluminium bottle Aluminum can Ampoule Antistatic bag Bag-in-box Bag Barrel Biodegradable bag Blister pack Boil-in-bag Bottle Box Bulk box Cage Case Carboy Carton Chub Clamshell Corrugated box design Crate Disposable cup Drum Endcap Envelope Euro container Flexible intermediate bulk container Flexible tank Folding carton Glass bottle Gunny sack Inhaler Insulated shipping container Intermediate bulk container Jar Jerrycan Jug Keg Mesh bag Multilayered packaging Multi-pack Packet (container) Padded envelope Pail Paper bag Paper sack Plastic bag Plastic bottle Retort pouch Salvage drum Sachet Water sachet Security bag Shipping container Shipping tube Skin pack Spray bottle Squround Stand-up pouch Steel and tin cans Tetra Brik Thermal bag Tub (container) Tube Unit load Vial Wooden box Materials and components Adhesive Aluminium foil Bail handle Bioplastic Biodegradable plastic BoPET Bubble wrap Bung Cellophane Closure Coated paper Coating Coextrusion Container glass Corrugated fiberboard Corrugated plastic Cushioning Desiccant Double seam Flip-top Foam peanut Gel pack Hot-melt adhesive Humidity indicator card Kraft paper Label Lid Linear low-density polyethylene Liquid packaging board Living hinge Low-density polyethylene Meat absorbent pad Metallised film Modified atmosphere Molded pulp Nonwoven fabric Overwrap Oxygen scavenger Package handle Packaging gas Pallet Paper Paper pallet Paperboard Plastic-coated paper Plastic film Plastic pallet Plastic wrap Polyester Polyethylene Polypropylene Pressure-sensitive tape Pump dispenser Screw cap Screw cap (wine) Security printing Security tape Shock detector Shock and vibration data logger Shrink wrap Slip sheet Staple (fastener) Strapping Stretch wrap Susceptor Tamper-evident band Tear tape Temperature data logger Time temperature indicator Tinplate Velostat Processes Aseptic processing Authentication Automatic identification and data capture Blow fill seal Blow molding Calendering Canning Coating Containerization Converting Corona treatment Curtain coating Die cutting Die forming (plastics) Electronic article surveillance Extrusion Extrusion coating Flame treatment Glass production Graphic design Hazard analysis and critical control points Hermetic seal Induction sealing Injection moulding Lamination Laser cutting Molding Package tracking Papermaking Plastic extrusion Plastic welding Printing Product development Production control Quality assurance Radio-frequency identification Roll slitting Shearing (manufacturing) Thermoforming Track and trace Ultrasonic welding Vacuum forming Vacuum packaging Verification and validation Machinery Barcode printer Barcode reader Bottling line Calender Can seamer Cap torque tester Cartoning machine Case sealer Check weigher Conveyor system Drum pump Extended core stretch wrapper Filler Heat gun Heat sealer Industrial robot Injection molding machine Label printer applicator Lineshaft roller conveyor Logistics automation Material-handling equipment Mechanical brake stretch wrapper Multihead weigher Orbital stretch wrapper Packaging machinery Pallet inverter Palletizer Rotary wheel blow molding systems Seed-counting machine Shrink tunnel Staple gun Tape dispenser Turntable stretch wrapper Vertical form fill sealing machine Environment, post-use Biodegradation Can collecting Closed-loop box reuse Environmental engineering Extended producer responsibility Glass recycling Industrial ecology Life-cycle assessment Litter Packaging waste Paper recycling PET bottle recycling Plastic recycling Recycling Reusable packaging Reverse logistics Source reduction Sustainable packaging Waste management Category: Packaging v t e Plastics Chemical types Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) Cross-linked polyethylene (PEX, XLPE) Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) Poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PEMA) Polyacrylic acid (PAA) Polyamide (PA) Polybutylene (PB) Polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) Polycarbonate (PC) Polyetheretherketone (PEEK) Polyester (PEs) Polyethylene (PE) Polyethylene terephthalate (PET, PETE) Polyimide (PI) Polylactic acid (PLA) Polyoxymethylene (POM) Polyphenyl ether (PPE) Poly(p-phenylene oxide) (PPO) Polypropylene (PP) Polystyrene (PS) Polysulfone (PES) Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) Polyurethane (PU) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) Polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC) Styrene maleic anhydride (SMA) Styrene-acrylonitrile (SAN) Tritan copolyester Mechanical types Thermoplastic Thermosetting polymer Fibre-reinforced plastic Corrugated plastic Polymeric foam High-performance plastics Additives Polymer additive Colorants Plasticizer Polymer stabilizers Biodegradable additives Filler (materials) Plastics processing Injection moulding Plastic extrusion Blow molding Film blowing Thermoforming Compression molding Calendering Transfer molding Laminating Fiberglass molding Pultrusion Plastic welding Filament winding Solvent bonding Vacuum forming Rotational molding Products Plastics industry segments Commodity plastics Construction Engineering plastics Geosynthetics High-performance plastics Nurdle Category:Plastics applications Plasticulture (Agriculture) Specific goods Blister pack Chairs Packaging film Bottles Bags Cutlery Shopping bags Foam food containers Environment and health v t e Health issues of plastics and polyhalogenated compounds (PHCs) Plasticizers : Phthalates DIBP DBP BBP (BBzP) DIHP DEHP (DOP) DIDP DINP Miscellaneous plasticizers Organophosphates Adipates ( DEHA DOA ) Monomers Bisphenol A (BPA, in Polycarbonates ) Vinyl chloride (in PVC ) Miscellaneous additives incl. PHCs PBDEs PCBs Organotins PFCs Perfluorooctanoic acid Health issues Teratogen Carcinogen Endocrine disruptor Diabetes Obesity Polymer fume fever Pollution Plastic pollution Rubber pollution Great Pacific Garbage Patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Regulations California Proposition 65 European REACH regulation Japan Toxic Substances Law Toxic Substances Control Act Waste Plastic pollution Garbage patch Great Pacific Garbage Patch Persistent organic pollutant Dioxins List of environmental health hazards Plastic recycling Biodegradable plastic Identification codes Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Package_cushioning&oldid=1299098382 " Categories : Packaging Plastics applications Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 15:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Package cushioning 5 languages Add topic

