Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Emergence of environmental humanities 2 Connectivity ontology 3 Axioms 4 Contemporary ideas Toggle Contemporary ideas subsection 4.1 Political economic ecology 4.2 Energy systems language 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental humanities 9 languages العربية भोजपुरी Eesti فارسی Hausa Հայերեն 日本語 Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of environmental issues, nature and culture Environment Human impact on the climate Issues Environmentalism Stewardship Environmental studies Environment in Consulting Education Engineering Humanities Law Policy Science Social science Article index Lists Portal Category Commons v t e The environmental humanities (also ecological humanities ) is an interdisciplinary area of research, drawing on the many environmental sub-disciplines that have emerged in the humanities over the past several decades, in particular environmental literature, environmental philosophy , environmental history , science and technology studies , environmental anthropology , [ 1 ] and environmental communication .

[ 2 ] Environmental humanities employs humanistic questions about meaning, culture, values, ethics, and responsibilities to address pressing environmental problems. The environmental humanities aim to help bridge traditional divides between the sciences and the humanities, as well as between Western , Eastern , and Indigenous ways of relating to the natural world and the place of humans within it. The field also resists the traditional divide between "nature" and "culture," showing how many "environmental" issues have always been entangled in human questions of justice, labor, and politics. Environmental humanities is also a way of synthesizing methods from different fields to create new ways of thinking through environmental problems.

[ 3 ] Emergence of environmental humanities [ edit ] Although the concepts and ideas underpinning environmental humanities date back centuries, the field consolidated under the name "environmental humanities" in the 2000s following steady developments of the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s in humanities and social science fields such as literature, history, philosophy, gender studies, and anthropology. A group of Australian researchers used the name "ecological humanities" to describe their work in the 1990s; the field consolidated under the name "environmental humanities" around 2010.

[ 4 ] The journal Environmental Humanities [ 5 ] was founded in 2012 and Resilience: A Journal of the Environmental Humanities [ 6 ] in 2014, indicating the development of the field and the consolidation around this terminology.

There are dozens of environmental humanities centers, programs, and institutions around the world. Some of the more prominent ones are the fully funded [ 7 ] Environmental Humanities Graduate Program at the University of Utah , the oldest environmental humanities graduate program in America, [ 8 ] the Rachel Carson Center for Environment and Society (RCC) at LMU Munich , the Center for Culture, History, and Environment (CHE) at the University of Wisconsin–Madison , The Center for Energy and Environmental Research in the Human Sciences at Rice University , the Penn Program in Environmental Humanities at the University of Pennsylvania , the KTH Environmental Humanities Laboratory at KTH Royal Institute of Technology , The Greenhouse at the University of Stavanger , and the international Humanities for the Environment [ 9 ] observatories.

Dozens of universities offer PhDs, Masters of Arts degrees, graduate certificates, and Bachelor of Arts degrees in environmental humanities.

[ 10 ] Courses in environmental humanities are taught on every continent.

[ 8 ] The environmental humanities did not just emerge from Western academic thinkers: indigenous, postcolonial, and feminist thinkers have provided major contributions. These contributions include challenging the human-centered viewpoints that separate "nature" and "culture" and the white, male, European- and North American-centric viewpoints of what constitutes "nature"; revising the literary genre of " nature writing "; and creating new concepts and fields that bridge the academic and the political, such as "environmental justice," " environmental racism ," "the environmentalism of the poor ," "naturecultures," and "the posthuman." [ 4 ] Connectivity ontology [ edit ] The environmental humanities are characterised by a connectivity ontology and a commitment to two fundamental axioms relating to the need to submit to ecological laws and to see humanity as part of a larger living system.

One of the fundamental ontological presuppositions of environmental humanities is that the organic world and its inorganic parts are seen as a single system whereby each part is linked to each other part. This world view in turn shares an intimate connection with Lotka 's physiological philosophy and the associated concept of the "World Engine".

[1] When we see everything as connected, then the traditional questions of the humanities concerning economic and political justice become enlarged, into a consideration of how justice is connected with our transformation of our environment and ecosystems .

The consequence of such connectivity ontology is, as proponents of the environmental humanities argue, that we begin to seek out a more inclusive concept of justice that includes non-humans within the domain of those to whom rights are owing. This broadened conception of justice involves "enlarged" or "ecological thinking", which presupposes the enhancement of knowledge sharing within fields of plural and diverse ‘knowledges’. This kind of knowledge sharing is called transdisciplinarity. It has links with the political philosophy of Hannah Arendt and the works of Italo Calvino . As Calvino put it, "enlarge[s] the sphere of what we can imagine". It also has connections with Leibniz's Enlightenment project where the sciences are simultaneously abridged while also being enlarged.

[2] The situation is complicated, however, by the recognition of the fact that connections are both non-linear and linear . The environmental humanities, therefore, require both linear and non-linear modes of language through which reasoning about justice can be done. Thus there is a motivation to find linguistic modes which can adequately express both linear and non-linear connectivities.

Axioms [ edit ] According to some thinkers, there are three axioms of environmental humanities: The axiom of submission to ecosystem laws ; The axiom of ecological kinship, which situates humanity as a participant in a larger living system; and The axiom of the social construction of ecosystems and ecological unity, which states that ecosystems and nature may be merely convenient conceptual entities (Marshall, 2002).

Putting the first and second axioms another way, the connections between and among living things are the basis for how ecosystems are understood to work, and thus constitute laws of existence and guidelines for behaviour (Rose 2004).

The first of these axioms has a tradition in social sciences ( see Marx, 1968: 3). From the second axiom the notions of " ecological embodiment/ embeddedness " and "habitat" have emerged from Political Theory with a fundamental connectivity to rights, democracy, and ecologism (Eckersley 1996: 222, 225; Eckersley 1998).

The third axiom comes from the strong 'self-reflective' tradition of all 'humanities' scholarship and it encourages the environmental humanities to investigate its own theoretical basis (and without which, the environmental humanities is just 'ecology').

Contemporary ideas [ edit ] Political economic ecology [ edit ] See also: Political ecology Some theorists have suggested that the inclusion of non-humans in the consideration of justice links ecocentric philosophy with political economics. This is because the theorising of justice is a central activity of political economic philosophy. If in accordance with the axioms of environmental humanities, theories of justice are enlarged to include ecological values, then the necessary result is the synthesis of the concerns of ecology with that of political economy: i.e. political economic ecology.

Energy systems language [ edit ] The question of what language can best depict the linear and non-linear causal connections of ecological systems appears to have been taken up by the school of ecology known as systems ecology . To depict the linear and non-linear internal relatedness of ecosystems where the laws of thermodynamics hold significant consequences (Hannon et al. 1991: 80), Systems Ecologist H.T. Odum (1994) predicated the Energy Systems Language on the principles of ecological energetics . In ecological energetics, just as in environmental humanities, the causal bond between connections is considered an ontic category (see Patten et al. 1976: 460). Moreover, as a result of simulating ecological systems with the energy systems language, H.T. Odum made the controversial suggestion that embodied energy could be understood as value , which in itself is a step into the field of Political Economic Ecology noted above.

See also [ edit ] Animal studies Anthropocene Bioprospecting Bioregionalism Biosemiotics Climate justice Cultural geography Deep ecology Ecocentrism Ecocriticism Ecofeminism Ecomusicology Ecosemiotics Environmental history Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Green politics Political ecology Posthumanism Sexecology Social ecology Systems ecology Value theory Notes [ edit ] ^ Rose, Deborah Bird; van Dooren, Thom; Chrulew, Matthew; Cooke, Stuart; Kearnes, Matthew; O'Gorman, Emily (2012-05-01).

"Thinking Through the Environment, Unsettling the Humanities" .

Environmental Humanities .

1 (1): 1– 5.

doi : 10.1215/22011919-3609940 .

hdl : 10072/61242 .

ISSN 2201-1919 .

^ Milstein, T. & Castro-Sotomayor, J. (2020). Routledge Handbook of Ecocultural Identity. London, UK: Routledge.

https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351068840 ^ "The Environmental Humanities at UCLA" . Retrieved 2019-09-25 .

^ a b Emmett, Robert S. (2017-10-06).

The environmental humanities : a critical introduction .

ISBN 9780262036764 .

OCLC 978286393 .

^ Environmental Humanities ^ Resilience: A Journal of the Environmental Humanities ^ "Funding & Financial Aid - Environmental Humanities Program - University of Utah" .

^ a b O’Gorman, Emily, Thom van Dooren, Ursula Münster, Joni Adamson, Christof Mauch, Sverker Sörlin, Marco Armiero, Kati Lindström, Donna Houston, José Augusto Pádua, Kate Rigby, Owain Jones, Judy Motion, Stephen Muecke, Chia-ju Chang, Shuyuan Lu, Christopher Jones, Lesley Green, Frank Matose, Hedley Twidle, Matthew Schneider-Mayerson, Bethany Wiggin, and Dolly Jørgensen. " Teaching the environmental humanities: international perspectives and practices ." Environmental Humanities 11, no. 2 (2019): 427-460.

^ Humanities for the Environment ^ " "Where to Study - ASLE" " .

Association for the Study of Literature and Environment .

^ S. Kingsland (1985).

Modeling Nature . The University of Chicago Press. Chapter 2.

^ L. Courtart, translated by D. Rutherford, R. T. Monroe (2002).

The Logic of Leibniz . Chapter 5. Archived from the original on 2005-12-17 . Retrieved 2006-01-27 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) References [ edit ] Italo Calvino, On Fourier, III: A Utopia of Fine Dust, The Literature Machine, Picador, London.

R. Eckersley (1996) ‘Greening Liberal Democracy’, in Doherty, B. and de Geus, M. ed.

Democracy & Green Political Thought: Sustainability, Rights and Citizenship , Routledge, London, pp. 212–236.

R. Eckersley (1998) ‘The Death of Nature and the Birth of Ecological Humanities’, Organization and Environment , Vol 11, No. 2, pp. 183–185.

R. Eckersley (2001) 'Symposium Green Thinking – from Australia', Environmental Politics , Vol.10, No.4, pp. 85–102.

J.B. Foster and P.Burkett (2004) ‘Ecological Economics And Classical Marxism’, Organization & Environment , Vol. 17, No.1, pp. 32–60.

B. Hannon, R.Costanza and R.Ulanowicz (1991) ‘A General Accounting Framework for Ecological Systems: A Functional Taxonomy for Connectivist Ecology’, Theoretical Population Biology , Vol. 40, 78-104.

A. Marshall (2002) The Unity of Nature: Wholeness and Disintegration in Ecology and Science . London: Imperial College Press.

J. Martinez-Alier (1987) Ecological Economics , Basil Blackwell.

K. Marx (1968), in Karl Marx: 1818/1968, a collection of essays , Inter Nationes, Bad Godesberg.

H.T. Odum (1994) Ecological and General Systems: An Introduction to Systems Ecology , Colorado University Press, Boulder, Colorado.

B.C. Patten, R.W.Bosserman, J.T.Finn and W.B.Cale (1976) ‘Propagation of Cause in Ecosystems’, in Patten, B.C. ed.

Systems Analysis and Systems Simulation in Ecology , Academic Press inc. New York.

S. Podolinsky (2004) ‘Socialism And The Unity Of Physical Forces’, Organization & Environment , Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 61–75.

D. Rose and L. Robin (2004) 'The Ecological Humanities in Action: An Invitation', Australian Humanities Review, 31-2 D.R. Weiner (2000) Models of Nature: Ecology, Conservation and Cultural Revolution in Soviet Russia , University of Pittsburgh Press, U.S.A.

External links [ edit ] Environmental Humanities (journal) Resilience: A Journal of the Environmental Humanities (journal) "What is the Environmental Humanities?" The Environmental Humanities at UCLA .

Environment & Society Portal D. E. Nye, L. Rugg, J. Fleming, and R. Emmett (2013), " Background Paper: The Emergence of the Environmental Humanities" . Mistra, the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Environmental Research.

R. Hutchings (2014) 'Understanding of and Vision for the Environmental Humanities', Environmental Humanities , vol. 4, pp. 213-220 Archived 2017-12-02 at the Wayback Machine T. Griffiths 'The Humanities and an Environmentally Sustainable Australia', Appendix 1 in The Australian Academy of the Humanities, "The Humanities and Australia's National Research Priorities', Report prepared for the Commonwealth Department of Education, Science and Training, April 2003 v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_humanities&oldid=1287954423 " Categories : Environmental humanities Environmentalism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 13:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental humanities 9 languages Add topic

