Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Ultra-weak solution 1.2 Weak solution 1.3 Strong solution 2 Perfect play 3 Solved games 4 Weak-solves 5 Partially solved games 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Solved game 10 languages Català Deutsch Español Français 한국어 עברית Português Русский 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Game whose outcome can be correctly predicted A solved game is a game whose outcome (win, lose or draw ) can be correctly predicted from any position, assuming that both players play perfectly. This concept is usually applied to abstract strategy games , and especially to games with full information and no element of chance; solving such a game may use combinatorial game theory or computer assistance.

Overview [ edit ] A two-player game can be solved on several levels: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Ultra-weak solution [ edit ] Prove whether the first player will win, lose or draw from the initial position, given perfect play on both sides (see § Perfect play , below) . This can be a non-constructive proof (possibly involving a strategy-stealing argument ) that need not actually determine any details of the perfect play.

Weak solution [ edit ] Provide one algorithm for each of the two players, such that the player using it can achieve at least the optimal outcome, regardless of the opponent's moves, from the start of the game, using reasonable computational resources.

Strong solution [ edit ] Provide an algorithm that uses reasonable computational resources and finds optimal plays for both players from all legal positions.

Despite their name, many game theorists believe that "ultra-weak" proofs are the deepest, most interesting and valuable. "Ultra-weak" proofs require a scholar to reason about the abstract properties of the game, and show how these properties lead to certain outcomes if perfect play is realized.

[ citation needed ] By contrast, "strong" proofs often proceed by brute force — using a computer to exhaustively search a game tree to figure out what would happen if perfect play were realized. The resulting proof gives an optimal strategy for every possible position on the board. However, these proofs are not as helpful in understanding deeper reasons why some games are solvable as a draw, and other, seemingly very similar games are solvable as a win.

Given the rules of any two-person game with a finite number of positions, one can always trivially construct a minimax algorithm that would exhaustively traverse the game tree. However, since for many non-trivial games such an algorithm would require an infeasible amount of time to generate a move in a given position, a game is not considered to be solved weakly or strongly unless the algorithm can be run by existing hardware in a reasonable time. Many algorithms rely on a huge pre-generated database and are effectively nothing more.

As a simple example of a strong solution, the game of tic-tac-toe is easily solvable as a draw for both players with perfect play (a result manually determinable). Games like nim also admit a rigorous analysis using combinatorial game theory .

Whether a game is solved is not necessarily the same as whether it remains interesting for humans to play. Even a strongly solved game can still be interesting if its solution is too complex to be memorized; conversely, a weakly solved game may lose its attraction if the winning strategy is simple enough to remember (e.g., Maharajah and the Sepoys ). An ultra-weak solution (e.g., Chomp or Hex on a sufficiently large board) generally does not affect playability.

Perfect play [ edit ] In game theory , perfect play is the behavior or strategy of a player that leads to the best possible outcome for that player regardless of the response by the opponent. Perfect play for a game is known when the game is solved.

[ 1 ] Based on the rules of a game, every possible final position can be evaluated (as a win, loss or draw). By backward reasoning , one can recursively evaluate a non-final position as identical to the position that is one move away and best valued for the player whose move it is. Thus a transition between positions can never result in a better evaluation for the moving player, and a perfect move in a position would be a transition between positions that are equally evaluated. As an example, a perfect player in a drawn position would always get a draw or win, never a loss. If there are multiple options with the same outcome, perfect play is sometimes considered the fastest method leading to a good result, or the slowest method leading to a bad result.

Perfect play can be generalized to non- perfect information games, as the strategy that would guarantee the highest minimal expected outcome regardless of the strategy of the opponent. As an example, the perfect strategy for rock paper scissors would be to randomly choose each of the options with equal (1/3) probability. The disadvantage in this example is that this strategy will never exploit non-optimal strategies of the opponent, so the expected outcome of this strategy versus any strategy will always be equal to the minimal expected outcome.

Although the optimal strategy of a game may not (yet) be known, a game-playing computer might still benefit from solutions of the game from certain endgame positions (in the form of endgame tablebases ), which will allow it to play perfectly after some point in the game.

Computer chess programs are well known for doing this.

Solved games [ edit ] Awari (a game of the Mancala family) The variant of Oware allowing game ending "grand slams" was strongly solved by Henri Bal and John Romein at the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam , Netherlands (2002). Either player can force the game into a draw.

Chopsticks Strongly solved. If two players both play perfectly, the game will go on indefinitely.

[ citation needed ] Connect Four The game of Connect Four has been solved.

Solved first by James D. Allen on October 1, 1988, and independently by Victor Allis on October 16, 1988.

[ 3 ] The first player can force a win. Strongly solved by John Tromp's 8-ply database [ 4 ] (Feb 4, 1995). Weakly solved for all boardsizes where width+height is at most 15 (as well as 8×8 in late 2015) [ 3 ] (Feb 18, 2006). Solved for all boardsizes where width+height equals 16 on May 22, 2024.

[ 5 ] In 2025, the classic 7x6 board was strongly solved in terms of a win-draw-loss look-up table.

[ 6 ] Free gomoku Solved by Victor Allis (1993). The first player can force a win without opening rules.

[ 1 ] Ghost Solved by Alan Frank using the Official Scrabble Players Dictionary in 1987.

[ 7 ] Hexapawn 3×3 variant solved as a win for black, several other larger variants also solved.

[ 8 ] Kalah Most variants solved by Geoffrey Irving, Jeroen Donkers and Jos Uiterwijk (2000) except Kalah (6/6). The (6/6) variant was solved by Anders Carstensen (2011). Strong first-player advantage was proven in most cases.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] L game Easily solvable. Either player can force the game into a draw.

Maharajah and the Sepoys This asymmetrical game is a win for the sepoys player with correct play.

[ citation needed ] Nim Strongly solved.

[ 11 ] Nine men's morris Solved by Ralph Gasser (1993). Either player can force the game into a draw.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Order and Chaos Order (First player) wins.

[ 14 ] Ohvalhu Weakly solved by humans, but proven by computers.

[ citation needed ] (Dakon is, however, not identical to Ohvalhu, the game which actually had been observed by de Voogt) [ citation needed ] Pangki Strongly solved by Jason Doucette (2001).

[ 15 ] The game is a draw.  There are only two unique first moves if you discard mirrored positions. One forces the draw, and the other gives the opponent a forced win in 15 moves.

Pentago Strongly solved by Geoffrey Irving with use of a supercomputer at NERSC . The first player wins.

Quarto Solved by Luc Goossens (1998). Two perfect players will always draw.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Renju -like game without opening rules involved Claimed to be solved by János Wagner and István Virág (2001).

[ 19 ] A first-player win.

Teeko Solved by Guy Steele (1998). Depending on the variant either a first-player win or a draw.

[ 20 ] Three men's morris Trivially solvable. Either player can force the game into a draw.

[ citation needed ] Three musketeers Strongly solved by Johannes Laire in 2009, and weakly solved by Ali Elabridi in 2017.

[ 21 ] It is a win for the blue pieces (Cardinal Richelieu's men, or, the enemy).

[ 22 ] Tic-tac-toe Extremely trivially strongly solvable because of the small game tree.

[ 23 ] The game is a draw if no mistakes are made, with no mistake possible on the opening move.

Wythoff's game Strongly solved by W. A. Wythoff in 1907.

[ 24 ] Weak-solves [ edit ] English draughts (checkers) This 8×8 variant of draughts was weakly solved on April 29, 2007, by the team of Jonathan Schaeffer . From the standard starting position, both players can guarantee a draw with perfect play.

[ 25 ] Checkers has a search space of 5×10 20 possible game positions.

[ 26 ] The number of calculations involved was 10 14 , which were done over a period of 18 years. The process involved from 200 desktop computers at its peak down to around 50.

[ 27 ] Fanorona Weakly solved by Maarten Schadd. The game is a draw.

[ 28 ] Losing chess Weakly solved in 2016 as a win for White beginning with 1. e3.

[ 29 ] Othello (Reversi) Weakly solved in 2023 by Hiroki Takizawa, a researcher at Preferred Networks .

[ 30 ] However, the paper's conclusions are contested.

[ 31 ] From the standard starting position on an 8×8 board, a perfect play by both players will result in a draw. Othello is the largest game solved to date, with a search space of 10 28 possible game positions.

Pentominoes Weakly solved by H. K. Orman.

[ 32 ] It is a win for the first player.

Qubic Weakly solved by Oren Patashnik (1980) and Victor Allis . The first player wins.

Sim Weakly solved: win for the second player.

[ citation needed ] Lambs and tigers Weakly solved by Yew Jin Lim (2007). The game is a draw.

[ 33 ] Partially solved games [ edit ] Chess Main article: Solving chess Fully solving chess remains elusive, and it is speculated that the complexity of the game may preclude it ever being solved. Through retrograde computer analysis and endgame tablebases , strong solutions have been found for all three- to seven-piece endgames , counting the two kings as pieces.

Some variants of chess on a smaller board with reduced numbers of pieces have been solved. Some other popular variants have also been solved; for example, a weak solution to Maharajah and the Sepoys is an easily memorable series of moves that guarantees victory to the "sepoys" player.

Go The 5×5 board was weakly solved for all opening moves in 2002.

[ 34 ] The 7×7 board was weakly solved in 2015.

[ 35 ] Humans usually play on a 19×19 board, which is over 145 orders of magnitude more complex than 7×7.

[ 36 ] Hex A strategy-stealing argument (as used by John Nash ) shows that all square board sizes cannot be lost by the first player. Combined with a proof of the impossibility of a draw, this shows that the game is a first player win (so it is ultra-weak solved).

[ citation needed ] On particular board sizes, more is known: it is strongly solved by several computers for board sizes up to 6×6.

[ citation needed ] Weak solutions are known for board sizes 7×7 (using a swapping strategy ), 8×8, and 9×9; [ citation needed ] in the 8×8 case, a weak solution is known for all opening moves.

[ 37 ] Strongly solving Hex on an N × N board is unlikely as the problem has been shown to be PSPACE-complete .

[ citation needed ] If Hex is played on an N ×( N + 1) board then the player who has the shorter distance to connect can always win by a simple pairing strategy, even with the disadvantage of playing second.

[ citation needed ] International draughts All endgame positions with two through seven pieces were solved, as well as positions with 4×4 and 5×3 pieces where each side had one king or fewer, positions with five men versus four men, positions with five men versus three men and one king, and positions with four men and one king versus four men. The endgame positions were solved in 2007 by Ed Gilbert of the United States. Computer analysis showed that it was highly likely to end in a draw if both players played perfectly.

[ 38 ] [ better source needed ] Morabaraba Strongly solved by Gábor E. Gévay (2015). The first player wins in optimal play.

[ 39 ] m , n , k -game It is trivial to show that the second player can never win; see strategy-stealing argument . Almost all cases have been solved weakly for k ≤ 4. Some results are known for k = 5. The games are drawn for k ≥ 8.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Computer chess Computer Go Computer Othello Game complexity God's algorithm Zermelo's theorem (game theory) References [ edit ] ^ a b c Allis, L.V. (1994).

Searching for solutions in games and artificial intelligence (Thesis). Maastricht University.

doi : 10.26481/dis.19940923la .

^ van den Herik, H.Jaap; Uiterwijk, Jos W.H.M.; van Rijswijck, Jack (2002).

"Games solved: Now and in the future" .

Artificial Intelligence .

134 ( 1– 2): 277– 311.

doi : 10.1016/S0004-3702(01)00152-7 .

^ a b "John's Connect Four Playground" .

tromp.github.io .

^ "UCI Machine Learning Repository: Connect-4 Data Set" .

archive.ics.uci.edu .

^ "ChristopheSteininger/c4" .

github.com .

^ Böck, Markus (1 Jul 2025). "Strongly Solving 7×6 Connect-Four on Consumer Grade Hardware".

arXiv : 2507.05267 [ cs.AI ].

^ Frank, Alan (1987-08-01).

"Ghostbusters" .

Word Ways .

20 (4).

^ Price, Robert.

"Hexapawn" .

www.chessvariants.com .

^ Solving Kalah by Geoffrey Irving, Jeroen Donkers and Jos Uiterwijk.

^ Solving (6,6)-Kalaha by Anders Carstensen.

^ Bouton, C. L.

(1901–1902), "Nim, a game with a complete mathematical theory ", Annals of Mathematics , 3 (14): 35– 39, doi : 10.2307/1967631 , JSTOR 1967631 ^ Gasser, Ralph (1996). "Solving Nine Men's Morris". In Nowakowski, Richard (ed.).

Games of No Chance (PDF) . Vol. 29. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

101– 113.

ISBN 9780521574112 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-07-24 . Retrieved 2022-01-03 .

^ Nine Men's Morris is a Draw by Ralph Gasser ^ "solved: Order wins - Order and Chaos" .

^ Pangki is strongly solved as a draw by Jason Doucette ^ "Quarto" (PDF) .

wouterkoolen.info . Retrieved 29 February 2024 .

^ "414298141056 Quarto Draws Suffice!" .

^ "Quarto" . Archived from the original on 2004-10-12.

^ Wágner, János & Virág, István (March 2001).

"Solving Renju" (PDF) .

Széchenyi Egyetem - University of Győr . p. 30.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 April 2024 . Retrieved 24 April 2024 .

^ Teeko , by E. Weisstein ^ Elabridi, Ali.

"Weakly Solving the Three Musketeers Game Using Artificial Intelligence and Game Theory" (PDF) .

^ Three Musketeers , by J. Lemaire ^ Tic-Tac-Toe , by R. Munroe ^ Wythoff, W. A.

(1907), "A modification of the game of nim" , Nieuw Archief voor Wiskunde , 7 (2): 199– 202 ^ Schaeffer, Jonathan (2007-07-19).

"Checkers Is Solved" .

Science .

317 (5844): 1518– 22.

Bibcode : 2007Sci...317.1518S .

doi : 10.1126/science.1144079 .

PMID 17641166 .

S2CID 10274228 .

^ "Project - Chinook - World Man-Machine Checkers Champion" . Retrieved 2007-07-19 .

^ Mullins, Justin (2007-07-19).

"Checkers 'solved' after years of number crunching" . NewScientist.com news service . Retrieved 2020-12-06 .

^ M.P.D. Schadd; M.H.M. Winands; J.W.H.M. Uiterwijk; H.J. van den Herik; M.H.J. Bergsma (2008).

"Best Play in Fanorona leads to Draw" (PDF) .

New Mathematics and Natural Computation .

4 (3): 369– 387.

doi : 10.1142/S1793005708001124 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2015-04-08 .

^ Watkins, Mark.

"Losing Chess: 1. e3 wins for White" (PDF) . Retrieved 17 January 2017 .

^ Takizawa, Hiroki (2023-10-30). "Othello is Solved".

arXiv : 2310.19387 [ cs.AI ].

^ "HN discussion" .

Hacker News . 2024-11-03.

^ Hilarie K. Orman: Pentominoes: A First Player Win in Games of no chance , MSRI Publications – Volume 29, 1996, pages 339-344. Online: pdf .

^ Yew Jin Lim.

On Forward Pruning in Game-Tree Search Archived 2009-03-25 at the Wayback Machine . Ph.D. Thesis, National University of Singapore , 2007.

^ 5×5 Go is solved by Erik van der Werf ^ "首期喆理围棋沙龙举行 李喆7路盘最优解具有里程碑意义_下棋想赢怕输_新浪博客" .

blog.sina.com.cn .

(which says the 7x7 solution is only weakly solved and it's still under research, 1. the correct komi is 9 (4.5 stone); 2. there are multiple optimal trees - the first 3 moves are unique - but within the first 7 moves there are 5 optimal trees; 3. There are many ways to play that don't affect the result) ^ Counting legal positions in Go Archived 2007-09-30 at the Wayback Machine , Tromp and Farnebäck, accessed 2007-08-24.

^ P. Henderson, B. Arneson, and R. Hayward, [webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~hayward/papers/solve8.pdf Solving 8×8 Hex ], Proc. IJCAI-09 505-510 (2009) Retrieved 29 June 2010.

^ Some of the nine-piece endgame tablebase by Ed Gilbert ^ Gevay, Gabor E.; Danner, Gabor (September 2016). "Calculating Ultrastrong and Extended Solutions for Nine Men's Morris, Morabaraba, and Lasker Morris".

IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games .

8 (3): 256– 267.

doi : 10.1109/TCIAIG.2015.2420191 .

ISSN 1943-068X .

Further reading [ edit ] Allis, Beating the World Champion? The state-of-the-art in computer game playing.

in New Approaches to Board Games Research.

External links [ edit ] Computational Complexity of Games and Puzzles by David Eppstein.

GamesCrafters solving two-person games with perfect information and no chance v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solved_game&oldid=1304953728 " Categories : Mathematical games Abstract strategy games Combinatorial game theory Solved games Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2019 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 04:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solved game 10 languages Add topic

