Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 The beginnings 3 The unconscious 4 Personality structure 5 Defense mechanisms 6 Psychology theories Toggle Psychology theories subsection 6.1 Psychosexual development 6.2 Neo-analytic theory 7 Criticisms 8 Application to the arts and humanities 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 11.1 Books 11.2 Online papers 11.3 Others 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Psychoanalytic theory 10 languages العربية فارسی Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Português Српски / srpski தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory of personality organization developed by Sigmund Freud Psychoanalytic theory is the theory of the innate structure of the human soul and the dynamics of personality development relating to the practice of psychoanalysis , a method of research and for treating of mental disorders ( psychopathology ). Laid out by Sigmund Freud in the late 19th century (s.

The Interpretation of Dreams ), he developed the theory and practice of psychoanalysis until his death in 1939. Since then, it has been further refined, also divided into various sub-areas, but independent of this, Freuds structural distinction of the soul into three functionally interlocking instances has been largely retained.

Psychoanalysis with its theoretical core came to full prominence in the last third of the twentieth century, as part of the flow of critical discourse regarding psychological treatments in the 1970s.

[ 1 ] Freud himself had ceased his physiological research of the neural brain organisation in 1906 (cf.

history ).

[ 2 ] shifting his focus to psychology and the treatment of mental health issues by using free associations and the phenonmenon of transference . Psychoanalysis is based on the distinction between unconscious and conscious processes, and emphasized the recognition of childhood events that influence the mental functioning of adults. Freud's consideration of human evolutionary history ( genetics ) and then the aspect of individual psychological development in cultural contexts gave the psychoanalytic theory its characteristics.

[ 3 ] Definition [ edit ] Psychoanalytic and psychoanalytical are used in English. The latter is the older term, and at first, simply meant 'relating to the analysis of the human psyche.' But with the emergence of psychoanalysis as a distinct clinical practice, both terms came to describe that. Although both are still used, today, the normal adjective is psychoanalytic.

[ 4 ] Psychoanalysis is defined in the Oxford English Dictionary as A therapeutic method, originated by Sigmund Freud, for treating mental disorders by investigating the interaction of conscious and unconscious elements in the patient's mind and bringing repressed fears and conflicts into the conscious mind, using techniques such as dream interpretation and free association. Also: a system of psychological theory is associated with this method.

[ 5 ] The beginnings [ edit ] Freud began his studies on psychoanalysis in collaboration with Dr.

Josef Breuer , most notably in relation to the case study of Anna O.

[ 6 ] Anna O. was subject to a number of psychosomatic disturbances, such as not being able to drink out of fear.

[ 7 ] Breuer and Freud found that hypnosis was a great help in discovering more about Anna O. and her treatment. Freud frequently referred to the study on Anna O. in his lectures on the origin and development of psychoanalysis.

Observations in the Anna O. case led Freud to theorize that the problems faced by hysterical patients could be associated with painful childhood experiences that could not be recalled. The influence of these lost memories shaped the feelings, thoughts, and behaviors of patients. These studies contributed to the development of the psychoanalytic theory.

[ 8 ] The unconscious [ edit ] In psychoanalytic theory, the unconscious mind consists of ideas and drives that have been subject to the mechanism of Repression : anxiety-producing impulses in childhood are barred from consciousness, but do not cease to exist, and exert a constant pressure in the direction of consciousness. However, the content of the unconscious is only knowable to consciousness through its representation in a disguised or distorted form, by way of dreams and neurotic symptoms, as well as in slips of the tongue and jokes . The psychoanalyst seeks to interpret these conscious manifestations in order to understand the nature of the repressed. In psychoanalytic terms, the unconscious does not include all that is not conscious, but rather that which is actively repressed from conscious thought. Freud viewed the unconscious as a repository for socially unacceptable ideas, anxiety-producing wishes or desires, traumatic memories, and painful emotions put out of consciousness by the mechanism of repression. Such unconscious mental processes can only be recognized through analysis of their effects in consciousness. Unconscious thoughts are not directly accessible to ordinary introspection, but they are capable of partially evading the censorship mechanism of repression in a disguised form, manifesting, for example, as dream elements or neurotic symptoms . Dreams and symptoms are supposed to be capable of being "interpreted" during psychoanalysis, with the help of methods such as free association , dream analysis, and analysis of verbal slips.

[ 9 ] Personality structure [ edit ] In Freud's model the psyche consists of three different elements, the id, ego, and the superego . The id is the aspect of personality that is driven by internal and basic drives and needs, such as hunger, thirst, and the drive for sex, or libido. The id acts in accordance with the pleasure principle . Due to the instinctual quality of the id, it is impulsive and unaware of the implications of actions. The superego is driven by the morality principle. It enforces the morality of social thought and action on an intrapsychic level. It employs morality, judging wrong and right and using guilt to discourage socially unacceptable behavior.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The ego is driven by the reality principle . The ego seeks to balance the conflicting aims of the id and superego, by trying to satisfy the id's drives in ways that are compatible with reality. The Ego is how we view ourselves: it is what we refer to as 'I' (Freud's word is the German ich , which simply means 'I').

Defense mechanisms [ edit ] The ego balances demands of the id, the superego, and of reality to maintain a healthy state of consciousness, where there is only minimal intrapsychic conflict. It thus reacts to protect the individual from stressors and from anxiety by distorting internal or external reality to a lesser or greater extent. This prevents threatening unconscious thoughts and material from entering the consciousness. The ten different defence mechanisms initially enumerated by Anna Freud [ 12 ] are: repression , regression , reaction formation , isolation of affect , undoing , projection , introjection , turning against the self, reversal into the opposite, and sublimation . In the same work, however, she details other manoeuvres such as identification with the aggressor and intellectualisation that would later come to be considered defence mechanisms in their own right. Furthermore, this list has been greatly expanded upon by other psychoanalysts, with some authors [ 13 ] claiming to enumerate in excess of one hundred defence mechanisms.

Psychology theories [ edit ] Psychosexual development [ edit ] Freud's take on the development of the personality ( psyche ). It is a stage theory that believes progress occurs through stages as the libido is directed to different body parts. The different stages, listed in order of progression, are Oral, Anal, Phallic ( Oedipus complex ), Latency, and Genital. The Genital stage is achieved if people meet all their needs throughout the other stages with enough available sexual energy. Individuals who do not meet their needs in a given stage become fixated or "stuck" in that stage.

Neo-analytic theory [ edit ] Freud's theory and work with psychosexual development led to Neo-Analytic/ Neo-Freudians who also believed in the importance of the unconscious, dream interpretations, defense mechanisms, and the integral influence of childhood experiences but had objections to the theory as well. They do not support the idea that personality development stops at age 6. Instead, they believe development spreads across the lifespan. They extended Freud's work and encompassed more influence from the environment and the importance of conscious thought and the unconscious. The most important theorists are Erik Erikson (Psychosocial Development), Anna Freud , Carl Jung , Alfred Adler and Karen Horney , and including the school of object relations . Erikson's Psychosocial Development theory is based on eight stages of development. The stages are trust vs. mistrust, autonomy vs. shame, initiative vs. guilt, industry vs. inferiority, identity vs. confusion, intimacy vs. isolation, generatively vs. stagnation, and integrity vs. despair. These are important to the psychoanalytic theory because they describe the different stages that people go through in life. Each stage has a major impact on their life outcomes since they are going through conflicts at each stage and whichever route they decide to take, will have certain outcomes.

[ 14 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Some claim that the theory is lacking in empirical data and too focused on pathology .

[ 15 ] Other criticisms are that the theory lacks consideration of culture and its influence on personality.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Psychoanalytic theory comes from Freud and is focused on childhood. This might be an issue since most believe studying children can be inconclusive. One major concern lies in if observed personality will be a lifelong occurrence or if the child will shed it later in life.

[ 18 ] Application to the arts and humanities [ edit ] Psychoanalytic theory is a major influence in Continental philosophy and in aesthetics in particular. Freud is sometimes considered a philosopher. The psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan , and the philosophers Michel Foucault , and Jacques Derrida , have written extensively on how psychoanalysis informs philosophical analysis.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Other philosophers such as Alain Badiou and Rafael Holmberg have argued that the meaning of psychoanalysis for philosophy was not immediately clear, but that they have come to reciprocally define each other.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] When analyzing literary texts, the psychoanalytic theory is sometimes used (often specifically with regard to the motives of the author and the characters) to reveal purported concealed meanings or to purportedly better understand the author's intentions.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Freud's psychoanalytic theories Metapsychology References [ edit ] ^ Tere sa de Lauretis, Freud's Drive (Basingstoke 2008) p. 3 ^ Freud, Sigmund. 1966 [1895]. " Project for a Scientific Psychology ." Pp. 347–445 in Standard Editions 3, edited by J. Strachey . London: Hogarth Press .

^ Tyson, Phyllis. (2002). The challenges of psychoanalytic developmental theory. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 50, 19–52.

^ "psychoanalytical, adj. (and n.)." and "psychoanalytic, adj." OED Online. Oxford University Press, June 2015. Web. 7 September 2015.

^ "psychoanalysis, n." OED Online. Oxford University Press, June 2015. Web. 7 September 2015.

^ [1] , Sigmund Freud: The Origin and Development of Psychoanalysis.

^ [2] , FreudFild: Anna O. Case.

^ Schacter, Gilbert, Wegner. ""Psychology"". Second Edition. New York. Worth Publishers. 2009, 2011. p.12.

^ Freud, S (1915). The Unconscious. XIV (2nd ed.). Hogarth Press, 1955.

^ Friedman, H. W., & Schustack, M. W. (2011). Personality: Classics theories and modern research. (5th Edition). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

^ Silberman, Edward. "Review of Psycho-dynamic Therapy: A Guide to Evidence-Based Practice." Psychiatry: Interpersonal and Biological Processes 75.3 (2012): 298–301. PsycINFO. Web.

^ Freud, A. (1937). The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense, London: Hogarth Press and Institute of Psycho-Analysis. (Revised edition: 1966 (US), 1968 (UK)) ^ Blackman, J. S. (2004). 101 Defenses: How the Mind Shields Itself, New York: Routledge.

^ Young, Kimball; Blum, Gerald S. (December 1953). "Psychoanalytic Theories of Personality".

American Sociological Review .

18 (6): 714.

doi : 10.2307/2088147 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

JSTOR 2088147 .

^ Mahmood, Omar M., and Sawssan R. Ahmed. Psychological Testing and Assessment. New York, NY, US: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group, New York, NY, 2012. PsycINFO. Web.

^ Hoggard, Lori S., Christy M. Byrd, and Robert M. Sellers. "Comparison of African American College Students' Coping with Racially and Nonracially Stressful Events." Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology 18.4 (2012): 329–39. PsycINFO. Web.

^ Giamo, Lisa S., Michael T. Schmitt, and H. R. Outten. "Perceived Discrimination, Group Identification, and Life Satisfaction among Multiracial People: A Test of the Rejection-Identification Model." Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology 18.4 (2012): 319–28. PsycINFO. Web.

^ Behrendt, Ralf-Peter (17 April 2018).

The Evolved Structure of Human Social Behaviour and Personality .

doi : 10.4324/9780429481703 .

ISBN 9780429481703 .

^ Felman, Shoshana. Jacques Lacan and the adventure of insight: Psychoanalysis in contemporary culture. Harvard University Press, 1987.

^ Spector, Jack J. The aesthetics of Freud: A study in psychoanalysis and art. Lane, Allen, 1973.

^ Segal, Hanna. "A psychoanalytic approach to aesthetics." Reading Melanie Klein (1998): 203.

^ Glover, Nicky. Psychoanalytic aesthetics: An introduction to the British School. Karnac Books, 2009.

^ Badiou, Alain (2012).

The Adventure of French Philosophy . Verso.

ISBN 978-1844677931 .

^ Holmberg, Rafael (2023).

"The Failed Interventions of Psychoanalysis: Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience as a Proxy-Intervention to Psychoanalysis and Philosophy" (PDF) .

Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology .

44 (4): 355-366.

doi : 10.1037/teo0000261 .

^ Lye, J.

"Psychoanalysis and Literature" . Retrieved 17 March 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] This " further reading " section may need cleanup .

Please read the editing guide and help improve the section.

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Books [ edit ] Brenner, C. (1973). An Elementary Textbook of Psychoanalysis – Revised edition. New York: International Universities Press.

ISBN 0-385-09884-7 Ellman, S. (2010). When Theories Touch:  A Historical and Theoretical Integration of Psychoanalytic Thought. London: Karnac Books.

ISBN 1-85575-868-7 Laplanche, J.

& Pontalis, J. B. (1974). The Language of Psycho-Analysis. W. W. Norton & Company, ISBN 0-393-01105-4 Online papers [ edit ] Benjamin, J. (1995). Recognition and destruction: An outline of intersubjectivity Boesky, D. (2005). Psychoanalytic controversies contextualized Boston Process of Change Study Group. (2005). The "something more" than interpretation Brenner, C. (1992). The mind as conflict and compromise formation Eagle, M. (1984). Developmental deficit versus dynamic conflict Gill, M. (1984). Psychoanalysis and psychotherapy: A revision Kernberg, O. (2000). Psychoanalysis, psychoanalytic psychotherapy and supportive psychotherapy: contemporary controversies Mitchell, Stephen A. (1984). Object relations theories and the developmental tilt Rubinstein, B. (1975). On the clinical psychoanalytic theory and its role in the inference and confirmation of particular clinical hypotheses Schwartz, W. (2013) Essentials of Psychoanalytic Theory and Practice Sprenger, Scott (2002) Freudian Psychoanalytic Theory Others [ edit ] Freud, Sigmund 1900, Interpretation of Dreams (Chapter 2). Standard Edition.

Grünbaum, Adolf 1986. Precis of Foundations of Psycho-Analysis. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9 : 217–284.

Greenberg, J. and Mitchell, S.A. (1983). Object Relations in Psychoanalytic Theory. Cambridge MASS and London: Harvard University Press.

Klein, Melanie 1932. Chapter 2, The Psychoanalysis of Children. In The Writings of Melanie Klein Volume 2. London: Hogarth Press.

Klein, Melanie (1935), A contribution to the psychogenesis of manic-depressive states, International Journal of Psycho-Analysis 16: 145–74. Republished: Hogarth Press.

Bion, W. (1957), 'On Arrogance', in Second Thoughts. London: Heinemann, pp. 86–92, 161–6.

Benjamin, J. (1990). An Outline of Intersubjectivity: the development of recognition. Psychoanalytic Psychology 7S:33–46.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Psychoanalytic theory .

Library resources about Psychoanalytic theory Resources in your library Resources in other libraries PSY-LOG: Psychoanalytic Web Directory (in French, German and English) René Major article on Foucault and psychoanalysis (in French) The États Generaux de la psychanalyse, which was organized in part by Jacques Derrida and René Major (in French) Critical psychology glossary American Psychoanalytic Association's official website Psychoanalysis – Techniques and Practice v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐d5hqz
Cached time: 20250815092647
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.474 seconds
Real time usage: 0.612 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2008/1000000
Revision size: 19190/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 94174/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2756/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 63168/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.269/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6102723/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  482.077      1 -total
 33.28%  160.456      3 Template:Navbox
 26.58%  128.142      1 Template:Psychology
 24.34%  117.337      1 Template:Reflist
 16.28%   78.474      2 Template:Cite_journal
 12.63%   60.909      1 Template:Short_description
 11.13%   53.640      2 Template:Side_box
 11.11%   53.553      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.77%   51.918      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.04%   48.424      1 Template:Further_reading_cleanup Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:145880:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815092647 and revision id 1295532537. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychoanalytic_theory&oldid=1295532537 " Categories : Psychoanalytic theory Freudian psychology Psychological theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia spam cleanup from March 2022 Wikipedia further reading cleanup Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Use dmy dates from August 2019 This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 09:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychoanalytic theory 10 languages Add topic

