Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Term 2 Proposed identifications 3 In scholarly works 4 In the canon law 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Katechon 8 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Polski Русский Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian philosophical concept The katechon (from Greek : τὸ κατέχον , "that which withholds", or ὁ κατέχων , "the one who withholds"), also known as the restrainer , is a biblical term referring to something that must be removed before the arrival of the " man of sin ." Mentioned in the New Testament, the katechon's uncertain identity has been debated amongst Christian scholars. Common interpretations for the identity include the government, the church, and the Holy Spirit .

Term [ edit ] The term is found in 2 Thessalonians 2:6–7 in an eschatological context: Christians must not behave as if the Day of the Lord would happen tomorrow, since the son of perdition (the Antichrist of 1 and 2 John ) must be revealed before. The author of Second Thessalonians then adds that the revelation of the Antichrist is conditional upon the removal of "something/someone that restrains him" and prevents him being fully manifested. Verse 6 uses the neuter gender in Greek, τὸ κατέχον; and verse 7 the masculine, ὁ κατέχων.

Proposed identifications [ edit ] The Catholic and Eastern Orthodox traditions consider that the Antichrist will come at the End of the World . The katechon , which restrains his coming, was someone or something that was known to the Thessalonians and active in their time: "You know what is restraining" (2 Thes 2:6). As the Catholic New American Bible states: "Traditionally, 2 Thes 2:6 has been applied to the Roman Empire and 2 Thes 2:7 to the Roman emperor [...] as bulwarks holding back chaos (cf Romans 13:1–7)." [ 1 ] However, some understand the katechon as the Grand Monarch or a new Orthodox Emperor, and some as the rebirth of the Holy Roman Empire . Other scholars suggest that the katechon is the Holy Spirit or the Church .

[ 2 ] The last two interpretations are usually believed by Christians supporting a pretribulation rapture .

Finally, the Great Apostasy of the Antichrist within the believers and the Roman Catholic hierarchy is predicted by the Catechism of the Catholic Church (CCC 675-677).

[ 3 ] In scholarly works [ edit ] In Nomos of the Earth , German political thinker Carl Schmitt suggested the historical importance within traditional Christianity of the idea of the katechontic "restrainer" that allows for a Rome-centered Christianity, and that "meant the historical power to restrain the appearance of the Antichrist and the end of the present eon". The katechon represents, for Schmitt, the intellectualization of the ancient State of the Roman Empire , with all its police and military powers to enforce orthodox ethics.

[ 4 ] In his posthumously published diary (the Glossarium ) the entry from December 19, 1947, reads: "I believe in the Katechon: it is for me the only possible way to understand Christian history and to find it meaningful".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] And Schmitt adds: "the Katechon needs to be named for every epoch of the past 1948 years. The place was never unoccupied; otherwise we would no longer be present." [ 6 ] Paolo Virno has a long discussion of the katechon in his book Multitude: Between Innovation and Negation .

[ 7 ] He refers to Schmitt's discussion. Virno says that Schmitt views the katechon as something that impedes the coming of the Antichrist, but because the coming of the Antichrist is a condition for the redemption promised by the Messiah , the katechon also impedes the redemption.

[ 7 ] : 60 Virno uses " katechon " to refer to that which impedes both the War of all against all ( Bellum omnium contra omnes ) and totalitarianism, for example the society in Orwell's Big Brother (Nineteen Eighty-Four) . It impedes both but eliminates neither. Virno locates the katechon in the human ability to use language, which makes it possible to conceive of the negation of something, and also allows the conceptualization of something which can be other than what it is; and in the bioanthropological behavior of humans as social animals, which allows people to know how to follow rules without needing a rule to tell how to follow a rule, then a rule to tell how to follow that rule, and so on to infinity. These capabilities permit people to create social institutions and to dissolve or change them.

[ 7 ] In the canon law [ edit ] In the Canon law of the Catholic Church does not provide for any special rules for governing the Church if the truth of faith of the Great Apostasy and Katechon is realised within it.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The 1917 Code of Canon Law repealed the part of the Decretum Gratiani that allowed the people of God to depose a heretical pope. This procedure of deposition in cases of heresy was never accepted in the history of the Magisterium of the Church.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Adso of Montier-en-Der Apocalypse of Pseudo-Methodius Bound monster Fifth Empire Joachim of Fiore Great Apostasy Great Catholic Monarch Guelphs and Ghibellines King Arthur's messianic return Kyffhäuser legend Last Roman Emperor Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor Prophecy of Merlin Parousia Prophecy of the Popes Sebastianism John Chrysostom References [ edit ] ^ "NAB - 2 Thessalonians 2" .

USCCB . Archived from the original on 28 December 2009 . Retrieved 2020-10-02 .

^ Engleman, Dennis Eugene (1995).

Ultimate Things: An Orthodox Christian Perspective on the End Times . Conciliar Press.

ISBN 0-9622713-9-X .

OCLC 486977993 .

^ "From thence He will come again to judge the living and the dead" " .

675 Before Christ's second coming the Church must pass through a final trial that will shake the faith of many believers.

The persecution that accompanies her pilgrimage on earth will unveil the "mystery of iniquity" in the form of a religious deception offering men an apparent solution to their problems at the price of apostasy from the truth. The supreme religious deception is that of the Antichrist, a pseudo-messianism by which man glorifies himself in place of God and of his Messiah come in the flesh .

^ Schmitt, Carl (2003).

The Nomos of the Earth in the International Law of the Jus Publicum Europaeum . Telos Press. pp.

59– 60.

ISBN 978-0-914386-29-2 .

^ Ullrich, Calvin Dieter (2018-07-03).

"Carl Schmitt: Katechon" .

Critical Legal Thinking . Retrieved 2020-10-02 .

^ a b Joyce, Richard (2019), Simpson, Gerry; Craven, Matthew; Pahuja, Sundhya (eds.), "International Law and the Cold War: Reflections on the Concept of History" , International Law and the Cold War , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

27– 48, doi : 10.1017/9781108615525.002 , ISBN 978-1-108-49918-7 , S2CID 213451543 , retrieved 2020-10-02 ^ a b c Virno, Paolo. (2008).

Multitude: Between Innovation and Negation . Semiotext(e).

ISBN 978-1-58435-050-7 .

OCLC 259926626 .

^ See Can.

333 § 3 . Quote: "No appeal or recourse is permitted against a sentence or decree of the Roman Pontiff." ^ Pope and bishops are juridically qualified as princeps with plenitudo potestatis over their universal or particular Churches (legislative, executive, and judicial power). Cfr.

"Distinzione di poteri e potestà esecutiva" . January 14, 2022.

^ Mgr.

Athanasius Schneider (September 18, 2023).

"Bishop Schneider: "About the Validity of the Pontificate of Pope Francis" " .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2025.

v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios v t e Carl Schmitt Bibliography Publications The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy (1923) The Concept of the Political (1932) Land and Sea (1942) Ex Captivitate Salus (1950) Theory of the Partisan (1963) Concepts Decisionism Katechon Political theology State of exception Schools Conservative Revolution German conservatism Works about The Oxford Handbook of Carl Schmitt (2017) The Atlantic Realists (2022) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Katechon&oldid=1295716248 " Categories : Christian eschatology Prophecy in Christianity Christian terminology New Testament Greek words and phrases Carl Schmitt Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 11:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Katechon 8 languages Add topic

