Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Contents of letter Toggle Contents of letter subsection 2.1 Doctrine of Accommodation 2.2 Queen of sciences 3 Methodology of the letter 4 Joshua argument 5 Reception 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina 5 languages العربية Español Français Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Essay by Galileo The " Letter to The Grand Duchess Christina " is an essay written in 1615 by Galileo Galilei . The intention of this letter was to accommodate Copernicanism with the doctrines of the Catholic Church. Galileo tried to use the ideas of Church Fathers and Doctors to show that any condemnation of Copernicanism would be inappropriate. The letter has been described as a hallmark in the history of the relationship between science and theology , [ 1 ] and a founding text of the Scientific Revolution .

[ 2 ] Cover of Galileo's Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina , printing of 1705 Background [ edit ] Christina was the daughter of Charles III of Lorraine and granddaughter of Catherine de' Medici .

Tiberio Titi – Portrait of Christine of Lorraine Medici , 1600 In 1611 Galileo was informed by a friend, Cigoli , that "ill-disposed men envious of your virtue and merits met [to discuss]... any means by which they could damage you." The number of scholars who disagreed with his Discourse on Floating Bodies , or were simply ill-disposed toward Galileo grew, but other than one letter from Niccolò Lorini there was not much discussion about the issue for the remainder of the year.

Late in 1613, Galileo's former student Benedetto Castelli , a Benedictine monk and lecturer in mathematics at the University of Pisa, wrote to Galileo about the events at a recent breakfast in Pisa with the Grand Duke Cosimo II de' Medici . In the course of conversation at the breakfast Cosimo Boscaglia , a professor of philosophy , argued that the motion of the Earth could not be true, being contrary to the Bible . After breakfast ended, Castelli was called back to answer scriptural arguments against the motion of the Earth from Christina. Castelli took on the role of theologian in response, and convinced everyone there except the Duchess (who he thought was arguing mainly to hear his answers) and Boscaglia (who said nothing during this dialogue).

[ 3 ] Galileo decided to address Christina because of her desire to learn more about astronomy. Christina's position of power would also give the letter more exposure to other nobles and Church leaders.

Justus Sustermans – Portrait of Galileo Galilei , 1636 Galileo replied to Castelli with a long letter laying out his position on the relation between science and Scripture. By 1615, with the controversy over the Earth's motion becoming more widespread and increasingly dangerous, Galileo revised this letter and greatly expanded it; this became the Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina . The letter circulated in manuscript but was not printed until much later, after the Inquisition had condemned Galileo. It appeared in Strasbourg in 1636 with both Italian and Latin text. It was suppressed in Catholic jurisdictions, as were all works of Galileo at that period which dealt with that subject.

[ citation needed ] Contents of letter [ edit ] Galileo establishes two main premises before addressing his conclusion.

God has created Scripture and nature. They cannot contradict each other.

Nature is independent of accommodation, but Scripture is produced to accommodate.

[ 4 ] Galileo argued that the Copernican theory was not just a mathematical calculating tool, but a physical reality. The letter includes a direct paragraph in which Galileo wrote: I hold the sun to be situated motionless in the center of the revolution of the celestial orbs while the earth rotates on its axis and revolves about the sun. They know also that I support this position not only by refuting the arguments of Ptolemy and Aristotle ... especially some pertaining to physical effects whose causes perhaps cannot be determined in any other way, and other astronomical discoveries; these discoveries clearly confute the Ptolemaic system, and they agree admirably with this other position and confirm it.

[ 5 ] This approach caused some, including Dominican friar Niccolò Lorini, to complain to the Inquisition , which in 1616 condemned Copernicanism as philosophically absurd and contrary to scripture. Much later the Inquisition tried Galileo himself and in 1633 condemned him of suspicion of heresy .

Throughout the letter, Galileo includes quotes from St. Augustine .  For example, he cites, "If anyone shall set the authority of Holy Writ against clear and manifest reason, he who does this knows not what he has undertaken; for he opposes to the truth not the meaning of the Bible, which is beyond his comprehension, but rather his own interpretation, not what is in the Bible, but what he has found in himself and imagines to be there." [ 6 ] Doctrine of Accommodation [ edit ] Galileo argues that the Bible is written in a way that is accessible to even uneducated people. Therefore, every word in the Bible cannot be taken literally. He cites an example in which God is described as having hands, which St. Augustine elucidated as not being literal. Further, Galileo cites Cardinal Baronio: "[The] intention of the Holy Spirit is to teach us how one goes to heaven and not how heaven goes." [ 4 ] Queen of sciences [ edit ] Galileo was writing this letter in the context of an ongoing debate about the relationship between theology and philosophy. From medieval times, theology was known as the queen of sciences. Galileo reinterprets this phrase to distinguish the areas of theology vs philosophy. He rejects the belief that theology is the queen because it includes knowledge of all scientific fields. Instead, he says that theology is the queen because it is a vehicle to the highest knowledge of attaining salvation.

Methodology of the letter [ edit ] Galileo starts the letter with a little flattery of the Grand Duchess. He tries to build her up as an authority figure and then presents his own credentials to show that he has similar authority. Since the Grand Duchess was a person of high authority but did not have much knowledge in the field of astronomy, Galileo wrote the letter in a manner understandable to a layperson. He attempts to attain the sympathy of the Duchess by mentioning the unfair attacks made against his honor. He tried to portray "himself as a man of good will who seeks only to disclose the truth." [ 3 ] He states he was motivated to write the letter to justify himself to men of religion he holds in great esteem. The letter can also be seen as a political move for Galileo since having a highly influential and powerful figure on his side would benefit him.

[ 7 ] Joshua argument [ edit ] Critics of the Copernican system used the Battle of Gibeon from the tenth chapter of the Book of Joshua as scriptural evidence against heliocentrism. In the chapter, Joshua asks God to stop the Sun in order to lengthen the day and allow the Israelites to win the battle. When taken literally, this story implies that the Sun is mobile.

[ 8 ] Galileo adopts an Augustinian perspective, while also marginalizing it later. In the Letter to the Grand Duchess he references Augustine of Hippo ’s work De Genesi ad Litteram , which calls for either a compromise between literal translation of scripture and astronomy or an allegorical standpoint, which could resolve future astronomical conflicts arising that could jeopardize the validity of the Bible.

[ 8 ] Whereas his critics took the stopping of the Sun to mean that Sun halts its orbit around the Earth, Galileo interpreted it with a different astronomical viewpoint. He claimed that God stopped the rotation of the Sun rather than its supposed orbital motion. Arguing that the rotation of the Sun drives the entire planetary system, including the daily rotation of the Earth on its axis, he concluded that when God stopped the Sun from spinning, this also stopped the Earth's rotation and so lengthened the day, as Joshua wished. Galileo thus argued that his Copernican reading of the Joshua passage was in fact more literal than the traditional geocentric reading. Galileo did not, however, see this as real evidence in favor of Copernicanism, but simply as a debating point: even if we played by his opponents' rules and gave scientific weight to literal readings of scripture, Copernicanism still won out.

[ 8 ] In summary, Galileo accepted the authority of scriptural passages, as long as they are properly interpreted.

Reception [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this article may not include all significant viewpoints .

Please improve the article or discuss the issue .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Galileo wrote the letter to the Grand Duchess in an effort to convince her of the compatibility of Copernicanism and Scripture. This served as a treatise under the disguise of a letter, with the purpose of addressing the politically powerful, as well as his fellow mathematicians and philosophers. The goal of the secondary audience was targeted to whom he believed was condemning Copernicus. The failure of this stratagem was that he used Christina as his titular audience, instead of the shadow audience he truly sought to persuade. The result was that he was attempting to move an audience unfamiliar with his chosen topic, instead of those who were already disposed on the topic of the movement of the heavens.

[ 3 ] "With his deprecating tone Galileo effectively marks off a group of philosophers and theologians as adversaries whose faults he proceeds to define".

[ 3 ] Within that group were progressive Aristotelians, including Bishop Dini, Cardinals Bellarmine and Barberini, as well as famous Jesuit astronomers at the Collegio Romano ( Roman College ). These men were open to scientific demonstration to progress Copernicus' theories, however Galileo attacks them stating that they "determine in 'hypocritical zeal' to preserve at all costs what they believe, rather than admit what is obvious to their eyes." [ 3 ] This compounds his problems rather than aiding him.

[ 8 ] Moreover, his letter misses out on key facts that include the Church's non-attacking stance on Copernicus when the canon proposed his heliocentric model. A Dominican theologian Tolosani made an unpublished attack on the Copernican system as early as 1544.

Furthermore, the tone of the letter was combative and overly proud. "Many resented his arrogant tone, his presumption for speaking on theological matters, and for crossing over from the world of mathematical astronomy into the world of natural philosophy." [ 3 ] "But he has ruined himself by being so much in love with his own genius and having no respect for others. One should not wonder that everyone conspires to damn him." [ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Letter to Madame Christina of Lorraine, Grand Duchess of Tuscany" .

Interdisciplinary Encyclopedia of Religion and Science . Retrieved 2025-05-27 .

^ Pollmann, Karla (2021). "Commenting on a Commentary: Modes of Reception of Augustine's Literal Commentary on Genesis". In Brachtendorf, Johannes; Drecoll, Volker Henning (eds.).

Augustinus "De Genesi ad litteram": ein kooperativer kommentar . Augustinus - Werk und Wirkung. Paderborn: Brill Ferdinand Schöningh.

ISBN 978-3-506-79128-3 .

^ a b c d e f g Moss, John Dietz (1983).

"Galileo's Letter to Christina: Some Rhetorical Considerations" (PDF) .

Renaissance Quarterly .

36 (4): 547– 576.

doi : 10.2307/2860733 .

JSTOR 2860733 .

^ a b Mørkøre Stigel Hansen, Bjarke (2020-01-02).

"Biblical hermeneutics in Galileo's "Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina": On the issue of negative theology" .

Studia Theologica - Nordic Journal of Theology .

74 (1): 67– 93.

doi : 10.1080/0039338X.2020.1750477 .

ISSN 0039-338X .

^ https://www.inters.org/galilei-madame-christina-Lorraine Galileo's Letter to the Grand Duchess in 1615 ^ Galilei, Galileo.

"Modern Philosophy and The Quest for Certainty" (PDF) .

web.stanford.edu .

^ "Historical Context for Letter to Madame Christina of Lorraine, Grand Duchess of Tuscany Concerning the Use of Bibilical Quotations in Matters of Science (1615) - Galileo Galilei | The Core Curriculum" .

www.college.columbia.edu . Retrieved 2024-01-24 .

^ a b c d Reeves, Eileen (1991). "Augustine and Galileo on Reading the Heavens".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

52 (4): 563– 579.

doi : 10.2307/2709966 .

JSTOR 2709966 .

Sources [ edit ] Stillman Drake (translator and editor) (1957).

Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo . New York: Doubleday Anchor Books.

ISBN 0-385-09239-3 .  This has the full text of the letter, with commentary, as well as other short works of Galileo.

Maurice A. Finocchiario (1989).

The Galileo Affair . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-06662-5 .  This compilation of relevant original documents also includes a 43-page introduction by the author.

External links [ edit ] A link to Moss' "Galileo's Letter to Christina : Some Rhetorical Considerations": [1] Galileo's Letter to the Grand Duchess in 1615 Fordham University Modern History Sourcebook on "Galileo Galilei: Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina of Tuscany , 1615": [2] v t e Galileo Galilei Scientific career Observational astronomy Galileo affair Galileo's escapement Galilean invariance Galilean moons Galilean transformation Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment Phases of Venus Celatone Thermoscope Works De motu antiquiora (1589–1592) Sidereus Nuncius (1610) Letters on Sunspots (1613) Letter to Benedetto Castelli (1613) " Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina " (1615) " Discourse on the Tides " (1616) Discourse on Comets (1619) The Assayer (1623) Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632) Two New Sciences (1638) Family Vincenzo Galilei (father) Michelagnolo Galilei (brother) Vincenzo Gamba (son) Maria Celeste (daughter) Marina Gamba (mistress) Related " And yet it moves " Villa Il Gioiello Galileo's paradox Galileo's ship Sector Museo Galileo Galileo's telescopes Galileo's objective lens Tribune of Galileo Galileo thermometer Galileo project spacecraft Galileo Galilei Airport Galileo National Telescope Astronomers Monument In popular culture Life of Galileo (1943 play) Lamp At Midnight (1947 play) Galileo (1968 film) Galileo (1975 film) Starry Messenger (1996 book) Galileo's Daughter: A Historical Memoir of Science, Faith, and Love (1999 book) Galileo Galilei (2002 opera) Galileo's Dream (2009 novel) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Letter_to_the_Grand_Duchess_Christina&oldid=1298217833 " Categories : Essays by Galileo Galilei 1615 essays Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2009 Articles needing more viewpoints from June 2025 This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 04:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina 5 languages Add topic

