Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Wildlife 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Togiak National Wildlife Refuge 4 languages Cebuano Deutsch Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 59°19′59″N 160°15′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 59.333°N 160.250°W ﻿ / 59.333; -160.250 [ 1 ] From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Togiak National Wildlife Refuge IUCN category IV (habitat/species management area) Ahklun and Wood River Mountains, Togiak National Wildlife Refuge Map of Alaska , United States Location Alaska , United States Nearest city Dillingham, Alaska Coordinates 59°19′59″N 160°15′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 59.333°N 160.250°W ﻿ / 59.333; -160.250 [ 1 ] Area 4,102,537 acres (16,602.38 km 2 ) Established 1980 Governing body U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Website Togiak NWR Map of Togiak National Wildlife Refuge Togiak National Wildlife Refuge is in the Dillingham and Bethel Census Areas, Alaska. It is dominated by the Ahklun Mountains in the north and the cold waters of Bristol Bay to the south. The natural forces that have shaped this land range from the violent and powerful to the geologically patient.

Earthquakes and volcanoes filled the former role, and their marks can still be found, but it was the gradual advance and retreat of glacial ice that carved many of the physical features of this refuge.

The refuge has a surface area of 4,102,537 acres (16,602.4 km 2 ). It is the fourth-largest National Wildlife Refuge in the United States as well as the state of Alaska, which has all eleven of the largest NWRs. It is bordered in the southeast by Wood-Tikchik State Park , the largest state park in the United States.

The Togiak Wilderness occupies 2,274,066 acres (920,282 ha) in the northern half of the refuge. It protects pristine rivers, lakes, and steep-sloped mountains, including the rugged Ahklun Mountains and Wood River Range, which are located partly within the wilderness.  Parts of the Kanektok , Goodnews , and Togiak drainages are also located within the boundaries of the Togiak Wilderness.

[ 2 ] Wildlife [ edit ] Caribou at the refuge The refuge is home to 48 mammal species, 31 of which are terrestrial and 17 marine. More than 150,000 caribou from two herds, the Nushagak Peninsula and the Mulchatna, make use of refuge lands, which they share with wolf packs, moose , brown and black bear , coyote , Canadian lynx , Arctic fox , muskrat , wolverine , red fox , marmot , beaver , marten , two species of otter , and porcupine , among other land mammals.

Seals , sea lions , walrus and whales are found at various times of year along the refuge's 600 miles (970 km) of coastline.

Within the refuge, the waters produce over 3 million Chinook , sockeye , coho , pink , and chum salmon. Not including the five species of salmon that inhabit the region, there are 27 species found in the waters, including Dolly Varden , Arctic grayling , and rainbow trout . The region's salmon are a primary subsistence source for locals, and provide a very important commercial and recreational fishery.

Some 201 species of birds have been sighted on Togiak Refuge. Threatened species can occasionally be found here, including Steller's and spectacled eiders. Several arctic goose species frequent the refuge, along with murres , seven species of owls , peregrine falcons , dowitchers , Lapland longspurs and a rich variety of other seabirds , waterfowl , shorebirds , songbirds and raptors . Refuge staff and volunteers have also documented more than 500 species of plants, demonstrating a high degree of biodiversity for a sub-arctic area.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Togiak National Wildlife Refuge .

List of largest National Wildlife Refuges References [ edit ] ^ "Togiak National Wildlife Refuge" .

Geographic Names Information System .

United States Geological Survey , United States Department of the Interior .

^ Togiak National Wildlife Refuge Archived 2011-03-11 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Refuge profile Refuge website Togiak Wilderness - Wilderness.net This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service .

v t e Protected areas of Alaska Federal National Conservation Areas Steese National Forests Chugach Tongass National Historic Areas and Historical Parks Aleutian World War II Klondike Gold Rush Sitka National Monuments Admiralty Island Aleutian Islands World War II Aniakchak Cape Krusenstern Misty Fjords National Parks Denali Gates of the Arctic Glacier Bay Katmai Kenai Fjords Kobuk Valley Lake Clark Wrangell–St. Elias National Preserves Bering Land Bridge Noatak Yukon–Charley Rivers National Trails Chilkoot Iditarod National Wild and Scenic Rivers Alagnak Alatna Andreafsky Aniakchak Beaver Creek Birch Creek Charley Chilikadrotna Delta Fortymile Gulkana Ivishak John Kobuk North Fork Koyukuk Mulchatna Noatak Nowitna Salmon Selawik Sheenjek Tinayguk Tlikakila Unalakleet Wind National Wildlife Refuges Alaska Maritime Alaska Peninsula Arctic Becharof Innoko Izembek Kanuti Kenai Kodiak Koyukuk Nowitna Selawik Tetlin Togiak Yukon Delta Yukon Flats Other National Historic Landmarks National Natural Landmarks National Register of Historic Places Wilderness Areas State State Parks Afognak Island Chilkat Chugach Denali Kachemak Bay Point Bridget Shuyak Island Wood-Tikchik State Forests Haines Southeast Tanana Valley Alaska Department of Natural Resources v t e National Wildlife Refuges of the United States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa Guam Puerto Rico U.S. Minor Outlying Islands U.S. Virgin Islands Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States 2 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Togiak_National_Wildlife_Refuge&oldid=1266603507 " Categories : IUCN Category IV Protected areas of Bethel Census Area, Alaska Protected areas of Dillingham Census Area, Alaska National Wildlife Refuges in Alaska Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Use mdy dates from January 2025 Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 January 2025, at 10:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Togiak National Wildlife Refuge 4 languages Add topic

