Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions Toggle Definitions subsection 1.1 Non-wood forest products 2 Uses 3 Economic importance 4 Impacts on people Toggle Impacts on people subsection 4.1 Gendered differences 4.2 In ethnic minority communities 5 Research 6 See also 7 Sources 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Non-timber forest product 15 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Polski Русский සිංහල Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Commodities obtained from forests other than timber Dried Mahua flowers Tendu patta (leaf) collection Non-timber forest products ( NTFPs ) are useful foods, substances, materials and/or commodities obtained from forests other than timber. Harvest ranges from wild collection to farming. They typically include game animals , fur-bearers , nuts , seeds , berries , mushrooms , oils , sap , foliage , pollarding , medicinal plants , peat , mast , fuelwood , fish, insects, spices, and forage .

[ 1 ] Overlapping concepts include non-wood forest products (NWFPs) , [ 2 ] wild forest products , minor forest produce , [ 3 ] special, minor, alternative and secondary forest products – for further distinctions see the definition section below Research on NTFPs has focused on their ability to be produced as commodities for rural incomes and markets, as an expression of traditional knowledge or as a livelihood option for rural household needs, as a key component of sustainable forest management and conservation strategies, and for their important role in improving dietary diversity and providing nutritious food, particularly for forest-proximate peoples.

[ 2 ] All research promotes forest products as valuable commodities and tools that can promote the conservation of forests.

NTFPs in particular highlight forest products which are of value to local people and communities, but have been overlooked in the wake of forest management priorities (for example, timber production and animal forage). For example, some 2.4 billion people – in both urban and rural settings – use wood-based energy for cooking.

[ 4 ] Different communities are involved in collecting and using forest NTFPs, often with different minority communities or gender roles determining how they are used.

In recent decades, interest has grown in using NTFPs as alternatives or supplements to forest management practices. In some forest types, under the right political and social conditions, forests can be managed to increase NTFP diversity, and consequently, to increase biodiversity and potentially economic diversity.

Black truffle cultivation in the Mediterranean area is highly profitable when well managed.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Definitions [ edit ] The wide variety of NTFPs includes mushrooms , huckleberries , ferns , transplants, seed cones, pine nuts , tree nuts , moss , maple syrup , cork, cinnamon , rubber, wild pigs, tree oils and resins , and ginseng . The United Kingdom 's Forestry Commission defines NTFPs as "any biological resources found in woodlands except timber", [ 7 ] and Forest Harvest, part of the Reforesting Scotland project, defines them as "materials supplied by woodlands - except the conventional harvest of timber".

[ 8 ] These definitions include wild and managed game, fish, and insects.

[ 9 ] NTFPs are commonly grouped into categories such as floral greens, decoratives, medicinal plants , foods, flavors and fragrances, fibers, and saps and resins.

Non-wood forest products [ edit ] Non-wood forest products (NWFPs) [ 2 ] are a subset of NTFP; they exclude woodfuel and wood charcoal. Both NWFP and NTFP include wild foods. Worldwide, around 1 billion people depend to some extent on wild foods such as wild meat, edible insects, edible plant products, mushrooms and fish, which often contain high levels of key micronutrients.

[ 4 ] Several million households world-wide depend on NWFPs for income, and these products may be particularly important for local economies. On a global scale, FAO estimates that NWFPs generated US$88 billion in 2011.

[ 10 ] Some 80 percent of the population of the developing world use NWFPs, mostly plant-based, for health. The value of forest foods as a nutritional resource is not limited to low- and middle-income countries; more than 100 million people in the European Union (EU) regularly consume wild food.

Land conversion, pollution and overharvesting threaten wild species and collectors' lives and livelihoods in many regions of the world. For instance, one in five medicinal and aromatic plant species have been found to be threatened with extinction, yet only 7 percent of MAPs have been assessed for the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (TRAFFIC, 2018). Data and information on NWFPs is incomplete yet essential to monitor their status in the wild, their contribution to food and nutrition security and for traceability across the supply chain.

[ 2 ] Other groupings or names for these types of forest products include wild forest products, minor forest produce, [ 3 ] special, minor, alternative and secondary forest products. The term non-wood forest products (NWFP) differs from NTFP in that it does not include woodfuel or wood charcoal. The terminology debate on NWFPs has persisted for decades, although steps have been taken to disentangle the different terms and definitions for improved forest statistics.

[ 11 ] Uses [ edit ] The harvest of NTFPs remains widespread throughout the world. People from a wide range of socioeconomic, geographical, and cultural contexts harvest NTFPs for a number of purposes, including household subsistence, maintenance of cultural and familial traditions, spiritual fulfilment, physical and emotional well-being , house heating and cooking, animal feeding, indigenous medicine and healing, scientific learning, and income.

[ 9 ] Other terms synonymous with harvesting include wild-crafting, gathering, collecting, and foraging. NTFPs also serve as raw materials for industries ranging from large-scale floral greens suppliers and pharmaceutical companies to microenterprises centered upon a wide variety of activities (such as basket-making, woodcarving, and the harvest and processing of various medicinal plants).

More than 28,000 plant species are currently recorded as being of medicinal use and many of them are found in forest ecosystems. Visits to forest environments can have positive impacts on human physical and mental health and many people have a deep spiritual relationship to forests.

[ 4 ] Economic importance [ edit ] Estimate the contribution of NTFPs to national or regional economies is difficult, broad-based systems for tracking the combined value of the hundreds of products that make up various NTFP industries are lacking. One exception to this is the maple syrup industry, which in 2002 in the US alone yielded 1.4 million US gallons (5,300 m 3 ) worth US$D 38.3 million.

[ 12 ] In temperate forests such as in the US, wild edible mushrooms such as matsutake , medicinal plants such as ginseng, and floral greens such as salal and sword fern are multimillion-dollar industries. Others with documented trade data include Brazil nuts, bamboo, honey, chestnuts, and gum Arabic, among others.

[ 13 ] While these high-value species may attract the most attention, a diversity of NTFPs can be found in most forests of the world, many of which remain invisible in official statistics.

In tropical forests, for example, NTFPs can be an important source of income that can supplement farming and/or other activities.  A value analysis of the Amazon rainforest in Peru found that exploitation of NTFPs could yield higher net revenue per hectare than would timber harvest of the same area, while still conserving vital ecological services .

[ 14 ] Their economic, cultural, and ecological values, when considered in aggregate, make managing NTFPs an important component of sustainable forest management and the conservation of biological and cultural diversity.

Impacts on people [ edit ] Gendered differences [ edit ] Both men and women are involved in collection and sale of NWFPs – and have different knowledge on different products, although women tend to collect forest foods to supplement the nutrition of their households – empowering them has important spill-over effects on households'/communities' nutrition.

[ 2 ] For part-time (unpaid) collection of woodfuel for rural uses, women account for almost 80 percent of all labour and a significantly higher proportion than this in Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean.

[ 10 ] In ethnic minority communities [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Minority people in Vietnam, Myanmar, and Laos live away from mainstream settlements. The hill tribes and many other minority groups are closely associated with forests for centuries. Much of their household subsistence and part of the income is generated from the sale of a variety of NTFP products. In the highlands of Vietnam, NTFPs production is spread almost throughout the year, so provides a sustained income for the ethnic minority people. From June to August is the wild berry called uoi ( Scaphium macropodium ) collection that provides the bulk of household income. Every family sends several people into the forest on a regular basis during this period where they stay for 2–3 days during which 5–6 kg of berries are collected. A kilogram of dried berries (2–3 days of sun-dry) is sold for $1.50. The next comes bamboo shoots, mushrooms, and vegetable collection that goes through to February. The minority people in Sa Pa area depends mainly on a variety of NTFPs for their livelihoods. Among the products collected are fruits, berries, leaves, mushrooms, fish, bees honey, bamboo shoots, wild orchids and the list goes on. The Friday market is full of orchids and other wild plants put forward by these people for the tourists, both domestic and international, that flock there. Between 10-15% of the total household income is derived from the sale of NTFPs. The harvesting of leaves in the diet of family goes round the year where different species are readily available in specific months. Water from forest areas is yet another service that is useful in the livelihoods of these people. They have micro-hydro plants installed in streams that generate the much needed power for pounding (grain and seeds) and lighting too.

In the drier areas of Sri Lanka, the harvesting of curry leaves to be sold to traders is an important income. The harvesting of velvet tamarind ( Dialium ovoideum ) is an important income source to the rural people. This tree which is endemic to the country provides a fruit that has a high-popularity during certain months of the year. The returns from the sale of these two products is an important addition to the household incomes of rural people.

Research [ edit ] Research on NTFPs has focused on three perspectives: NTFPs as a commodity with a focus on rural incomes and markets, as an expression of traditional knowledge or as a livelihood option for rural household needs, and finally, as a key component of sustainable forest management and conservation strategies. These perspectives promote forest products as valuable commodities and important tools that can promote the conservation of forests. In some contexts, the gathering and use of NTFPs can be a mechanism for poverty alleviation and local development.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Trees portal Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Biology portal Bioproducts Ethnobotany Countermeasures in LULUCF Ecotourism in the Amazon rainforest Rural crafts Waste valorization Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from The State of the World’s Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief​ , FAO & UNEP, FAO & UNEP.

References [ edit ] ^ "Glossary of Forestry Terms in British Columbia" (PDF) . Ministry of Forests and Range (Canada). March 2008 . Retrieved 2009-04-06 .

^ a b c d e "FAO – Forestry, Non-wood forest products" .

^ a b "Minor Forest Produce (MFP)" .

Arthapedia .

^ a b c The State of the World's Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief . Rome: FAO & UNEP. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/ca8985en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132707-4 .

S2CID 241416114 .

^ Bonet, Jose-Antonio; Oliach, Daniel; Fischer, Christine; Olivera, Antoni; Martinez de Aragon, Juan; Colinas, Carlos (2009). "Cultivation Methods of the Black Truffle, the Most Profitable Mediterranean Non-Wood Forest Product; A State of the Art Review".

Modelling, Valuing and Managing Mediterranean Forest Ecosystems for Non-Timber Goods and Services .

57 : 57– 71.

^ Martinez de Aragon, Juan; Fischer, Christine; Bonet, Jose-Antonio (2012). "Economically profitable post fire restoration with black truffle (Tuber melanosporum) producing plantations".

New Forests .

43 ( 5– 6): 615– 630.

Bibcode : 2012NewFo..43..615M .

doi : 10.1007/s11056-012-9316-x .

S2CID 17598889 .

^ "Forest Research - Social, cultural and economic values of contemporary non-timber forest products: Wild Harvests" . Forestry.gov.uk . Retrieved 2013-11-21 .

^ "non timber forest products in Scotland" . ForestHarvest . Retrieved 2013-11-21 .

^ a b "Forests and non-timber forest products" . Cifor.org . Retrieved 2013-11-21 .

^ a b State of World's Forests 2014 . Rome: FAO. 2021.

doi : 10.4060/cb3694en .

ISBN 978-92-5-108269-0 .

^ G.F. Muir , S. Sorrenti, P. Vantomme , E. Vidale and M. Masiero (2020).

"Into the wild: disentangling non-wood terms and definitions for improved forest statistics" (PDF) .

International Forestry Review .

22 (1): 101– 119.

doi : 10.1505/146554820828671553 (inactive 12 July 2025).

S2CID 215403967 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "SIC 0831 Forest Nurseries and Gathering of Forest Products".

Encyclopedia of American Industries, 5th ed . Gale. 2008.

^ "FAO – Non-wood forest products: Data and statistics" .

FAO .

^ Peters, Charles M.; Alwyn H. Gentry; Robert O. Mendelsohn (29 June 1989). "Valuation of an Amazonian rainforest".

Nature .

339 (6227): 655– 656.

Bibcode : 1989Natur.339..655P .

doi : 10.1038/339655a0 .

S2CID 4338510 .

^ Belcher, B.M. (2003). "What isn't an NTFP?".

International Forestry Review .

5 (2): 161– 168.

doi : 10.1505/IFOR.5.2.161.17408 .

^ Kala, CP 2003. Medicinal Plants of Indian Trans-Himalaya.

http://www.cabdirect.org/abstracts/20066710101.html;jsessionid=453D5B8DEE32770EACE0E447E613263E Further reading [ edit ] Delang, Claudio O. 2006.

The Role of Wild Food Plants in Poverty Alleviation and Biodiversity Conservation in Tropical Countries . Progress in Development Studies 6(4): 275-286 Emery, Marla and Rebecca J. McLain; (editors).  2001.

Non-Timber Forest Products: Medicinal Herbs, Fungi, Edible Fruits and Nuts, and Other Natural Products from the Forest.

Food Products Press: Binghamton, New York .

Guillen, Abraham; Laird, Sarah A.; Shanley, Patricia; Pierce, Alan R. (editors). 2002.

Tapping the Green Market: Certification and Management of Non-Timber Forest Products.

Earthscan Jones, Eric T. Rebecca J. McLain, and James Weigand. eds. 2002.

Non Timber Forest Products in the United States.

Lawrence: University Press of Kansas .

Mohammed, Gina H. 2011.

The Canadian NTFP Business Companion: Ideas, Techniques and Resources for Small Businesses in Non-Timber Forest Products & Services.

Candlenut Books: Sault Ste Marie, Ontario External links [ edit ] FAO Nonwood Forest Products Website Nontimber Forest Products in Alaska Northern Forest Diversification Centre NTFP.org Virginia Tech Non-Timber Forest Products v t e Non-timber forest products Animal products Furs Honey pine Wild game Berries / tree fruit Banana Bilberry Binukaw Blackberry Blueberry Breadfruit Cocoa bean Coconut Durian Gambooge Huckleberry Jackfruit Juniper berry Lingonberry Raspberry Strawberry Tamarind Woodland strawberry Edible plants / roots Betel Fiddlehead ferns Heart of palm Mahuwa flowers Sago palm queen Sassafras filé powder root beer Saw palmetto Wild ginseng Wild onions Bear garlic Canada onion Crow garlic Twincrest onion Pacific mountain onion Ramps Mushrooms Bare-toothed russula Bay bolete Birch bolete Cep Chanterelle Honey mushroom Lingzhi (reishi) Matsutake Meadow mushroom Morel Oyster mushroom Parasol mushroom Red cap Saffron milk cap Slippery jack Truffle Yellow knight Nuts spices Allspice Areca nut Bay leaf Black pepper Brazil nut Cinnamon Clove Hazelnut Malva nut Nutmeg Pine nut Vanilla Oil waxes Allanblackia Babassu Bacuri Candlenut Capuacu Carnauba Chaulmoogra ( Hydnocarpus wightiana ) Cocoa butter Eucalyptol Eucalyptus Illipe Japan wax Kokum Kombo Kpangnan Kusum Mafura Mahua Mango butter Murumuru Nagkesar Palm ( kernel ) Phulwara Pilu Pongamia Sal-seed ( Shorea robusta ) Sandalwood Shea butter Tamanu Tea-seed Tea-tree Tucuma Ucuuba Vateria indica Resins Benzoin Birch tar Camphor Creosote Frankincense Gamboge Kauri Lacquer Mastic Myrrh Pine tar Pitch Rosin Turpentine Varnish Sap / gum / etc.

Birch syrup Chicle chewing gum Coconut sugar Date sugar Fruit syrup Gum arabic Gutta-percha Kino Latex Maple sugar Maple syrup Palm sugar Palm wine akpeteshie ogogoro Rubber Spruce gum Other Amadou Bamboo edible musical instruments textiles Birch bark Birch beer Cork Ferns Forage Gambier Moss Natural dyes henna Peat Quinine Rattan Shellac Tanbark tannin Tendu leaves Thatching Vegetable ivory Willow bark Related Dehesa (Iberian agroforestry) Forest farming / gardening Honey hunting Indian forest produce Mushroom hunting Naval stores Resin extraction Rubber tapping Wildcrafting Category Commons v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-timber_forest_product&oldid=1300109259 " Categories : Non-timber forest products Forestry Sustainable forest management Sustainable agriculture Sustainable products Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2021 All articles needing additional references Free-content attribution Free content from FAO & UNEP This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 09:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Non-timber forest product 15 languages Add topic

